VILLAGE CODE
of
MIDLOTHIAN, ILLINOIS
1963
Code current through:
Ord. 2178, passed October 8, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This code of the Village of Midlothian, as supplemented, contains ordinances up
to and including ordinance 2178, passed October 8, 2025. Ordinances of the
Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this code to
the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult the
Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
American Legal Publishing
Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
 
 
ORDINANCE NO. 2179
_____________________________________________________________
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, GRANTING A
ZONING VARIATION TO PERMIT A SOUND BARRIER FENCE TO MITIGATE NOISE FROM THE
EXISTING CARWASH
(Phillip DeGeratto and Little Bear Holdings, LLC – 14455 S. Pulaski Rd.,
Midlothian)
______________________________________________________________
 
GARY L’HEUREUX, Village President
ALLEN MOSKAL, Village Clerk
 
ANTHONY BURBATT, Village Trustee
DIANNA HARRIS-JEDD, Village Trustee
SANDRA CROWLEY, Village Trustee
JACK HILLE, Village Trustee
KATHLEEN JOHNSON, Village Trustee
DONALD KILLELEA, Village Trustee
__________________________________________________________
 
ADOPTED BY THE VILLAGE BOARD OF THE
VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN
THIS 3rd DAY OF DECEMBER 2025
______________________________________________________________________________
 
Published in pamphlet form by authority of the Village Board of the
Village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois, this 3rd day of December 2025.
ORDINANCE NO. 2179
 
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, GRANTING A
ZONING VARIATION TO PERMIT A SOUND BARRIER FENCE TO MITIGATE NOISE FROM THE
EXISTING CARWASH
(Phillip DeGeratto and Little Bear Holdings, LLC – 14455 S. Pulaski Rd.,
Midlothian)
 
WHEREAS, the Village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois (the “Village”) is a
duly organized and existing municipal corporation created under the provisions
of the laws of the State of Illinois and under the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code, as from time to time supplemented and amended; and
 
WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village of Midlothian (the
“Corporate Authorities”) have heretofore exercised the power conferred on them
pursuant to Chapter 11-13-1, et seq., of the Illinois Municipal Code by
adopting the Midlothian Zoning Code, as amended from time to time (Village Code
Title 11); and
 
WHEREAS, Little Bear Holdings, LLC d/b/a Buddy Bear Carwash, and Phillip
DeGeratto (the “Owners”) currently occupy and utilize the property commonly
known as 14455 S. Pulaski Road, Midlothian, (the “Subject Property”) as a
carwash; and
 
   WHEREAS, the Owners have applied for a variation from the requirements of
the Village of Midlothian Zoning Code Chapter 11A, specifically 4-11A-3 which
limits fences to 6 feet in height. The Owners are seeking a higher fence to
mitigate sound from the carwash. See ZBA Findings and Recommendations attached
hereto as Exhibit A .
 
   WHEREAS, the Village of Midlothian Zoning Board of Appeals held a public
hearing on October 7, 2025, on whether the proposed variation should be
approved, at which time all persons present were afforded an opportunity to be
heard; and
 
WHEREAS, a public notice in the form required by law was given of said public
hearing date; and
 
   WHEREAS, the Zoning Board of Appeals has filed its findings of fact and
recommendations with the Village Board, and has recommended that the proposed
variation be granted; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities have duly considered said findings of fact
and recommendations of the Zoning Board of Appeals, and the Minutes of the Site
Plan Review Committee attached hereto as Exhibit B.  See Exhibits A and B; and
 
WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities have determined, in the best interest of the
health, safety and welfare of the residents of the Village, to grant the
proposed variation subject to the conditions identified herein.
 
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Village President and Board of Trustees
of the Village of Midlothian, Cook County and State of Illinois, as follows:
 
SECTION 1. The foregoing recitals and legislative findings are found to be true
and correct, and are incorporated into this Ordinance as if fully set forth in
their entirety.
 
SECTION 2. The President and the Board of Trustees hereby adopt by reference
the findings of fact of the Zoning Board of Appeals as findings of the
President and the Board of Trustees as if completely set forth herein. All
exhibits submitted at the aforesaid public hearings are also incorporated by
reference into this Ordinance. See Exhibit A .
SECTION 3. In addition to the findings set forth in Section 2 hereof, the
President and the Board of Trustees further finds in relation to the proposed
variations as follows:
 
1.   Hardship: The applicant has established that carrying out the strict
letter of the provisions of this title would create a practical difficulty or
particular hardship.
2.   Unique Physical Conditions: The subject property is exceptional, as
compared to other properties subject to the same provisions, by means of a
unique physical condition, including irregular or substandard size, shape or
configuration, exceptional topographical features, or presence of an existing
use, structure or sign, whether conforming or nonconforming, or other
extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to, and inherent in, the subject
property that amount to more than a mere inconvenience to the property owner,
and that relate to, or arise out of, the characteristics of the property rather
than the personal situation or preference of the current property owner.
3.   Not Self-Created: The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the
result of any action or inaction of the property owner, or his/her predecessors
in title, and that it existed at the time of enactment of the provisions from
which a variation is sought, was created by natural forces, or was the result
of governmental action, other than the adoption of this title.
4.   Denied Substantial Rights: The carrying out of the strict letter of
provision from which a variation is sought would deprive the owner of the
subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other
properties subject to the same provisions.
5.   Not Merely Special Privilege: The alleged hardship or difficulty is
neither merely the inability of the owner or occupants to enjoy some special
privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of other
lots or properties subject to the same provisions, nor merely the inability of
the owner to gain a greater financial return from the use of the subject
property.
6.   Conformance With Title And Plan Purposes: The variation would not result
in a use of development of the subject property that would not be in harmony
with the general and specific purposes of this title, including the provision
from which a variation is sought, or the general purpose and intent of the
comprehensive plan.
7.   No Other Remedy: There is no means, other than granting the
requested variation, by which the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided
or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject
property.
8.   Minimum Relief Required: The requested variation is the minimum measure of
relief necessary to alleviate the alleged hardship or difficulty presented by
the strict application of this title.
SECTION 4.      That the Proposed Variation, set forth in Exhibit A attached
hereto,
is granted for the Property, which is commonly known as 14455 S. Pulaski Road,
Midlothian, Illinois, subject to the ZBA Findings and Recommendations and those
of the Site Plan Review Committee. See Exhibits A and B .
 
SECTION 5. That the following described property in Midlothian, Illinois:
 
Common Address:   14455 S. Pulaski Road, Midlothian, IL 60445
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3662_9408x2308.jpg]
 
PINs:      28-11-108-007-0000, 008, 009, 010             
 
is the property for which the Applicants have requested a Variation, and for
which a Variation is granted unto Phillip DeGeratto and Little Bear Holdings,
LLC, to construct a fence between 8’ and 12’ in height.
 
Specifically, the Variation granted to the Applicants and Owners for the
Property herein are as follows: a variation permitting a fence between 8’ and
12’ in height in the B-3 District.
 
SECTION 6.     If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of this
Ordinance shall be held invalid, the invalidity thereof shall not affect any
other provision of this Ordinance.
 
 
SECTION 7.   All ordinances, resolutions, motions, or orders in conflict with
this Ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
 
SECTION 8.   This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect upon its passage,
approval and publication as provided by law.
 
                      Aye Nay Abstain Absent
Anthony Burbatt
Trustee
Sandra Crowley
Trustee
Dianna L. Harris-Jedd
Trustee
Jack Hille
Trustee
Kathleen Johnson
Trustee
Donald Killelea
Trustee
Gary L’Heureux
Mayor
PRESENTED AND PASSED on a roll call vote this 3rd day of December, 2025.
 
APPROVED this 3rd day of December, 2025.
 
 
                  __________________________________________
                  GARY L’HEUREUX, VILLAGE PRESIDENT
 
ATTEST:
 
__________________________________________
ALLEN MOSKAL, VILLAGE CLERK
 
RECORDED this 3rd day of December, 2025.

EXHIBIT A – FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ZBA
                                                       [https://
export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/IMAGES/0-0-0-
3665_1753x1611.jpg]   
Exhibit A
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN
HEARING DATE: October 7, 2025
 
FINDINGS AND RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS OF THE VILLAGE OF
MIDLOTHIAN
 
IN THE MATTER OF A ZONING VARIATION APPLICATION
FOR ADDRESS: 14455 S Pulaski Road, Midlothian IL, 60445.
 
BY APPLICANTS:    Phillip DeGeratto and Little Bear Holdings, LLC d/b/a Buddy
Bear Carwash.
I. BACKGROUND OF SUBJECT PROPERTY
The property is currently an operating car wash. The property is located in the
B3 Community Commercial District. A Variation is required to install a fence
greater than 6’ in height pursuant to Village Code 4-11A-3. Applicants’ fence
is to be 8’ to 12’ in total height as a barrier to noise.
 
II. NATURE OF REQUEST
Applicants request a Variation to allow for an 8’ to 12’ fence as a barrier to
noise.
III. PUBLIC HEARING
The ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS convened a public hearing on the Applicants’
application for a Variation at 6 p.m. on October 7, 2025. The Applicant/
Petitioner appeared and provided testimony and evidence that proper notice of
the hearing had been issued in compliance with 11-2-9 of the Village Code in
the form posting Notice at the business address.
 
Proof was also provided that notice of the hearing date and time was published
in the Midlothian-Bremen
Messenger Newspaper on September 18, 2025.
 
The following testimony/evidence/exhibits were presented in support of the
application:
 
The Applicant introduced himself before the board: Roderick Lofton, Buddy Bear
Area Manager for the South Suburbs. He advised the ZBA that they are applying
for a Variation to install a fence taller than permitted by Village Code for
noise mitigation from the car wash blowers.
The fence would be close to 12’ in height and approximately 26’ long. It would
be made of material designed to buffer the sound of blowers from the car wash.
The Applicants also provided drawings of the proposed fence, pictures of the
property, pictures of the proposed fencing material, and the layout of the
property.
 
The following testimony/evidence/exhibits were presented in opposition to the
application:
 
The Zoning Board of Appeals Chairman asked for any objections, testimony/
evidence/exhibits to be presented in opposition to the application, and there
were none.
 
IV. STANDARDS FOR VARIATIONS
 
A variation from the provisions of this title shall not be granted unless the
zoning board of appeals, in its recommendation, and village board in its
decision, make specific findings of fact directly based on the standards and
conditions imposed by this section. The standards for variations shall be as
follows:
 
      1.   Hardship: No variation shall be granted unless the applicant shall
establish that carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this title
would create a practical difficulty or particular hardship.
      2.   Unique Physical Conditions: The subject property is exceptional, as
compared to other properties subject to the same provisions, by means of a
unique physical condition, including irregular or substandard size, shape or
configuration, exceptional topographical features, or presence of an existing
use, structure or sign, whether conforming or nonconforming, or other
extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to, and inherent in, the subject
property that amount to more than a mere inconvenience to the property owner,
and that relate to, or arise out of, the characteristics of the property rather
than the personal situation or preference of the current property owner.
      3.   Not Self-Created: The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the
result of any action or inaction of the property owner, or his/her predecessors
in title, and that it existed at the time of enactment of the provisions from
which a variation is sought, was created by natural forces, or was the result
of governmental action, other than the adoption of this title.
      4.   Denied Substantial Rights: The carrying out of the strict letter of
provision from which a variation is sought would deprive the owner of the
subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other
properties subject to the same provisions.
      5.   Not Merely Special Privilege: The alleged hardship or difficulty is
neither merely the inability of the owner or occupants to enjoy some special
privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of other
lots or properties subject to the same provisions, nor merely the inability of
the owner to gain a greater financial return from the use of the subject
property.
      6.   Conformance With Title And Plan Purposes: The variation would not
result in a use of development of the subject property that would not be in
harmony with the general and specific purposes of this title, including the
provision from which a variation is sought, or the general purpose and intent
of the comprehensive plan.
      7.   No Other Remedy: There is no means, other than granting the
requested variation, by which the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided
or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject
property.
      8.   Minimum Relief Required: The requested variation is the minimum
measure of relief necessary to alleviate the alleged hardship or difficulty
presented by the strict application of this title.
 
V. CONDITIONS UPON GRANT OF VARIATION
 
The Variation shall comply with all State laws, Federal laws, and Village
Ordinances. The Variation shall also comply with the Recommendations of the
Site Plan Review Committee Minutes of October 1, 2025.
In addition, The Building Department would require that the proper installation
process is followed as noted on the approved permit application and that
inspections are scheduled and completed as needed.
Police Department noted that complaints have been coming from neighbors, and
the Committee agreed that it appears this would help mitigate the noise issue.
 
 
VI. RECOMMENDATION
 
Based on the findings and reasons stated above, the ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS OF
THE
 
VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN recommends to the Village Board that the Applicants’
Application
 
for a Variation be approved.
 
 
                             Yes No Absent Present
Mr. Jerry Gillis, Chairman               
X                                                                     
Mr. Ted Engler                             X   
   
Mr. Tom Waicekauskas                X                                     
  
Mr. Jay Johnson                   X
 
Ms. Lisa Olson                   X
 
Mr. Jacob Conway                   X
        
Ms. Karen Pringle                   X
 
                                             
Chairman: _________________________________   Dated ______________________
 
 
 
Attest ZBA Member: ___________________________________
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT B
Minutes of the Site Plan Review Committee of October 1, 2025
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-3672_2330x2330.jpg]
           Minutes of the
Site Plan Review Committee
Village of
Midlothian
 
14801 South Pulaski Road
         Midlothian, Illinois 60445
         Phone: (708) 389-0200
         Fax: (708) 389-0255
         www.villageofmidlothian.net
 
Meeting Date: October 1st, 2025
 
Meeting Attendees:  
   Diana Jedd, Trustee
   Anthony Tavormina, Deputy Police Chief
   Marty Rita, Fire Chief
   Tye Swanson, Public Works Superintendent
   Marc Cerf, Interim Building Superintendent
   Philip Powers, Building Department Administrative Assistant
 
Projects Reviewed:
1.   14455 Pulaski (Buddy Bear Carwash)
This property was just recently developed into a Buddy Bear Carwash. The
request for this variance is because of Fence permit that was submitted for the
property. The owner of the carwash, Phil Degeratto, wants to install soundproof
fencing to help mitigate the noise that is generated by the carwash and dryers
for the neighboring properties.
a.   Philip Powers let the group know more details about the request for the
variance and what kind of fencing they are wanting to install. He shared
pictures of the proposed fencing and the proposed location of the fencing that
was provided by the applicant. The fencing would be like what is on the sides
of 294, to help reduce the noise for residents that abut to Buddy Bear
property. He did share that the fencing is not installed yet but the other 6’
fencing that was part of the permit is already installed.
b.   He shared that a permit was submitted, and the permit was approved for all
the work except what required a variance. It was noted by the General
contractor, Weiss construction, that the permit should have been turned in
sooner, but it was an oversight. The building department allowed for partial
approval so that the fencing could be installed before the opening of the
business, but a variance was required.
c.   The request for the fence included 26’ of fencing that would be between 8’
and 12’ high. This exceeds the allowable height of fencing that is allowed by
the Village Code (4-11A-3). The allowable height of fencing is 6’ and in some
cases 8’. This is not one of the areas where 8’ would be allowed. The property
where the Buddy Bear Carwash is located is B-3 zoning and it abuts to a
residential district (R-2). The exit of the carwash where the dryers are
located is pointing towards the residential district. This fencing that the
variance is for would be install on the property line right in line with the
exit of the car wash.
d.   Anthony noted that the one neighbor has been complaining quite frequently
about the noise from the Car wash. He was not sure which neighbor was, but the
police have been getting calls.
e.   Marty asked if they are installing the 8’ and 12’ fencing all the way down
the property line as is shown on the plat of survey. Phil let him know that the
rest of the fence will be 6’ but the 26’ that is marked with go from 6’ to 8’
to 12’ back to 8’ and then 6’. Marc added that it will be just in front of the
exit to the carwash.
f.   Phil let the group know that the fees were paid, proper notice was given
in the Messenger, and signs were posted at the property. The Zoning Board of
Appeals Hearing was all set for October 7 th , 2025, at 6pm in the Village
Chambers.
g.   Anthony shared that the Police Department would not see any issue with
this Fence Variance.
h.   Marc added that the installation of these would be different from a normal
fence. Footing will be needed and that plans were or will be submitted if the
variance is granted.
i.   Tye asked if there was anything else to the panels? Like if there was
backing material or panels that would be the sound proofing. Marc answered,
stating that it is all that will be there. It’s not quite sound proofing but
just to block the sound.
j.   Marty stated that the only concern for fire would be if there were water
connections behind the panels, they would ask to have an access panel. That
does not appear to be the case, so they would have no issues.
k.   Tye stated that Public Works would also have no issues with the Fencing.
l.   Anothony did add that the Power Lines appear to run north and south on the
property line. Just that they are taken into consideration with the permit.
 
 
Findings and Recommendations
 
∙   The Building Department would require that the proper installation process
is followed as noted on the approved permit application and that inspections
are scheduled and completed as needed.
∙   Police Department noted that complaints have been coming from neighbors,
and the Committee agreed that it appears this would help mitigate the noise
issue.
 
 
Respectfully Submitted by:
 
Philip Powers
Philip Powers
Building Department Administrative Assistant
AN ORDINANCE OF THE VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS, GRANTING A
ZONING VARIATION TO PERMIT A SOUND BARRIER FENCE TO MITIGATE NOISE FROM THE
EXISTING CARWASH
(Phillip DeGeratto and Little Bear Holdings, LLC – 14455 S. Pulaski Rd.,
Midlothian)
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ord 2180
 
Ordinance No. 2180 can be found in PDF_here.
 
Ordinance No. _2181_____
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING TITLE 4, CHAPTERS 23 AND 24 OF THE MUNICIPAL CODE OF THE
VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN, COOK COUNTY, ILLINOIS
 
   WHEREAS, the Village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois (the “Village”) is
a duly organized and validly existing home rule municipality created in
accordance with the Illinois Constitution of 1970 (the “Constitution”) and the
laws of the State; and
   WHEREAS, the Village, pursuant to its home rule powers, has the authority to
exercise any power and perform any function pertaining to its government and
affairs including the power to protect the public health, safety and welfare of
its citizens and to address the deterioration and decline in Village properties
caused by prolonged vacancies; and
   WHEREAS, the Village has established a program for the registration and
regulation of vacant properties, both residential and commercial properties, to
prevent further spread of blight which the Village believes it to be in the
best interests of its residents to amend its registration program as herein
after provided.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the President and Board of Trustees of the
Village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois, as follows:
Section 1.    Title 4, Chapter 23, Section 4-23-5(E) of the Midlothian
Municipal Code is hereby
amended by deleting said section in its entirety and replacing it with the
following:
   (E)    At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable semi-annual registration fee of four hundred dollars ($400) for each
vacant property. Subsequent semi-annual registration of each property and a fee
in the amount of four hundred dollars ($400) is due within ten (10) days of the
expiration of the previous registration. Any registerable property remaining
vacant after two (2) years shall pay subsequent registration fees in the amount
of one thousand dollars ($1,000) semi-annually. Said fees shall be used to
offset the costs of: 1) registration and registration enforcement, 2) code
enforcement and mitigation related to defaulted properties, and 3) for any
related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter. The
Building Superintendent of the Village shall be authorized to waive the fee
requirements of this chapter upon written petition of non-profit entities whose
purpose and effect are to reduce the number of registerable properties as
provided for in this chapter.
    
Section 2.    Title 4, Chapter 23, Section 4-23-6(C) of the Midlothian
Municipal Code is hereby
amended by deleting said section in its entirety and replacing it with the
following:
   (C)    At the initial registration of a vacant property, each registrant
shall pay a non-refundable semi-annual registration fee of four hundred dollars
($400) for each vacant property. Subsequent semi-annual registrations of a
vacant property and a fee in the amount of four hundred dollars ($400) is due
within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previous registration. Any
registerable property remaining vacant after two (2) years shall pay subsequent
registration fees in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) semi-annually.
Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: 1) registration and
registration enforcement, 2) code enforcement and mitigation related to vacant
properties, and 3) for any related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set
forth in this chapter.
Section 3.   Title 4, Chapter 24, Sections 4-24-9(A) and 4-24-9(B) of the
Midlothian Municipal
Code is hereby amended by deleting said sections in their entirety and
replacing said sections
with the following:
   (A)    Any owner of vacant commercial property located in the Village shall
within thirty (30) days after the property becomes vacant or within ten (10)
days after assuming ownership of the property, register the vacant commercial
real property with the Village.
(B)    At the initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-refundable
semi-annual registration fee of five hundred dollars ($500) for each vacant
property. Subsequent semi-annual registrations of vacant properties and fees in
the amount of five hundred dollars ($500) are due within ten (10) days of the
expiration of the previous registration. Any registerable property remaining
vacant after one (1) year shall pay a semi-annual registration fee in the
amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000) within ten (10) days of the expiration
of the previous registration; each semi-annual registration fee thereafter
shall be increased by five hundred dollars ($500), payable within ten (10) days
of the expiration of the prior registration with a maximum semi-annual fee of
five thousand dollars ($5,000) if remaining vacant after 5 years. Said fees
shall be used to offset the costs of: 1) registration and registration
enforcement, 2) code enforcement and mitigation related to vacant properties,
and 3) for any related purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in
this chapter.
Section 4.   Article 4, Chapter 24, Section 4-24-9(D) is hereby deleted in its
entirety.
Section 5.   Effective Date. This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect
from and after its
passage, by a simple majority vote of the Corporate Authorities, approval,
publication and posting
as provided by law.
                 AYE NAY ABSTAIN ABSENT
Anthony Burbatt
Trustee
Kathleen Caveney
Trustee
Sandra Crowley
Trustee
Jack Hille
Trustee
Kathleen Johnson
Trustee
Donald Killelea
Trustee
Gary L’Heureux
Mayor
 
PRESENTED and PASSED on a roll call vote this ___    day of           2025.
 
APPROVED this     day of           2025.
 
                     
Mayor
 
Attest:
 
                  
Village Clerk
 
Recorded this     day of           2025.
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
AN ORDINANCE
PROVIDING FOR THE CODIFICATION OF THE GENERAL ORDINANCES OF THE VILLAGE OF
MIDLOTHIAN, ILLINOIS, AND PROVIDING FOR THE ADOPTION OF THE OFFICIAL CODE OF
THE VILLAGE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE PRESIDENT AND BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE VILLAGE OF
MIDLOTHIAN, that:
   Section 1. From and after the date of passage of this ordinance the official
village code of the village of Midlothian, prepared by Sterling Codifiers,
Inc., and hereby approved and accepted shall be the official code of all
ordinances of a general and permanent character of the village.
   Section 2. There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplemental
service whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general nature, amending,
altering, adding to, or deleting provisions of this official village code is
identified by the proper catch line, and following preparation by Sterling
Codifiers, Inc., is inserted in the proper place in each of the official
copies. Each such insertion shall be made within thirty (30) days following the
date of adoption by the board of trustees, and each new provision shall become
effective upon such insertion.
   Section 3. At least three (3) copies of this village code shall at all times
be on file and available for inspection in the office of the clerk.
   Passed and approved by the president and board of trustees this 26th day of
June, 1963.
[IMAGE]
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATIVE
Village Code   1
Saving Clause   2
Definitions   3
Penalty   4
Board Of Trustees   5
Clerk   6
Treasurer   7
Attorney   8
Superintendent Of Streets (Rep. by Ord. 596, 1-13-1965)   9
Health Officer (Rep. by Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)   10
Village Court (Rep. by Ord. 738, 4-26-1972)   11
Finance   12
Director Of Public Relations   13
Official Seal   14
Official Plan   15
Board Of Health   16
Code Of Ethics   17
Residency Of Employees (Rep. by Ord. 1575, 8-27-2003)   18
Ethics   19
Locally Imposed And Administered Tax
Rights And Responsibility   20
Bid Procedures   21
Village Administrator   22
Inspector General   23
Cook County Ordinances   24
CHAPTER 1
VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Construction Of Words
1-1-5: Interpretations
1-1-6: Bond Issue Notification Act
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the governing body this code is hereby declared to be and
shall hereafter constitute the official village code of the village of
Midlothian. Any reference made to the number of any section contained herein
shall be understood to refer to the position of the same under its appropriate
chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto,
as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this code by title
in any legal document. (1963 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received
without further proof in all courts and in all administrative tribunals of this
state as the ordinances of the village of general and permanent effect. (1963
Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this code shall set forth the title, chapter and section
number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute a
sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the
amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to Sterling
Codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this code. Each such replacement page shall be
properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of this code
within thirty (30) days from the date of its final passage. (1963 Code)
1-1-4: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this code importing the plural number is
used, in describing or referring to any matters, parties, or persons, any
single matter, party, or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this code by words
importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several matters,
parties, or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate shall be
deemed to be included, provided, that these rules of construction shall not be
applied to any section of this code which contains any express provision
excluding such construction or where the subject matter or content may be
repugnant thereto. (1963 Code)
1-1-5: INTERPRETATIONS:
In the determination of the provisions of each section of this code the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Intent To Defraud: Whenever an intent to defraud is required in order
to constitute an offense, it shall be sufficient if an intent appears to
defraud any person.
   (B)   Liability Of Employers And Agents: When the provisions of any section
of this code prohibits the commission of an act, not only the person actually
doing the prohibited act or omitting the directed act, but also the employer
and all other persons concerned with or aiding or abetting the said person
shall be guilty of the offense described and liable to the penalty set forth 1
. (1963 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1, 5/1-2-3, 5/1-2-6.
1-1-6: BOND ISSUE NOTIFICATION ACT:
The provisions of the bond issue notification act 1  shall not be applicable to
the village of Midlothian. As such, the publication requirement, all notice and
hearing requirements of the bond issue notification act shall not apply to the
village of Midlothian. (Ord. 1791, 6-27-2012)
 
Notes
1 2. 30 ILCS 352/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the village passed prior to the adoption of this code
are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as being still in
force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to
the saving clauses contained in the following section), from which are excluded
the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances;
appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations;
franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or
corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a
contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; ordinances
establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places;
improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections;
ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the
village; and all special ordinances. (1963 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this code or by virtue
of the preceding section, excepting as this code may contain provisions for
such matters, in which case this code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect of such provisions only. (1963 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings, thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this or the preceding section shall be construed as
abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of
the village herein repealed; or as discontinuing, abating, modifying or
altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any
person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the village under any
ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this
code. (1963 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Definitions, General
1-3-1: DEFINITIONS, GENERAL:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the content makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
CODE: Unless otherwise specifically stated shall mean this code.
COMMISSION: Any committee, commission or board established by title 2 of this
code, whether or not the name contains the word "commission". Such commissions
are required to post agendas and maintain minutes.
COMMITTEE: Any committee, commission, board or group created by the corporate
authorities of the village or by the village president, but which is not
established by title 2 of this code or other village ordinance, whether or not
the name contains the word "committee". Such committees are required to post
agendas and maintain minutes, unless the committee, such as the Historical
Society, does not hold meetings.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this code to the village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the
village of Midlothian".
Full time employees shall work a yearly average of thirty five (35) hours per
week. All employees who work less shall be considered part time employees.
Short term employee is an employee who is employed for less than two (2)
consecutive calendar quarters during a calendar year and who does not have a
reasonable assurance that he or she will be rehired by the village for the same
service in a subsequent calendar year.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation.
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense deemed a violation of the provisions of this code
which is a lesser offense than a felony as defined by state law.
NEGLIGENT, NEGLECT, NEGLIGENCE AND NEGLIGENTLY: Imports a want of such
attention to the nature or probable consequences of the act or omission as a
prudent man ordinarily bestows in acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this code to a village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the village
of Midlothian".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Shall include the singular and the plural and shall also mean and
include any person, firm, corporation, association, partnership or any other
form of association or organization.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
square, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The village of Midlothian.
WHOLESALER AND WHOLESALE DEALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall
be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things
in quantity to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage. (Ord. 1825, 2-27-2013)
CHAPTER 4
PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Penalty
1-4-2: Default
1-4-3: License
1-4-4: Application
1-4-5: Liability Of Officers
1-4-1: PENALTY:
   (A)   1. Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code,
and there being no fine or penalty provided for such violation, shall be fined
in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for any one
offense 1 , and the penalty imposed for violation of an ordinance may include,
or consist of, a requirement that a defendant perform some reasonable public
service work such as, but not limited to, picking up of litter in public parks
or along public highways, or the maintenance of public facilities.
      2.   All ordinances of the village which have a specific penalty
provision with a maximum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) are hereby
amended by striking the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and inserting
in its place the amount of "seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or the
maximum allowed by state statutes". Any minimum penalty, if stated in said
ordinance, shall remain the same, and where each day's continued violation
shall be deemed a separate offense, that wording or any similar wording shall
continue in effect and shall be applicable to the ordinance in question. (Ord.
1362, 9-13-1995)
   (B)   In determining the amount and method of payment of a fine, the court
shall consider:
      1.   The financial resources and future ability of the offender to pay
the fine;
      2.   Whether the fine will prevent the offender from making court ordered
restitution or reparation to the victim of the offense.
   (C)   The court may order the fine to be paid forthwith or within a
specified period of time or in installments.
   (D)   The court, upon good cause shown, may revoke the fine or the unpaid
portion or may modify the method of payment. (Ord. 820, 10-9-1974)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-1.
1-4-2: DEFAULT:
   (A)   An offender who defaults in the payment of a fine or in any
installment may be held in contempt and imprisoned for nonpayment. The court
may issue a summons for his appearance or warrant of arrest.
   (B)   Unless the offender shows that his default was not due to his
intentional refusal to pay, or not due to a failure on his part to make a good
faith effort to pay, the court may order the offender imprisoned for a term not
to exceed six (6) months, if the fine was for a felony, or thirty (30) days if
the fine was for a misdemeanor, a petty offense or a business offense. Payment
of the fine at any time will entitle the offender to be released, but
imprisonment under this section shall not satisfy the payment of the fine.
   (C)   If it appears that the default in the payment of a fine is not
intentional under subsection (B) of this section, the court may enter an order
allowing the offender additional time for payment, reducing the amount of the
fine or of each installment, or revoking the fine or the unpaid portion.
   (D)   When a fine is imposed on a corporation or unincorporated organization
or association, it is the duty of the person or persons authorized to make
disbursement of the assets, and their superiors, to pay the fine from assets of
the corporation or unincorporated organization or association. The failure of
such persons to do so shall render them subject to proceedings under
subsections (A) and (B) of this section. (Ord. 820, 10-9-1974)
   (E)   A default in the payment of a fine or penalty or any installment of a
fine or penalty may be collected by any means authorized for the collection of
monetary judgments. The municipal attorney of the village is authorized to take
any necessary legal action in order to collect any outstanding default in
payment of any fine or penalty. The village attorney and/or village president
is also authorized to retain attorneys and private collection agents for the
purpose of collecting any default in payment of any fine or penalty or
installment of that fine or penalty. Any fees or costs incurred by the
municipality with respect to the village attorney, outside attorneys or private
collection agents retained by the municipality for the purposes described in
this section shall be charged to the offender. (Ord. 1874, 9-10-2014)
1-4-3: LICENSE:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any
license previously issued to him by the village may be revoked by the court or
by the governing body. (1963 Code)
1-4-4: APPLICATION:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
Any person convicted of a violation of any section of this code where any duty
is prescribed or obligation imposed, or where any act which is of a continuing
nature or declared unlawful, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. A
separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created by
different clauses or sections of this code the prosecuting officer may elect
under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had against the
same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of a license or
permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any other
penalty being enforced.
Whenever the doing of any act or the omission to do any act constitutes a
breach of any section or provision of this code and there shall be no fine or
penalty specifically declared for such breach, the provisions of this chapter
shall apply and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a breach of violation occurs or continues 1 . (1963 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2-7.
1-4-5: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employees liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the governing body to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or employee
is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the duty. (1963
Code)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-5-1: Regular Meetings
1-5-2: Special Meetings
1-5-3: Order Of Business
1-5-4: President; Duties
1-5-5: President; Veto Power
1-5-6: Preservation Of Order
1-5-7: Board Of Trustees; Duties
1-5-8: Motions, Ordinances, Orders And Resolutions
1-5-9: Taking Of Vote
1-5-10: Presence Of Question
1-5-11: Adjournment
1-5-12: Previous Question
1-5-13: Lay On The Table
1-5-14: Indefinite Postponement; Reference
1-5-15: Amendments; Substitutions
1-5-16: Reconsideration
1-5-17: Standing Committees
1-5-18: Jurisdiction Of Committees
1-5-19: Reports Of Committees
1-5-20: Ordinances; Expenditures
1-5-21: Suspension Of Rules
1-5-22: Censure
1-5-23: Rules Of Parliamentary Practice
1-5-24: Compensation
1-5-25: Date Elected Municipal Officials Take Office
1-5-26: Remote Attendance
1-5-27: Village Newsletter, Other Publications
1-5-1: REGULAR MEETINGS:
The regular meeting of the village board shall be held on the second and fourth
Wednesday of each month at the hour of seven thirty o'clock (7:30) P.M. in the
council room of the village hall. Any regular meeting falling upon a legal
holiday shall be held on the next following business day at the same hour and
place. No notice shall be required for regular meetings. (Ord. 1770, 11-9-2011,
eff. 12-1-2011)
1-5-2: SPECIAL MEETINGS:
Special meetings may be held at any time on call for the same by the president
or any three (3) or more trustees which call shall be in writing, duly signed
and presented to the clerk who shall proceed immediately to prepare notices of
the same and cause them to be served on the president and members of the board
of trustees in the usual manner at least twenty four (24) hours before the time
of the meeting. Such notices shall describe in brief the nature or objects of
the call.
At every special meeting the call therefor shall be read and then filed by the
clerk. No business other than that proposed by the call shall be in order at
such meeting. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-3: ORDER OF BUSINESS:
The following order of business will be adhered to in all meetings of the board
unless suspended by the unanimous consent of members present.
At the hour selected for the meeting, the clerk or someone appointed to fill
his place, shall proceed to call the roll of members and mark the absentees.
Upon the appearance of a quorum, the board shall be called to order, the
president taking the chair, if present, but the board appointing a temporary
chairman if absent. If a quorum does not appear, the board shall not thereby
stand adjourned unless by a vote of the members present. When a quorum is
present, the board shall proceed to the business before it which shall be
conducted in the following order:
   (A)   Municipal commission and local organization attendance.
   (B)   Public comments.
   (C)   Consent agenda (pursuant to section 1-5-8 of this chapter).
   (D)   Trustee's business, which may include reports from standing
committees.
   (E)   President's business.
   (F)   Clerk's business and correspondence.
   (G)   Other business.
   (H)   Village administrator's business.
   (I)   Legal business.
   (J)   Village engineer's business.
   (K)   Department head's comments and/or business.
   (L)   Adjournment.
All questions relating to the priority of business shall be decided by the
chair without debate. (Ord. 1770, 11-9-2011, eff. 12-1-2011)
1-5-4: PRESIDENT; DUTIES:
The president shall sign all commissions and permits granted by the authority
of the board of trustees and grant or revoke all licenses, except as otherwise
provided by law, and perform such other acts as may be required by the
provisions of this code or other laws of the village.
He shall supervise the conduct of all officers of the village, examine the
grounds of all reasonable complaints made against any of them, and cause all
their violations of duty and other neglects to be properly punished or reported
to the proper tribunal for correction.
He shall appoint, by and with the consent of the board of trustees, all
officers whose appointment is not, by the laws of this state or the provisions
of this code, otherwise provided for. Whenever any vacancy shall occur in any
office, which by law he is empowered to fill, he shall, within thirty (30) days
after the occurrence of such vacancy, communicate to the board the name of his
appointee to such office. Pending the concurrence of the board of trustees in
such appointment the president may appoint some suitable person to discharge
the duties of such office. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-5: PRESIDENT; VETO POWER:
The president shall have the right to veto all ordinances, resolutions and
orders passed by the board of trustees, but the trustees, by two-thirds (2/3)
vote of all the members elected, may pass the ordinances, resolutions or orders
over the veto of the president, with the exception of an ordinance repealing
subsection 1-5-20(A) of this chapter, which shall require a vote of five-sixths
(5/6) of all the members elected in order to override the veto of the
president. (Ord. 1832, 5-8-2013)
1-5-6: PRESERVATION OF ORDER:
The presiding officer shall preserve order and decorum and may speak to points
of order in preference to other members and shall decide all questions of
order.
While the presiding officer is putting the question, or while business is being
transacted, no member shall walk across or out of the village boardroom except
by consent of the board.
Every member, previous to his speaking, making a motion or seconding the same,
shall address himself to the presiding officer, but shall not proceed with his
remarks until recognized and named by the chair.
When two (2) or more members speak at approximately the same time, the
presiding officer shall name the member who is first to speak.
In case of any disturbance or disorderly conduct, the presiding officer shall
have the power to require the room to be cleared if necessary. (Ord. 1770, 11-
9-2011, eff. 12-1-2011)
1-5-7: BOARD OF TRUSTEES; DUTIES:
When a member wishes to present a communication, petition, order, resolution or
other original matter he shall rise in his place and briefly state its nature
before presenting the same.
No member without sanction of the board shall speak more than once upon the
same subject until every member desirous of speaking shall have spoken; and no
member shall speak longer than five (5) minutes at one time except by consent
of the board.
A member called to order by the chair shall immediately sit down, unless
permitted to explain. If there be no appeal, the decision of the chair shall be
conclusive, but if the member appeals from the decision of the chair, the board
shall decide on the case.
While a member is speaking, no member shall hold any private discourse.
Every member who shall be present when a question is stated from the chair
shall vote thereon unless excused by the board, or unless he is directly
interested in the question, in which case he shall not vote.
No member shall be allowed to leave the board while in session unless excused
by the presiding officer. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-8: MOTIONS, ORDINANCES, ORDERS AND RESOLUTIONS:
   (A)   Consent Agenda: The corporate authorities may by unanimous consent
take a single vote by yeas and nays on the several questions of the passage of
any two (2) or more of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, or
motions placed together for voting purposes in a single group.
If one or more member(s) of the corporate authorities does not consent to take
a single vote on all of the several questions of the passage of any two (2) or
more of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, or motions placed
together for voting purposes in a single group, such item or items for which
placement on the consent agenda is not unanimous shall be voted upon as set
forth in subsection (B) of this section.
The single vote shall be entered separately in the minutes of the board under
the designation "consent agenda", and in that event the clerk may enter the
words "consent agenda" in the minutes of the board in each case instead of
entering the names of the members of the board voting yea and those voting nay
on the passage of each of the designated ordinances, orders, resolutions, and
motions included in the consent agenda.
The taking of a single or omnibus vote and the entries of the words "consent
agenda" in the minutes of the board shall have the same effect as if the vote
in each case had been taken separately by yeas and nays on the question of the
passage of each ordinance, order, resolution, and motion included in the
consent agenda and separately recorded in the minutes of the board.
   (B)   All Other Motions, Ordinances And/Or Resolutions: No motion shall be
put or debated unless it be seconded. When a motion is seconded, it shall be
stated by the presiding officer before debate and the proposer of the motion
shall be entitled to the floor.
After a motion regarding an ordinance, other motion or resolution is stated by
the presiding officer, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the board, but
may be withdrawn at any time before decision or amendment by unanimous consent
of the board.
In all cases where a resolution, ordinance or motion is entered on the minutes
of the board, the names of the trustees moving and seconding the same shall be
entered also.
The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the
designated ordinances, resolutions, or motions and recorded on the minutes of
the board.
All ordinances, resolutions and amendments of rules or ordinances before being
presented shall be reduced to writing and delivered to the clerk. (Ord. 1770,
11-9-2011, eff. 12-1-2011)
1-5-9: TAKING OF VOTE:
If any member require it the yeas and nays shall be taken and entered on the
minutes, but the yeas and nays shall not be taken unless called for previous to
any vote on the question. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-10: PRESENCE OF QUESTION:
When a blank is to be filled and different sums or times are proposed, the
question shall be taken first on the lesser sum or the longest time.
When a question is under debate the only motion or order shall be:
   (A)   To adjourn to a day certain.
   (B)   To adjourn.
   (C)   To lay on the table.
   (D)   The previous question.
   (E)   To refer.
   (F)   To amend.
   (G)   To substitute.
   (H)   To postpone indefinitely or to a day certain.
Subsections (B), (C) and (D) of this section are to be decided without debate.
(Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-11: ADJOURNMENT:
A motion to adjourn the board shall always be in order, except:
   (A)   When a member is in possession of the floor.
   (B)   While the yeas and nays are being called.
   (C)   When the members are voting.
   (D)   When adjournment was the last preceding motion.
   (E)   When it has been decided that the previous question shall be taken.
A motion simply to adjourn cannot be amended, but a motion to adjourn to a time
named may be and is open to debate. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-12: PREVIOUS QUESTION:
When the previous question is moved and seconded it shall be put in this form:
"Shall the main question now be put?". If this is carried, all further
amendments and all further motions and debates shall be excluded, and the
question put without delay, upon the pending amendments in proper order, and
then upon the main question. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-13: LAY ON THE TABLE:
A motion to simply lay a question on the table is not debatable; but a motion
to lay on the table and publish, or any other condition, is subject to
amendment and debate.
A motion to take subject matter from the table may be proposed at the same
meeting; provided, two-thirds (2/3) of the trustees present vote therefor.
(Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-14: INDEFINITE POSTPONEMENT; REFERENCE:
When a motion is postponed indefinitely it shall not be again taken up at the
same meeting. A motion to refer to a standing committee shall take precedence
of a similar motion for a special committee. (Ord. 1, 5-10-1927)
1-5-15: AMENDMENTS; SUBSTITUTIONS:
A motion to amend an amendment shall be in order, but one to amend an amendment
to an amendment shall not be entertained.
An amendment modifying the intention of a motion shall be in order, but an
amendment relating to a different subject shall not be in order.
On an amendment to "strike out and insert" the paragraph to be amended shall
first be read as it stands, then the words proposed to be stricken out and
those to be inserted and, finally, the paragraph as it will stand if so amended
shall be read.
A substitute for any original proposition in debate may be entertained when
further amendment is not admissible; but if accepted by the mover of such
original proposition, or by the board by vote, it shall entirely supersede the
original proposition and cut off all amendments appertaining thereto. (Ord. 1,
5-10-1927)
1-5-16: RECONSIDERATION:
A vote or question may be reconsidered at any time during the same meeting, or
at the first regular meeting held thereafter. A motion for reconsideration
being once made and decided in the negative, shall not be renewed, nor shall a
vote to reconsider be reconsidered.
No vote of the board of trustees shall be reconsidered or rescinded at a
special meeting unless at such special meeting there be present as large a
number of trustees as were present when such vote was taken.
A motion to reconsider must be made and seconded by members who voted in the
majority; provided, however, that where a motion is lost by reason of not
receiving a two-thirds (2/3) vote required for its passage, a motion to
reconsider may be made and seconded by those voting in the minority. (Ord. 1,
5-10-1927)
1-5-17: STANDING COMMITTEES:
All standing committees shall be appointed by the president at or before the
second regular meeting in each municipal year, or as soon thereafter as may be
practical, and whenever any vacancy shall occur. Special committees shall also
be appointed by the president, unless otherwise ordered by the board. (Ord. 1,
5-10-1927)
There shall be six (6) standing committees. Each committee shall consist of the
six (6) trustees and the president shall be ex officio a member of each
committee. The president shall appoint a chairman of each committee. The
committee shall be designated and cover the general area as hereinafter set
out:
   (A)   Administration And Finance: General office, treasurer, collector,
accounting budget, appropriation ordinance, tax levy, licenses, vehicle tags,
billing, internal audit, garbage and refuse, the chairman shall serve as
president pro tempore. (Ord. 552, 4-24-1963)
   (B)   Water, Sewer, Street Department: Shall have supervision, management
and control of the maintenance, enlargement and operation of the waterworks and
sewer system, the securing and selling of water, and all matters and things
connected with the operation, maintenance and extension of the waterworks
system and the selling of water therefrom and preserving the property belonging
thereto, and all matters connected with the operation of the sewer system and
maintenance and extension thereof. It shall have charge of the maintenance of
streets, sidewalks and public ways of the village and of the improvements and
repair thereof, also of the cleaning of streets and removal of dirt, garbage,
refuse and water therefrom. (Ord. 1332, 7-27-1994)
   (C)   Public Health And Welfare: Health services, sanitation inspections,
sanitation enforcement, nuisance complaints, liaison with mosquito abatement,
recreation, library.
   (D)   Public Safety: Police department, fire department, fire prevention
code enforcement, safety council, Cook County inspection bureau, civil defense.
(Ord. 552, 4-24-1963)
   (E)   Community Relations: Work with local agencies, including, but not
limited to, chamber of commerce, Midlothian park district, school districts and
library on community development and renewal issues. To act as municipal
liaison for federal and state economic and community development agencies. Work
with the organizations of and overseeing of all municipal satellites,
including, but not limited to, Harry Raday Lodge, Fine Art Society, and
Midlothian Historical Society. (Ord. 1332, 7-27-1994)
   (F)   Building And Zoning: Building permits, building code enforcement,
zoning enforcement, architectural harmony, housing code, sidewalks, street
lighting, liaison with planning commission and zoning board. (Ord. 552, 4-24-
1963)
1-5-18: JURISDICTION OF COMMITTEES:
Unless in case of emergency, committee meetings shall be called at least twenty
four (24) hours prior to the time of meeting. Each member shall attend promptly
at the hour stated in the notice, or, if unable to do so, shall notify the
chairman of the committee to that effect.
All ordinances, petitions, resolutions, orders and communications to the board
shall be referred to appropriate committees to be announced by the chair. (Ord.
493, 4-14-1961)
1-5-19: REPORTS OF COMMITTEES:
Standing and special committees to whom references are made shall in all cases
report in writing at least once in each month, unless further time be granted
by a vote of the board, the state of facts with their opinion thereon, signed
by the members concurring therein. Minority reports may be received at the same
time with majority reports.
All reports of committees shall be addressed "to the president and board of
trustees". They shall briefly describe the matter referred, and the conclusion
shall be summed up in the form of an ordinance, order, resolution,
recommendation or some other distinct proposition. (Ord. 493, 4-14-1961)
1-5-20: ORDINANCES; EXPENDITURES:
   (A)   Property Tax Cap:
      1.   The village board shall limit any annual increase in its total tax
levy, rather than its tax rate, to the amount levied for the previous year plus
the lesser of five percent (5%) or the increase in the consumer price index
(urban) for the previous calendar year and shall otherwise abide by the
property tax limitations as set forth in the property tax extension limitation
law 1 , commonly referred to as the property tax cap, as it applies to the
total tax levy only (not the tax rate).
      2.   Repeal of this subsection (A) shall require a vote of five- sixths
(5/6) of all of the elected members of the village board and that vote shall be
conducted only after two (2) public hearings are held following all legal
notification requirements set forth in subsection 11-2-9(A) of this code. Both
public hearings required by this section shall occur forty five (45) days prior
to the vote to repeal this subsection (A). (Ord. 1832, 5-8-2013)
   (B)   Concurrence Of Majority: The ayes and nays shall be taken upon the
passage of all ordinances, and on all propositions to create any liability
against the village, or for the expenditure or appropriation of any money. A
concurrence of a majority of all the members elected shall be necessary to the
passage of any such ordinance or proposition, except as set forth in said
subsection (A) of this section and except that it shall require a two-thirds
(2/3) vote of all the members elected to sell any village property.
   (C)   Bills Referred To Committee: All bills against the village shall be
referred to the proper trustee, who shall examine such bills, and approve the
same in writing, and the same shall then be ready for payment upon approving
the same and the requisite vote of the board, but not otherwise. This rule
shall apply to all bills and expenses incurred by the village. Any bill
adversely reported by a trustee shall be, on the request of any two (2)
trustees, referred to a special committee before the same is disallowed. (Ord.
1832, 5-8-2013; amd. Ord. 1860, 2-12-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 200/18-185 - 18-245.
1-5-21: SUSPENSION OF RULES:
These rules may be temporarily suspended by a vote of two- thirds (2/3) of the
trustees present, but shall not be repealed, altered or amended unless notice
thereof shall have been given in writing, and the alteration or amendment
submitted at least one meeting prior thereto, and two-thirds (2/3) of all the
trustees entitled by law to be elected, shall concur therein. (Ord. 493, 4-14-
1961)
1-5-22: CENSURE:
Any member acting or appearing in a disgraceful manner, or who uses opprobrious
or insulting language to or about any member of the board of trustees, or who
does not obey the order of the chair, shall be on motion censured by a majority
vote of the members present.
No person not a member of the village board shall address the board without the
unanimous consent of the members present. (Ord. 493, 4-14-1961)
1-5-23: RULES OF PARLIAMENTARY PRACTICE:
The rules of the parliamentary practice comprised in "Robert's Rules Of Order"
shall govern the board in all cases to which they are applicable, and in which
they are not inconsistent with the standing rules of the board 1 . (Ord. 493,
4-14-1961)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/3-1-11.
1-5-24: COMPENSATION:
   (A)   The salary of the village president shall be the sum of twenty three
thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($23,250.00) annually. This compensation
shall cover all meetings, regular or special or committee, and preparation for
all meetings and all work done for the village. (Ord. 1720, 4-14-2010)
   (B)   The compensation of the trustees of the village shall be the sum of
six thousand dollars ($6,000.00) annually. This compensation shall cover all
meetings, regular or special or committee, and preparation for all meetings and
all work done for the village. (Ord. 1741, 12-22-2010)
1-5-25: DATE ELECTED MUNICIPAL OFFICIALS TAKE OFFICE:
The terms of the newly elected officials shall commence at the first regular or
special meeting during the month of May following the proclamation of the
results of the regular municipal elections. (Ord. 997, 3-25-1981)
1-5-26: REMOTE ATTENDANCE:
If a quorum of the members of the village board is physically present at a
public meeting as defined under the open meetings act, a member of the body may
attend and participate in the meeting remotely by telephone or video conference
when said member is prevented from physically attending the meeting because of:
a) personal illness or disability, b) employment purposes, c) the member's
conducting of business on behalf of the public body, or d) a family or other
emergency. Any member wishing to attend remotely should notify the village
clerk before the meeting unless advance notice is impractical. Any member who
is attending a meeting remotely shall be entitled to vote, speak and
participate in both open and executive sessions of the village board in the
same fashion as if he or she was physically present at the meeting. (Ord. 1881,
10-8-2014)
1-5-27: VILLAGE NEWSLETTER, OTHER PUBLICATIONS:
No member of the corporate authorities of the village of Midlothian may publish
a village newsletter or use the village seal on a publication without the
specific prior direction and approval of the village board of trustees. (Ord.
1954, 1-18-2017)
CHAPTER 6
CLERK
SECTION:
1-6-1: Custodian Of Seal
1-6-2: Record Of Ordinances
1-6-3: Issuance Of Notices
1-6-4: Attesting Licenses
1-6-5: Delivery Of Documents To President
1-6-6: Notification Of Election Or Appointment
1-6-7: Filing Tax Levy With County Clerk
1-6-8: Records To Be Kept
1-6-9: Copies Of Records; Fees
1-6-10: Registrar Of Vital Statistics
1-6-11: Compensation
1-6-12: Deputy Clerk
1-6-1: CUSTODIAN OF SEAL:
The clerk shall keep the corporate seal to be provided under the direction of
the president and board of trustees, and all papers belonging to the village,
and he shall attend to all meetings of the president and board of trustees and
keep a full record of its proceedings in the journal. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-2: RECORD OF ORDINANCES:
The clerk shall record in a book to be kept for that purpose, all ordinances
passed by the board of trustees, and at the foot of the record, at each
ordinance so recorded, shall make a memorandum of the date of passage and of
the publication or posting of the ordinance, which record and memorandum or
certified copy thereof shall be prima facie evidence of the passage and legal
publication or posting of such ordinance for all purposes. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-3: ISSUANCE OF NOTICES:
The clerk shall issue all notices to the members of the board of trustees,
officers of the village, and other persons when required to do so, as herein
provided for, or as may be further directed by the board. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-4: ATTESTING LICENSES:
The clerk shall attest all the licenses granted by the board, under the
provisions of this code. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-5: DELIVERY OF DOCUMENTS TO PRESIDENT:
The clerk shall, without delay, deliver to the president, all ordinances or
resolutions under his charge, or vouchers which may require the approval or
signature of the president. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-6: NOTIFICATION OF ELECTION OR APPOINTMENT:
The clerk shall, within five (5) days after the result of any election is
declared, or appointment made, notify such person so elected or appointed to
any village office, of his election or appointment, and unless such person
shall qualify respectively in ten (10) days, the office shall be considered
vacant and the clerk shall notify the president thereof. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-7: FILING TAX LEVY WITH COUNTY CLERK:
It shall be the duty of the clerk on or before the second Tuesday of September
in each year, to file with the county clerk of Cook County, a certified copy of
the tax levy ordinance. (Ord. 34, 6-19-1928)
1-6-8: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
The clerk shall file and preserve in a convenient form, for reference and use,
and index according to date of filing any subject matter, all official bonds,
oaths of office, written reports of officers and committees, vouchers and all
papers and documents filed within or deposited in his care, and promptly turn
the same over to his successor in office at the expiration of his term; except
the bond of the clerk which shall be filed with the treasurer. (Ord. 34, 6-19-
1928)
1-6-9: COPIES OF RECORDS; FEES:
The clerk shall be entitled to demand and receive in addition to his regular
salary, the following fees:
For certified copies of any record, each one hundred (100) words or fraction
thereof, twenty five cents ($0.25). (Ord. 109, 12-27-1932)
1-6-10: REGISTRAR OF VITAL STATISTICS:
The clerk shall be registrar of vital statistics for the village.
A report of all births, stillbirths and deaths shall be made to the local
registrar of vital statistics, which report shall contain all information
required by the "act to provide for the registration of all births,
stillbirths, and deaths in the state of Illinois, and to repeal an act herein
named", approved June 22, 1915, as amended.
The local registrar shall keep a record showing all births, stillbirths and
deaths occurring within the village, which record shall include all information
required to be kept by the act hereinbefore described. (Ord. 219, 9-22-1943)
1-6-11: COMPENSATION:
The salary of the village clerk shall be the sum of fifteen thousand seven
hundred fifty dollars ($15,750.00) annually. This compensation shall cover all
meetings, regular or special or committee, and preparation for all meetings and
all work done for the village. (Ord. 1720, 4-14-2010)
1-6-12: DEPUTY CLERK:
There is hereby created the position of deputy clerk. The president is
authorized to appoint the deputy clerk for a term of one year by and with the
advice and consent of the board of trustees. The compensation shall be as set
forth by the village board.
The duties of the deputy clerk shall be to act in place and stead of the clerk
in the event of his absence or inability to act. He shall assist the clerk in
the exercise of all his duties and help perform such other duties as may be
assigned to him by the clerk. (Ord. 1069, 6-27-1984)
CHAPTER 7
TREASURER
SECTION:
1-7-1: Appointment
1-7-2: Duties
1-7-3: Oath And Bond
1-7-4: Salary
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT:
The president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees shall
appoint a treasurer for a one year term. (Ord. 643, 5-10-1967)
1-7-2: DUTIES:
The duties of the treasurer shall be:
   (A)   To receive, collect and receipt for all monies and funds due or
payable to the village, including taxes, license fees, special assessments,
fines, penalties, refunds, credits and any and all other fees or monies payable
to the village. To ensure that all valid financial obligations and accounts
payable of the village are timely monitored and paid to avoid losses,
penalties, late charges and/or interest costs to the village.
   (B)   To keep a complete and accurate record and account of all monies
received; and to keep such records, accounts, warrants, books, vouchers and
other payments in the manner that the president and board of trustees may
prescribe. All such records may be examined from time to time by the president,
clerk or any member of the board of trustees.
   (C)   To perform such other duties as are required by 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes, and as may be prescribed by the village board from time to time.
(Ord. 643, 5-10-1967; amd. Ord. 2105, 8-10-2022)
1-7-3: OATH AND BOND:
Before entering upon the duties of the office the treasurer shall take and
subscribe to the oath required of other village officials and shall execute a
bond with security to be approved by the president and board of trustees. The
bond shall be payable to the village in whatever penal sum may be directed by
motion or resolution of the board, conditioned upon the faithful performance of
the duties of the office and the payment of all monies received by the
treasurer. (Ord. 643, 5-10-1967)
1-7-4: SALARY:
The salary of the treasurer shall be fixed from time to time by the village
board. (Ord. 643, 5-10-1967)
CHAPTER 8
ATTORNEY
SECTION:
1-8-1: Appointment
1-8-2: Duties
1-8-3: Compensation
1-8-1: APPOINTMENT:
The office of attorney is hereby created; said office shall be filled by
appointment made by the president and board of trustees, and shall be
transcribed upon the records or proceedings of the village, as soon as same is
made, or as conveniently thereafter as may be. The attorney shall take the oath
required by law, which oath shall be filed at any time after the appointment
with the clerk. (Ord. 24, 12-6-1928)
1-8-2: DUTIES:
The attorney shall be authorized and directed to prepare all of the necessary
papers, resolutions, ordinances, estimates, petitions, notices, orders, appear
in court, attend board of local improvements meetings, write up the minutes of
the board of local improvements meetings, and to do all other work necessary or
which may be necessary, including the spreading of the assessment and writing
up the assessment roll for the purpose of originating and pursuing to
completion, including confirmation of all special assessments that may be
levied in the village. (Ord. 24, 12-6-1928)
1-8-3: COMPENSATION:
The village attorney shall receive as his or her compensation for the services
set forth in section 1-8-2 of this chapter an amount determined from time to
time by the president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
(Ord. 1720, 4-14-2010)
CHAPTER 9
SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS
(Rep. by Ord. 596, 1-13-1965)
CHAPTER 10
HEALTH OFFICER
(Rep. by Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
CHAPTER 11
VILLAGE COURT
(Rep. by Ord. 738, 4-26-1972)
CHAPTER 12
FINANCE
SECTION:
1-12-1: Fiscal Year
1-12-2: Finance Director Office Created
1-12-3: Retirement Fund Participation
1-12-4: Maximum Tax Rates
1-12-5: Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax
1-12-6: Municipal Service Occupation Tax
1-12-7: Municipal Use Tax
1-12-8: Fraudulent Payment, Personal Check
1-12-9: Delinquent Special Assessments
1-12-10: Municipal Automobile Renting Use Tax
1-12-11: Municipal Automobile Renting Occupation Tax
1-12-12: Transaction Fees On Payments
1-12-13: Street Enhancement Fund
1-12-1: FISCAL YEAR:
The fiscal year for the village shall begin on May 1 of each year and end on
April 30 of the following year. (Ord. 226, 9-13-1944)
1-12-2: FINANCE DIRECTOR OFFICE CREATED:
There is created the office of Finance Director. The Finance Director shall be
appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees.
   (A)   Duties: The duties of the Finance Director shall include:
      1.   Overseeing day to day duties and operations of the Village's
Finances.
      2.   Managing, overseeing and being responsible for accounts payable,
payroll, bank reconciliations, and auditing insurance premiums.
      3.   Responsibility for the Village's independent annual audit, Tax
Increment Financing and Motor Fuel Tax reporting and management.
      4.   Preparing final audits, financial statements and ensuring conformity
with Government Finance Officers Association certificate program.
      5.   Ensuring that all financial institutions receiving public funds are
in compliance with the Public Funds Deposit Act (30 ILCS 225) and the Public
Funds investment Act (30 ILCS 225) as now or herein after amended.
      6.   Preparing the Village's annual budget and five-year financial
forecast; assuring the quality, accuracy, timeliness, completeness, and
compliance with local, state, and national standards.
      7.   Implementing and managing technology within the department.
      8.   Implementing and managing Village finance information on the Village
website.
      9.   Implementing and maintaining a grant and vendor contract database.
      10.   Responsibility for implementing and revising all financial policies
and procedures.
      11.   Managing the capital projects budget, coordinating with departments
to determine needs, prioritize projects and obtaining financing for capital
projects as needed.
      12.   Responsibility for ongoing monitoring and notifying the Village
Board of financial conditions and performance measurements throughout the
fiscal year, including quarterly reporting, cash flow analysis, forecasting,
rate studies, financial trend reviews and budget amendments, if necessary;
monitoring and directing the investment of surplus funds pursuant to investment
policies.
      13.   Responsibility for determining and recommending to the Village
Board appropriate rates for the Village's water and sewer services, and other
services as requested by the President and Board of Trustees.
      14.   Reviewing, developing, and implementing internal controls as well
as new processes and procedures to ensure accuracy, efficiency, and
transparency in all areas of Village operations related to Village finances.
      15.   Investigating and/ or responding to citizens' questions, concerns
and/ or complaints relating to the Finance Department.
      16.   Monitoring and coordinating with human resource personnel and
consultants.
      17.   Prepare documents for and attend monthly Village finance committee
meetings and Village Board meetings.
      18.   Coordinate and collaborate with the Village Treasurer to perform
all duties of the Village Treasure as required by the Illinois Municipal Code
and as provided in this section.
      19.   Perform other duties as assigned by the Village President and Board
of Trustees.
   (B)   Compensation: The Finance Director shall receive such compensation as
is established by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 2106, 10-12-2022)
1-12-3: RETIREMENT FUND PARTICIPATION:
The board of trustees, does hereby elect that the village participate in the
Illinois municipal retirement fund, effective January 1, 1961. (Ord. 483, 10-
19-1960)
1-12-4: MAXIMUM TAX RATES:
   (A)   The maximum tax rate for fire protection for the village shall be
0.0690 of the assessed value of all taxable property in the village as
ascertained and set by law. (Ord. 327, 12-12-1951)
   (B)   The maximum tax rate for general corporate purposes for the village
shall be 0.2499 of the assessed value of all taxable property in the village as
ascertained and set by law. (Ord. 328, 12-12-1951)
   (C)   The maximum tax rate for maintaining a public library for the village
shall be 0.0690 of the assessed value of all taxable property in the village as
ascertained and set by law. (Ord. 329, 12-12-1951)
   (D)   Pursuant to the provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-19-4,
as amended, the tax levy for the collection and disposal or solely for the
collection or solely for the disposal of garbage, refuse and ashes is herewith
increased to one-tenth percent (0.1%) of the full fair cash value, as equalized
or assessed by the department of revenue, on all of the taxable property in the
village. (Ord. 618, 12-18-1965)
1-12-5: MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX 1 :
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling tangible personal property at retail in this village at the rate of
three-fourths of one percent (0.75%) of the gross receipts from such sales made
in the course of such business while this section is in effect, in accordance
with the provisions of section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal code.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by section 3 of "an act in relation to a tax
upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property to
purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 28, 1933, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
receipts from sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
   (D)   The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state
department of revenue a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein not
later than five (5) days after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 645, 7-12-1967)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  5-5-1 of this code.
1-12-6: MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX 1 :
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality
in the business of making sales of service at the rate of three-fourths of one
percent (0.75%) of the gross receipts received from such business, in
accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-5 of the Illinois municipal
code.
   (B)   Every serviceman required to account for municipal service occupation
tax for the benefit of this municipality shall file, on or before the last day
of each calendar month, the report to the state department of revenue required
by section 9 of the service occupation tax act.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
   (D)   The village clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the state
department of revenue a certified copy of the ordinance codified herein not
later than five (5) days after the effective date hereof. (Ord. 647, 7-19-1967)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 5-5-1 of this code.
1-12-7: MUNICIPAL USE TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of section
8-11-6 of the Illinois municipal code upon the privilege of using in the
village any item of tangible personal property which is purchased outside
Illinois at retail from a retailer, and which is titled or registered with an
agency of Illinois government. The tax shall be at a rate of one percent (1%)
of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to have the
meaning as defined in the use tax act, approved July 14, 1955, as amended.
   (B)   Consent and authority are given to the Illinois department of revenue
to collect and enforce the tax imposed by subsection (A) of this section and
all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereof for or in
behalf of the village pursuant to the municipal use tax act. (Ord. 852, 6-23-
1976)
1-12-8: FRAUDULENT PAYMENT, PERSONAL CHECK:
   (A)   If any check received by the village in payment of a bill, fee,
charge, license, etc., is deposited by the village and thereafter returned to
the village because of nonsufficient funds, insufficient funds, uncollected
funds, stop payment, refer to maker, account closed or any similar reason, the
person, persons or company who gave the check to the village must make said
check good and pay an additional fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) for the work
done in processing said check. (Ord. 1305, 7-28-1993)
   (B)   If any person, persons or company causes two (2) checks to be returned
to the village as stated above within a twelve (12) month period, the village
shall not accept any further personal checks from said person, persons or
company and all further payments must be made by cashier's check, certified
check, money order or treasurer's check or cash. (Ord. 878, 5-25-1977)
1-12-9: DELINQUENT SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS:
In cases where any installments of a village special assessment levied on real
estate has been delinquent for a period of thirty (30) years, such installment
shall be presumed to be uncollectible and the village collector/treasurer and
the county collector and the county clerk shall enter upon the tax records in
their respective offices where such assessments appear the word "uncollectible"
and shall adjust the books and records of the respective offices therefor. When
such taxes shall have been designated "uncollectible" under this section, the
village may use any money it holds for payment of such special assessment for
improvements similar to the projects for which such monies were collected, for
the purchase of real estate or personal property in connection therewith. (Ord.
987, 9-24-1980)
1-12-10: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING USE TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon the privilege of using in this village an
automobile which is rented from a renter outside Illinois and which is titled
or registered with an agency of this state's government in this village at the
rate of one percent (1%) of the rental price of such automobile while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-8 of
the Illinois municipal code.
   (B)   The tax provided for in this section shall be collected from the
persons whose Illinois address for titling or registration purposes is given as
being in this village.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the Illinois
department of revenue. (Ord. 1022, 1-13-1982)
1-12-11: MUNICIPAL AUTOMOBILE RENTING OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
renting automobiles in this village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such rentals made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of section 8-11-7 of
the Illinois municipal code.
   (B)   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file
on or before the last day of each calendar month, the report to the state
department of revenue required by section 2 and 3 of "an act in relation to a
tax upon persons engaged in the business of selling tangible personal property
to purchasers for use or consumption" approved June 29, 1933, as amended.
   (C)   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the state
department of revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the
renting of automobiles during the preceding month. (Ord. 1021, 1-13-1982)
1-12-12: TRANSACTION FEES ON PAYMENTS:
(A)   The Village of Midlothian hereby authorizes that the transaction fees
associated with accepting credit cards, debit cards, and e-checks be passed on
to the users of credit cards, debit cards, and e-checks when paying for Village
fees and services.
(B)   In addition to the amount charged for the fees and services, there shall
be a transaction fee of two and one-quarter percent (2.25%) of the total amount
charged per transaction for credit cards and debit cards. In addition to the
amount charged for the fees and services, there shall be a fifty cents ($0.50)
per e-check charge. These transaction fees are intended to cover the merchant
fees paid by the Village to the merchant services provider. No credit card,
debit card, or e-check will be accepted without the transaction fees stated in
this section being charged. (Ord. 2156, 11-13-2024)
1-12-13: STREET ENHANCEMENT FUND:
(A)   A fund is hereby created to prioritize and provide for the paving,
repairing, rebuilding and maintaining of streets within the Village.
(B)   The fund established in this section shall be monetized by a fee applied
to all real property within the Village that has a structure upon it as defined
by the International Building Code and the International Residential Code as
adopted herein.
(C)   The fee shall be billed per property at a rate of eight dollars and
twenty-five cents ($8.25) quarterly except that water and garbage account
holders billed monthly may be billed monthly at a rate of two dollars and
seventy-five cents ($2.75) and except as provided for in paragraphs (D), (E),
and (F) of this section. All revenue generated by the fee shall be deposited
into the Village general fund.
(D)   For apartment buildings of four (4) or more units the fee shall apply to
each occupied unit and may be billed separately to each lessee. Only one (1)
fee shall be charged per unit regardless of the number of lessees or occupants
residing in the unit and the fee shall be jointly and severally collectable
against lessors and lessees of the subject property.
(E)   For condominiums and townhomes, the fee shall apply to each unit and may
be billed separately to each unit owner. Only one (1) fee shall be charged per
unit regardless of the number of owners, lessees or occupants residing in the
unit. Vacant home owner association (HOA) owned units shall be exempt from the
fee requirement in this section.
(F)   Senior Citizens' Rate: Any person subject to paying the fee in this
section who has reached the age of sixty-five (65) years by July 1 of the year,
shall therein after pay a reduced fee of one dollar and twenty-five cents
($1.25) per quarter, provided he or she supplies proof of age and proof of
ownership of the property and/or a valid lease if the lessee is obligated to
pay the fee, to the village clerk.
(G)   Failure to pay or default in the full payment of the fee required under
this section shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may
be collected in accordance with the applicable law. (Ord. 2167, 4-9-2025)
CHAPTER 13
DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC RELATIONS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Office Created; Appointment; Term; Salary
1-13-2: Duties
1-13-1: OFFICE CREATED; APPOINTMENT; TERM; SALARY:
There is hereby created the office of director of public relations. The
director of public relations shall be appointed by the president with the
advice and consent of the village board. His term shall commence on May 1 of
each year and expire April 30 of the succeeding year. He may be removed from
office at the will of the village president. The director of public relations
shall receive a salary as set by the village board as compensation for
performing his duties. (Ord. 879, 6-8-1977)
1-13-2: DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the director of public relations to attend all the
village board meetings, to compile and edit the monthly newsletter and compile
and edit all press releases from the village so as to fully inform the
residents of the village of the operations and programs of their village
government. (Ord. 553, 6-12-1963)
CHAPTER 14
OFFICIAL SEAL
SECTION:
1-14-1: Seal Adopted
1-14-2: Custody
1-14-1: SEAL ADOPTED:
The following be and the same hereby is adopted as the official seal of the
village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2623.gif]
(Ord. 1219, 4-10-1991)
1-14-2: CUSTODY:
Said seal shall be placed in the official care, custody and control of the
village clerk. (Ord. 560, 9-25-1963)
CHAPTER 15
OFFICIAL PLAN
SECTION:
1-15-1: Datum Plane
1-15-2: Bench Marks
1-15-3: Official Plan; Establishment
1-15-4: Compliance With Plan
1-15-5: Official Map
1-15-6: Requirements Of Village
1-15-1: DATUM PLANE:
The datum plane of the city of Chicago as established by ordinance as a plane
579.896 feet above mean low water level at Biloxi, Mississippi, as determined
by the United States geological survey be and the same is hereby established as
the base or datum of all village levels.
All grades or elevations that may hereafter be established by the board of
trustees shall be measured in feet and decimals of a foot above or below the
plane as the base or datum of all levels in the village. (Ord. 20, 11-14-1927;
amd. Ord., 1971)
1-15-2: BENCH MARKS:
The engineer is hereby authorized and empowered to establish bench marks within
the village and shall properly record such bench marks and file with the clerk
a true copy of such record. (Ord. 20, 11-14-1927; amd. Ord., 1971)
1-15-3: OFFICIAL PLAN; ESTABLISHMENT:
The official plan of the village shall consist of the following:
   (A)   The "official map" approved by the board on June 13, 1962, consisting
of a map of the village and contiguous unincorporated territory, charts and
diagrams showing proposed additions to and improvements of the village streets,
parks, public buildings, sewage disposal system, water system and street
lighting system.
   (B)   The specifications for street construction and paving hitherto
established by the board.
   (C)   The zoning title.
   (D)   The subdivision control chapter. (Ord. 522, 6-13-1962; amd. Ord.,
1971)
1-15-4: COMPLIANCE WITH PLAN:
No plat of subdivision, plan for the construction or layout of streets, or work
involving laying sewer or water mains shall be approved unless the same
complies fully with the requirements of the official plan. (Ord. 522, 6-13-
1962; amd. Ord., 1971)
1-15-5: OFFICIAL MAP:
The map drawn by George J. Chlebicki & Associates, Consulting Engineers, and
approved by the plan commission on April 4, 1962, entitled "official plan of
the village of Midlothian", is hereby incorporated as a part of this chapter
and is hereby adopted as the official map of the village. (Ord. 521, 6-13-1962;
amd. Ord., 1971)
1-15-6: REQUIREMENTS OF VILLAGE:
   (A)   Rights Of Way Widths: The minimum rights of way widths for street,
alley and crosswalkways shall be:
Major street (except in cases where a greater or lesser width is shown 100 feet
on the major street plan)
Secondary street                                                       66 feet
Minor street, for row houses and apartments                            60 feet
Minor street, for other residences                                     50 feet
Cul-de-sac                                                             50 feet
Marginal access street (with intersecting streets)                     50 feet
Marginal access street (without intersecting streets)                  40 feet
Alley                                                                  20 feet
Crosswalkway                                                           10 feet
 
   (B)   Roadway Widths (Outside To Outside Of Curbs):
Major street (as shown on major street plan)           
Secondary street                                      36 feet
Minor street                                          31 feet
Cul-de-sac                                            31 feet
Marginal access street (with intersecting streets)    31 feet
Marginal access street (without intersecting streets) 20 feet
Alley                                                 20 feet
Crosswalkway                                          5 feet
Sidewalk                                              5 feet
 
   (C)   Parks And Playgrounds: Not less than seven percent (7%) of the area of
every subdivision, exclusive of streets, alleys and unusable land, shall be set
aside for public recreational, school or other public purposes, other than of
streets and alleys, unless the village shall find that the proposed subdivision
is adequately served by such facilities. In small subdivisions, such
reservation of land shall be so located as to permit combining it with similar
reservations in adjoining tracts. Reservations of land for park and
recreational use shall be located to conform, as nearly as possible, with the
parks section of the official plan. In the event that the village shall
determine that the required seven percent (7%) of the subdivider's property for
use as a public site is not feasible in the particular location, the subdivider
shall, in lieu of dedicating a public site, pay into such fund as may be
directed by the village a sum equal in value to the seven percent (7%) of the
land value as mutually agreed upon between the subdivider and the village.
   (D)   Easements: All aboveground utilities shall be placed on rear or side
property lines. When a subdivision is transversed by a watercourse, an
appropriate easement shall be provided for the watercourse in either an open
cut or in an underground conduit, depending upon the density of development.
Where water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, gas mains, telephone lines,
power lines or other utilities are located on or adjacent to property lines,
adequate easements together with right of ingress or egress thereto and
therefrom shall be provided and platted. Easements shall not be less than ten
feet (10') in width and shall be centered upon the centerline of the utility.
Where more than one utility is to occupy the easement, the easement shall be of
such width as to extend five feet (5') at each side beyond the centerlines of
the outermost utilities. Additional width shall be provided where necessary to
accommodate utility pole bracing. The village may require evidence of approval
by the public utility company of easement width. Where side lot easements occur
adjacent to a driveway, there shall not be less than ten feet (10') clearance
between the easement line and the extreme projection of the building structure.
   (E)   Street Construction: The kind and quality of materials which shall be
used in the construction of streets and alleys shall conform to the standard
and quantity of materials required by the state for macadam type streets.
   (F)   Drainage And Sanitary Sewers: All plats submitted should indicate the
surface water drainage plan. The plan is subject to the approval of the board
of trustees. Sanitary sewers are required for all construction. The plan for
the installation and connection of sanitary sewers shall be shown on the plat
and is subject to the approval of the board of trustees and the metropolitan
sanitary district of greater Chicago 1 . (Ord. 521, 6-13-1962; amd. Ord., 1971)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-5.
CHAPTER 16
BOARD OF HEALTH
SECTION:
1-16-1: Board Of Health Created
1-16-2: Health Officer; Appointment
1-16-3: General Duties Of The Board
1-16-4: Regulatory Authority Of Board
1-16-5: Suspension Of License
1-16-6: Quarantine And Vaccination Authority Of Board
1-16-7: Jurisdiction Of Board Over Schools
1-16-8: Sanitation Officers
1-16-9: General Duties Of Health Officer
1-16-10: Compensation Of Health Officer
1-16-11: Inspection Of Schools
1-16-12: Police To Assist Health Officer And Sanitation Officers
1-16-13: Violation Or Disobedience Of Orders Or Notices Of Board
1-16-1: BOARD OF HEALTH CREATED:
There is hereby created the board of health for the village. The board of
health shall consist of the village president, the health officer and the
village trustee assigned to health and welfare from the village board. (Ord.
744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-2: HEALTH OFFICER; APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of health officer. The health officer shall
be appointed by the president with the consent of the village board. The term
of office shall be for one year commencing on May 1 of each year. The health
officer may be removed at the will of the president and with the concurrence of
the board of trustees. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-3: GENERAL DUTIES OF THE BOARD:
The board of health shall have the powers and perform the duties assigned to it
by statute or ordinance. It shall be the duty of the board of health to enforce
all sections of this code and all ordinances of the village or state statutes,
codes, regulations or orders which relate to public health, or relate to
nuisances. (Ord. 1438, 6-10-1998)
1-16-4: REGULATORY AUTHORITY OF BOARD:
The board of health shall make all necessary rules and regulations for the
protection of the health of the inhabitants of the village. They shall cause
all records of the board to be properly kept. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-5: SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
When the board of health finds a violation of any of the requirements of this
code relating to health and sanitation, it may make a second inspection after a
lapse of whatever time it deems necessary for the correction of the violation.
If, upon such second inspection it is found that such violation has not been
corrected, the license may be suspended or revoked by the board of health, or
by the village president. (Ord. 1438, 6-10-1998)
1-16-6: QUARANTINE AND VACCINATION AUTHORITY OF BOARD:
   (A)   The board of health is hereby authorized to make such reasonable rules
as may be necessary regarding quarantine and vaccination, for the prevention
and spread of contagious diseases, and to quarantine premises where such
diseases occur for such time as may be necessary to protect public health.
   (B)   The said board shall have power to prevent persons from entering or
leaving premises on which a case of a contagious or epidemic disease occurs or
is found, and to placard the same with signs indicating the nature of such
disease and the existence of the quarantine. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-7: JURISDICTION OF BOARD OVER SCHOOLS:
The board of health shall have jurisdiction in all matters pertaining to the
preservation of the health of those in attendance, upon the public and private
schools in the village, to which end it is hereby made the duty of said board
of health:
   (A)   To require that all persons attending said schools either as teachers
or pupils, shall have complied with the orders of the state board of health
concerning vaccination.
   (B)   To exclude from such schools any person suffering with a contagious or
infectious disease, or any person liable to convey such disease among those in
attendance, and to require and compel the vaccination of pupils when necessary.
(Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-8: SANITATION OFFICERS:
The health officer, with the approval of the village board, may appoint one or
two (2) sanitation officers whose duties shall be set out by the health officer
and shall include, but not be limited to, making inspections and issuing
notices or citations for violations. The compensation for the sanitation
officers shall be as fixed by the village board from time to time. The
sanitation officers shall report to the health officer and shall act upon his
direction or any member of the board of health. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-9: GENERAL DUTIES OF HEALTH OFFICER:
It shall be the duty of the health officer: (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
   (A)   To enforce and observe all rules and codes, including, but not limited
to, food service sanitation code and retail food service sanitation code,
regulations and orders of the Illinois department of public health and all
state laws pertaining to preservation of the health of the people within the
village. If any provisions of the state rules, codes, regulations, orders or
laws are more restrictive than the provisions hereof, the provisions of the
state shall prevail. (Ord. 1438, 6-10-1998)
   (B)   To execute and enforce all sections of this code and all ordinances of
the village relating to nuisances, public health and sanitation.
   (C)   To investigate the existence of any contagious or infectious disease
within the village and to report the same promptly to the village board and to
the department of health of the state, and to act without delay in carrying out
such measures for arresting the progress of the same as either or both of said
bodies shall adopt.
   (D)   To make all necessary sanitary and health investigations and
inspections within the village.
   (E)   To periodically inspect all establishments and premises duly licensed
and operating in the village which in any way affect or relate to the health
and welfare to the village.
   (F)   To work with and use the facilities of the Cook County health
department on all matters under their jurisdiction.
   (G)   To report to the president and board of trustees on all inspections
setting forth violations of any provisions of this code or state statutes and
recommending corrective measures. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-10: COMPENSATION OF HEALTH OFFICER:
The health officer shall receive as compensation for his services amounts to be
fixed by the village board from time to time. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-11: INSPECTION OF SCHOOLS:
The health officer or sanitation officers shall make regular inspection of all
school buildings at least once a year as to their hygienic condition and shall
report the result of such inspection to the board of trustees of the village
and to the board of education having charge and control of such schools, with
instructions as to remedy of conditions (if any such be found), whereby the
health of those in attendance may be impaired or life endangered. In the event
that said health officer deems it advisable that any public or private school
or schools be closed, he shall report his recommendations to the president and
board of trustees, and if they deem it advisable they shall recommend to the
board of education that such school or schools be closed for such period of
time as may be necessary. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-12: POLICE TO ASSIST HEALTH OFFICER AND SANITATION OFFICERS:
The village police shall assist the health officer or sanitation officers in
the performance of his duties when called upon by said health officer or
sanitation officers or by the president or board of trustees or any member
thereof. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
1-16-13: VIOLATION OR DISOBEDIENCE OF ORDERS OR NOTICES OF BOARD:
Any person violating or refusing to obey any order of the board of health or
destroying, mutilating or concealing any notice posted by or under the
authority of the board of health, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon
conviction thereof be punished as provided in this code. (Ord. 744, 6-14-1972)
CHAPTER 17
CODE OF ETHICS
SECTION:
1-17-1: Definitions
1-17-2: Code Of Ethics
1-17-3: Exceptions To Code
1-17-4: Disclosure Of Interest In Legislative Action
1-17-5: Penalties
1-17-6: Distribution Of Code Of Ethics
1-17-7: Separability
1-17-1: DEFINITIONS:
BUSINESS ENTITY: Any business, proprietorship, firm, partnership, person in
representative or fiduciary capacity, association, venture, trust or
corporation.
INTEREST: Direct or indirect pecuniary or material benefit accruing to a public
official, appointee or employee as a result of a contract or transaction which
is or may be the subject of an official action or act by or with the village
except for such contracts or transactions which by their terms and by the
substance of their provisions confer the opportunity and right to realize the
accrual of similar benefits to all other persons and/or property similarly
situated.
For the purposes of this code, a public official, appointee or employee shall
be deemed to have an interest in the affairs of:
   (A)   Any person related to him by blood or marriage; and a divorce or
separation between spouses shall not be deemed to terminate any such
relationship;
   (B)   Any person or business entity with whom a contractual relationship
exists with the public official, appointee or employee;
   (C)   Any business entity in which the public official, appointee or
employee is an officer, director, or member having a financial interest in, or
employed by;
   (D)   Any business entity in which the stock of, or legal beneficial
ownership of, in excess of seven and one-half percent (71/2%) of the total
stock or total legal and beneficial ownership is controlled or owned directly
or indirectly by the public official, appointee or employee.
OFFICIAL ACT OR ACTION: Any legislative, administrative, appointive or
discretionary act of any official, appointee or employee of the village or any
agency, board, committee or commission thereof.
PUBLIC OFFICIAL, APPOINTEE OR EMPLOYEE: Any person, consultants, official,
appointee or employee holding a position by election, appointment, or
employment in the service of the municipality, whether paid or unpaid,
including members of any board, committee or commission thereof. (Ord. 1113, 4-
23-1986)
1-17-2: CODE OF ETHICS:
   (A)   Generally: The requirements herein set forth shall constitute a code
of ethics establishing reasonable standards and guidelines for the ethical
conduct of public officials, appointees and employees of the village.
   (B)   Interest In Contract Or Transaction: No public official, appointee or
employee having the power or duty to perform an official act or action, related
to a contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of an official act
or action of the village, shall:
      1.   Have or thereafter acquire an interest in such contract or
transaction, or
      2.   Have an interest in any business entity representing, advising or
appearing on behalf of, whether paid or unpaid, any person involved in such
contract or transaction, or
      3.   Have solicited or accepted present or future employment with a
person or business entity involved in such contract or transaction, or
      4.   Have solicited, accepted or granted a present or future gift, favor,
service or thing of value from or to a person involved in such contract or
transaction, or
      5.   Have encouraged, made or accepted any ex parte or unilateral
application or communication where a determination is to be made after a public
hearing and such public employee fails to make the contents of the
communication a part of the record.
   (C)   Exceptions To Prohibition Against Gifts Or Favors: The prohibition
against gifts or favors in subsection (B)4 of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   An occasional nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value, or
      2.   An award publicly presented in recognition of public service, or
      3.   Any gift which would have been offered or given to him if he were
not an official, appointee or employee.
   (D)   Preacquisition Of Interest: No public official, appointee or employee
with respect to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of
an official act or action of the village shall acquire an interest in or be
affected by such contract or transaction at a time when the public employee
believes or has reason to believe that it will directly or indirectly be
affected by an official act or action of the village.
   (E)   Disclosure Of Information: No public official, appointee or employee
with respect to any contract or transaction which is or may be the subject of
an official act or action of the village, shall, without proper legal
authorization, disclose confidential information concerning the property,
government, or affairs of the village, or use such information to advance the
financial or other private interest of himself or others.
   (F)   Incompatible Service: No public official, appointee or employee shall
engage in or accept private employment or render service, for private interest,
when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of
his official duties or would tend to impair his independence of judgment or
action in the performance of his official duties, unless otherwise permitted by
law and unless disclosure is made as provided in this code.
   (G)   Appearances: No public official, appointee or employee shall appear on
behalf of any private persons, other than himself, his spouse or minor
children, before any village agency. However, a member of the village board may
appear before village agencies on behalf of his constituents in the course of
his duties as a representative of the electorate or in the performance of
public or civic obligations.
   (H)   Public Contracts: No public official, appointee or employee who, in
his capacity as such official, appointee or employee, participates in the
making of a contract in which he has a private pecuniary interest, direct or
indirect, or performs in regard to that contract some function requiring the
exercise of discretion on his part, shall enter into any contract with the
village unless:
      1.   The contract is awarded through a process of public notice and
competitive bidding, or
      2.   The village board waives the requirement of this section after
determining that it is in the best interest of the village to do so.
   (I)   Review Of Plans For Private Citizens: No engineer or consultant hired
by the village or any of the village departments or committees may provide
advice or consultations or sit in review of any plans or drawings he has
prepared for private citizens or corporations or organizations which need
approval of the village. Engineers or members of their firm employed by the
village must not prepare plans or drawings for private firms or parties, if
said plans or drawings are to be submitted for approval by the village.
   (J)   Village Attorney Restrictions: No attorney employed by the village nor
any member of his firm shall appear before the village or any of its committees
or boards as an attorney for any private person (other than himself or his
spouse or minor children) or any corporation or firm. (Ord. 1113, 4-23-1986)
1-17-3: EXCEPTIONS TO CODE:
It shall not be deemed a violation of the standards of this code if the action
of the public official, appointee or employee, would be exempt under the terms
of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes section 5/3-14-4. (Ord. 1113, 4-23-1986)
1-17-4: DISCLOSURE OF INTEREST IN LEGISLATIVE ACTION:
   (A)   Any member of the village board who has a financial interest or
personal interest in any proposed legislation before the village board shall
disclose on the record of the village board the nature and extent of such
interest.
   (B)   Any other official, appointee or employee who has a financial or
personal interest in any proposed legislative action of the village board and
who participates in discussion with or gives an official opinion or
recommendation to the village board, shall disclose on the record of the
village board the nature and extent of such interest. (Ord. 1113, 4-23-1986)
1-17-5: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any public official, appointee or employee who wilfully and knowingly
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any contract or transaction which was the subject of an official act
or action of the village in which there is an interest prohibited by this code,
or which involved the violation of a provision of this code, shall be voidable
at the option of the village. (Ord. 1113, 4-23-1986)
1-17-6: DISTRIBUTION OF CODE OF ETHICS:
The village clerk shall cause a copy of this code of ethics to be distributed
to every public official, appointee and employee of the village within thirty
(30) days after enactment of this code. Each public official, appointee and
employee elected, appointed or engaged thereafter shall be furnished a copy
before entering upon the duties of his office or employment. (Ord. 1113, 4-23-
1986)
1-17-7: SEPARABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is found by a court of competent jurisdiction
to be invalid or unconstitutional, or if the application of this chapter to any
person or circumstances is found to be invalid or unconstitutional, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect the other provisions or
applications of this code which can be given effect without the invalid or
unconstitutional provision or application. (Ord. 1113, 4-23-1986)
CHAPTER 18
RESIDENCY OF EMPLOYEES
(Rep. by Ord. 1575, 8-27-2003)
CHAPTER 19
ETHICS
SECTION:
1-19-1: Definitions
1-19-2: Prohibited Political Activities
1-19-3: Gift Ban
1-19-4: Exceptions
1-19-5: Disposition Of Gifts
1-19-6: Ethics Advisor
1-19-7: Duties Of Ethics Advisor
1-19-8: Penalties
1-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter the following terms shall be given these definitions:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities: a) relating to the
support or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action,
b) relating to collective bargaining, or c) that are otherwise in furtherance
of the person's official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code 1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act 2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code 3 .
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village, whether on a full time or part time
basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the direction and
control of an employer with regard to the material details of how the work is
to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Midlothian.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBER: Parents, spouse, brothers, sisters, children,
grandparents, grandchildren, parents-in-law, brothers-in-law, sisters-in-law,
and legal guardians.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive: a)
compensation for employment, b) service credit towards pension benefits, and c)
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities: a) relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, b) relating to collective bargaining, or
c) that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 4 , but only with regard to those activities
that require filing with the state board of elections or a county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY:
   (A)   Preparing for, organizing, or participating in any political meeting,
political rally, political demonstration, or other political event.
   (B)   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the purchase
of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any political
fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
   (C)   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any document or
report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign contribution.
   (D)   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll in
connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (E)   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual voters in
an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a campaign
for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for political
purposes or for or against any referendum question.
   (F)   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (G)   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or a
political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping in
an effort to get voters to the polls.
   (H)   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (I)   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective office in
that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
   (J)   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
   (K)   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
   (L)   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
   (M)   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
   (N)   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
   (O)   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
   (A)   Is seeking official action: 1) by an officer or 2) by an employee, or
by the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (B)   Does business or seeks to do business: 1) with the officer or 2) with
an employee, or with the officer or another employee directing that employee;
   (C)   Conducts activities regulated: 1) by the officer or 2) by an employee,
or by the officer or another employee directing that employee; or
   (D)   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the performance or
nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or employee.
VILLAGE: Village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. 10 ILCS 5/1-3.
2 2. 5 ILCS 315/3.
3 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.
4 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.
1-19-2: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any compensated time. No officer or employee shall
intentionally use any property or resources of the village in connection with
any prohibited political activity.
   (B)   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity: 1) as
part of that officer's or employee's duties, 2) as a condition of employment,
or 3) during any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal
time off).
   (C)   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   (E)   No person either: 1) in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or 2) in a position the salary for which is
paid in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
1-19-3: GIFT BAN:
Except as permitted by section 1-19-4 or 1-19-5 of this chapter, no officer or
employee, and no spouse of or immediate family member living with any officer
or employee (collectively referred to herein as "recipients"), shall
intentionally solicit or accept any gift from any "prohibited source", as
defined herein, or which is otherwise prohibited by law or ordinance. No
prohibited source shall intentionally offer or make a gift that violates this
section. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
1-19-4: EXCEPTIONS:
Section 1-19-3 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
   (A)   Opportunities, benefits, and services that are available on the same
conditions as for the general public.
   (B)   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
   (C)   Any: 1) contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
2) activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
   (D)   Educational materials and missions.
   (E)   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
   (F)   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual
as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt,
great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather,
grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-
law, daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's
spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
   (G)   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: 1) the history of the
relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the
gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between those individuals; 2)
whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who gave the
gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business
reimbursement for the gift; and 3) whether to the actual knowledge of the
recipient the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same
or similar gifts to other officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate
family members.
   (H)   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are: 1) consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or 2) catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food
or refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
   (I)   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an officer or employee), if
the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position
or employment of the officer or employee, and are customarily provided to
others in similar circumstances.
   (J)   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this
section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
   (K)   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
   (L)   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
1-19-5: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living
with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient
promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to
its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or
succeeded. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
1-19-6: ETHICS ADVISOR:
The village president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees
shall designate an ethics advisor for the village. The duties of the ethics
advisor may be delegated to an officer or employee of the village unless the
position has been created as an office by the village. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
1-19-7: DUTIES OF ETHICS ADVISOR:
The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees of the
village concerning the interpretation of and compliance with the provisions of
this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall perform such other
duties as may be delegated by the village. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
1-19-8: PENALTIES:
   (A)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-19-2 of
this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution
other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty
four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (B)   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section 1-19-3 or
1-19-5 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00).
   (C)   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be punished by a
term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for a
period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined
in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
   (D)   A violation of section 1-19-2 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a
criminal offense by an attorney for the village by filing in the circuit court
any information, or sworn complaint, charging such offense. The prosecution
shall be under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall
require the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable
doubt.
A violation of section 1-19-3 or 1-19-5 of this chapter may be prosecuted as a
quasi-criminal offense by an attorney for the village, or, if an ethics
commission has been created, by the commission through the designated
administrative procedure.
   (E)   In addition to any other penalty that may be applicable, whether
criminal or civil, an officer or employee who intentionally violates any
provision of section 1-19-2, 1-19-3 or 1-19-5 of this chapter is subject to
discipline or discharge. (Ord. 1595, 5-26-2004)
CHAPTER 20
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY
SECTION:
1-20-1: Title
1-20-2: Scope
1-20-3: Definitions
1-20-4: Notices
1-20-5: Late Payment
1-20-6: Payment
1-20-7: Certain Credits And Refunds
1-20-8: Audit Procedure
1-20-9: Appeal
1-20-10: Hearing
1-20-11: Interest And Penalties
1-20-12: Abatement
1-20-13: Installment Contracts
1-20-14: Statute Of Limitations
1-20-15: Voluntary Disclosure
1-20-16: Publication Of Tax Ordinances
1-20-17: Liens
1-20-18: Application
1-20-19: Severability
1-20-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the LOCALLY IMPOSED AND
ADMINISTERED TAX RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITY ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-2: SCOPE:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the village's procedures in
connection with all of the village's locally imposed and administered taxes.
(Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-3: DEFINITIONS:
Certain words or terms herein shall have the meanings ascribed to them as
follows:
ACT: The "local government taxpayers' bill of rights act".
CORPORATE AUTHORITIES: The village's president and board of trustees.
LOCAL TAX ADMINISTRATOR: The village's treasurer is charged with the
administration and collection of the locally imposed and administered taxes,
including staff, employees or agents to the extent they are authorized by the
local tax administrator to act in the local tax administrator's stead. The
local tax administrator shall have the authority to implement the terms of this
chapter to give full effect to this chapter. The exercise of such authority by
the local tax administrator shall not be inconsistent with this chapter and the
act.
LOCALLY IMPOSED AND ADMINISTERED TAX OR TAX: Each tax imposed by the village
that is collected or administered by the village not an agency or department of
the state. It does not include any taxes imposed upon real property under the
property tax code or fees collected by the village other than infrastructure
maintenance fees.
NOTICE: Each audit notice, collection notice or other similar notice or
communication in connection with each of the village's locally imposed and
administered taxes.
TAX ORDINANCE: Each ordinance adopted by the village that imposes any locally
imposed and administered tax.
TAXPAYER: Any person required to pay any locally imposed and administered tax
and generally includes the person upon whom the legal incidence of such tax is
placed and with respect to consumer taxes includes the business or entity
required to collect and pay the locally imposed and administered tax to the
village.
VILLAGE: The village of Midlothian, Illinois. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-4: NOTICES:
Unless otherwise provided, whenever notice is required to be given, the notice
is to be in writing mailed not less than seven (7) calendar days prior to the
day fixed for any applicable hearing, audit or other scheduled act of the local
tax administrator. The notice shall be sent by the local tax administrator as
follows:
   (A)   First class or express mail, or overnight mail, addressed to the
persons concerned at the persons' last known address, or
   (B)   Personal service or delivery. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-5: LATE PAYMENT:
Any notice, payment, remittance or other filing required to be made to the
village pursuant to any tax ordinance shall be considered late unless it is: a)
physically received by the village on or before the due date, or b) received in
an envelope or other container displaying a valid, readable U.S. postmark dated
on or before the due date, properly addressed to the village, with adequate
postage prepaid. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-6: PAYMENT:
Any payment or remittance received for a tax period shall be applied in the
following order: a) first to the tax due for the applicable period; b) second
to the interest due for the applicable period; and c) third to the penalty for
the applicable period. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-7: CERTAIN CREDITS AND REFUNDS:
   (A)   The village shall not refund or credit any taxes voluntarily paid
without written protest at the time of payment in the event that a locally
imposed and administered tax is declared invalidly enacted or unconstitutional
by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, a taxpayer shall not be deemed
to have paid the tax voluntarily if the taxpayer lacked knowledge of the facts
upon which to protest the taxes at the time of payment or if the taxpayer paid
the taxes under duress.
   (B)   The statute of limitations on a claim for credit or refund shall be
two (2) years after the end of the calendar year in which payment in error was
made. The village shall not grant a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest, or penalties to a person who has not paid the
amounts directly to the village.
   (C)   The procedure for claiming a credit or refund of locally imposed and
administered taxes, interest or penalties paid in error shall be as follows:
      1.   The taxpayer shall submit to the local tax administrator in writing
a claim for credit or refund together with a statement specifying:
         (a)   The name of the locally imposed and administered tax subject to
the claim;
         (b)   The tax period for the locally imposed and administered tax
subject to the claim;
         (c)   The date of the tax payment subject to the claim and the
canceled check or receipt for the payment;
         (d)   The taxpayer's recalculation, accompanied by an amended or
revised tax return, in connection with the claim; and
         (e)   A request for either a refund or a credit in connection with the
claim to be applied to the amount of tax, interest and penalties overpaid, and,
as applicable, related interest on the amount overpaid; provided, however, that
there shall be no refund and only a credit given in the event the taxpayer owes
any monies to the village.
      2.   Within ten (10) days of the receipt by the local tax administrator
of any claim for a refund or credit, the local tax administrator shall either:
         (a)   Grant the claim; or
         (b)   Deny the claim, in whole or in part, together with a statement
as to the reason for the denial or the partial grant and denial.
      3.   In the event the local tax administrator grants, in whole or in
part, a claim for refund or credit, the amount of the grant for refund or
credit shall bear interest at the rate of five percent (5%) per annum, based on
a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days and the number of days elapsed,
from the date of the overpayment to the date of mailing of a refund check or
the grant of a credit. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-8: AUDIT PROCEDURE:
Any request for proposed audit pursuant to any local administered tax shall
comply with the notice requirements of this chapter.
   (A)   Each notice of audit shall contain the following information:
      1.   The tax;
      2.   The time period of the audit; and
      3.   A brief description of the books and records to be made available
for the auditor.
   (B)   Any audit shall be conducted during normal business hours and if the
date and time selected by the local tax administrator is not agreeable to the
taxpayer, another date and time may be requested by the taxpayer within thirty
(30) days after the originally designated audit and during normal business
hours.
   (C)   The taxpayer may request an extension of time to have an audit
conducted. The audit shall be conducted not less than seven (7) days nor more
than thirty (30) days from the date the notice is given, unless the taxpayer
and the local tax administrator agreed to some other convenient time. In the
event the taxpayer is unable to comply with the audit on the date in question,
the taxpayer may request another date, within the thirty (30) days, approved in
writing, that is convenient to the taxpayer and the local tax administrator.
   (D)   Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of the taxpayer's
business or activities, including original source documents and books of entry
denoting the transactions which had given rise or may have given rise to any
tax liability, exemption or deduction. All books shall be kept in the English
language and shall be subject to and available for inspection by the village.
   (E)   It is the duty and responsibility of every taxpayer to make available
its books and records for inspection by the village. If the taxpayer or tax
collector fails to provide the documents necessary for audit within the time
provided, the local tax administrator may issue a tax determination and
assessment based on the tax administrator's determination of the best estimate
of the taxpayer's tax liability.
   (F)   If an audit determines there has been an overpayment of a locally
imposed and administered tax as a result of the audit, written notice of the
amount of overpayment shall be given to the taxpayer within thirty (30) days of
the village's determination of the amount of overpayment.
   (G)   In the event a tax payment was submitted to the incorrect local
governmental entity, the local tax administrator shall notify the local
governmental entity imposing such tax. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-9: APPEAL:
   (A)   The local tax administrator shall send written notice to a taxpayer
upon the local tax administrator's issuance of a protestable notice of tax due,
a bill, a claim denial, or a notice of claim reduction regarding any tax. The
notice shall include the following information:
      1.   The reason for the assessment;
      2.   The amount of the tax liability proposed;
      3.   The procedure for appealing the assessment; and
      4.   The obligations of the village during the audit, appeal, refund and
collection process.
   (B)   A taxpayer who receives written notice from the local tax
administrator of a determination of tax due or assessment may file with the
local tax administrator a written protest and petition for hearing, setting
forth the basis of the taxpayer's request for a hearing. The written protest
and petition for hearing must be filed with the local tax administrator within
forty five (45) days of receipt of the written notice of the tax determination
and assessment.
   (C)   If a timely written notice and petition for hearing is filed, the
local tax administrator shall fix the time and place for hearing and shall give
written notice to the taxpayer. The hearing shall be scheduled for a date
within fourteen (14) days of receipt of the written protest and petition for
hearing, unless the taxpayer requests a later date convenient to all parties.
   (D)   If a written protest and petition for hearing is not filed within the
forty five (45) day period, the tax determination, audit or assessment shall
become a final bill due and owing without further notice.
   (E)   Upon the showing of reasonable cause by the taxpayer and the full
payment of the contested tax liability along with interest accrued as of the
due date of the tax, the local tax administrator may reopen or extend the time
for filing a written protest and petition for hearing. In no event shall the
time for filing a written protest and petition for hearing be reopened or
extended for more than ninety (90) days after the expiration of the forty five
(45) day period. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-10: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a taxpayer or a tax collector has filed a timely written
protest and petition for hearing under section 1-20-9 of this chapter, the
local tax administrator shall conduct a hearing regarding any appeal.
   (B)   No continuances shall be granted except in cases where a continuance
is absolutely necessary to protect the rights of the taxpayer. Lack of
preparation shall not be grounds for a continuance. Any continuance granted
shall not exceed fourteen (14) days.
   (C)   At the hearing the local tax administrator shall preside and shall
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the tax determination, audit
or assessment. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply.
   (D)   At the conclusion of the hearing, the local tax administrator shall
make a written determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the
hearing. The taxpayer or tax collector shall be provided with a copy of the
written decision. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-11: INTEREST AND PENALTIES:
In the event a determination has been made that a tax is due and owing, through
audit, assessment or other bill sent, the tax must be paid within the time
frame otherwise indicated.
   (A)   Interest: The village hereby provides for the amount of interest to be
assessed on a late payment, underpayment, or nonpayment of the tax, to be nine
percent (9%) per annum, based on a year of three hundred sixty five (365) days
and the number of days elapsed.
   (B)   Late Filing And Payment Penalties: If a tax return is not filed within
the time and manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance, a late filing
penalty of five percent (5%) of the amount of tax required to be shown as due
on a return shall be imposed; and a late payment penalty of five percent (5%)
of the tax due shall be imposed. If no return is filed within the time or
manner provided by the controlling tax ordinance and prior to the village
issuing a notice of tax delinquency or notice of tax liability, then a failure
to file penalty shall be assessed equal to twenty five percent (25%) of the
total tax due for the applicable reporting period for which the return was
required to be filed. A late filing or payment penalty shall not apply if a
failure to file penalty is imposed by the controlling ordinance. (Ord. 1500, 1-
10-2001)
1-20-12: ABATEMENT:
The local tax administrator shall have the authority to waive or abate any late
filing penalty, late payment penalty or failure to file penalty if the local
tax administrator shall determine reasonable cause exists for delay or failure
to make a filing. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-13: INSTALLMENT CONTRACTS:
The village may enter into an installment contract with the taxpayer for the
payment of taxes under the controlling tax ordinance. The local tax
administrator may not cancel any installment contract so entered unless the
taxpayer fails to pay any amount due and owing. Upon written notice by the
local tax administrator that the payment is thirty (30) days delinquent, the
taxpayer shall have fourteen (14) working days to cure any delinquency. If the
taxpayer fails to cure the delinquency within the fourteen (14) day period or
fails to demonstrate good faith in restructuring the installment contract with
the local administrator, the installment contract shall be canceled without
further notice to the taxpayer. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-14: STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS:
The village, through the local tax administrator, shall review all tax returns
in a prompt and timely manner and inform taxpayers of any amounts due and
owing. The taxpayer shall have forty five (45) days after receiving notice of
the reviewed tax returns to make any request for refund or provide any tax
still due and owing.
   (A)   No determination of tax due and owing may be issued more than two (2)
years maximum after the end of the calendar year for which the return for the
applicable period was filed or for the calendar year in which the return for
the applicable period was due, whichever occurs later.
   (B)   If any tax return is not filed or if during any four (4) year period
for which a notice of tax determination or assessment may be issued by the
village, the tax paid was less than seventy five percent (75%) of the tax due,
the statute of limitations shall be six (6) years maximum after the end of the
calendar year in which return for the applicable period was due or end of the
calendar year in which the return for the applicable period was filed.
   (C)   No statute of limitations shall apply if a fraudulent tax return was
filed by the taxpayer. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-15: VOLUNTARY DISCLOSURE:
For any locally imposed and administered tax for which a taxpayer has not
received a written notice of an audit, investigation, or assessment from the
local tax administrator, a taxpayer is entitled to file an application with the
local tax administrator for a voluntary disclosure of the tax due. A taxpayer
filing a voluntary disclosure application must agree to pay the amount of tax
due, along with interest of one percent (1%) per month, for all periods prior
to the filing of the application but not more than four (4) years before the
date of filing the application. A taxpayer filing a valid voluntary disclosure
application may not be liable for any additional tax, interest, or penalty for
any period before the date the application was filed. However, if the taxpayer
incorrectly determined and underpaid the amount of tax due, the taxpayer is
liable for the underpaid tax along with applicable interest on the underpaid
tax, unless the underpayment was the result of fraud on the part of the
taxpayer, in which case the application shall be deemed invalid and void. The
payment of tax and interest must be made by no later than ninety (90) days
after the filing of the voluntary disclosure application or the date agreed to
by the local tax administrator. However, any additional amounts owed as a
result of an underpayment of tax and interest previously paid under this
section must be paid within ninety (90) days after a final determination and
the exhaustion of all appeals of the additional amount owed or the date agreed
to by the local tax administrator, whichever is longer. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-16: PUBLICATION OF TAX ORDINANCES:
Any locally administered tax ordinance shall be published via normal or
standard publishing requirements. The posting of a tax ordinance on the
internet shall satisfy the publication requirements. Copies of all tax
ordinances shall be made available to the public upon request at the village
clerk's office. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-17: LIENS:
The local tax administrator shall establish an internal review procedure
regarding any liens filed against any taxpayers for unpaid taxes. Upon a
determination by the local tax administrator that the lien is valid, the lien
shall remain in full force and effect. If the lien is determined to be
improper, the local tax administrator shall:
   (A)   Timely remove the lien at the village's expense;
   (B)   Correct the taxpayer's credit record; and
   (C)   Correct any public disclosure of the improperly imposed lien. (Ord.
1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-18: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed and administered to supplement all of
the village's tax ordinances. To the extent that any tax ordinance is in
conflict with or inconsistent with this chapter, this chapter shall be
controlling. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
1-20-19: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, paragraph or provision of this chapter shall be held to be
invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any of the remaining
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1500, 1-10-2001)
CHAPTER 21
BID PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-21-1: Contracts For Public Works Projects; Advertisement And Bid Procedures
1-21-2: Wage Rates For Public Works Projects
1-21-1: CONTRACTS FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS; ADVERTISEMENT AND BID PROCEDURES:
   (A)   All contracts for any work or other public improvement which is not to
be paid for in whole or in part by special assessment or special taxation, when
the expense thereof will exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00), shall be
constructed either:
      1.   By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after advertising
for bids, in the manner provided for in this section, except that any such
contract may be entered into by the proper officers without advertising for
bids, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees then
holding office; or
      2.   In the following manner, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds (2/3)
of all the trustees then holding office:
      The director of public works or other employee or agent of the village,
as determined by the village board, shall superintend and cause to be carried
out the construction of the work or other public improvement and shall employ
exclusively for the performance of all manual labor thereon, laborers and
artisans whom the village shall pay by the day or hour; and all material of the
value of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) and upward used in the construction
of the work or other public improvement, shall be purchased by contract let to
the lowest responsible bidder in the manner provided for in this section.
   (B)   When advertisement for bids is to be made, the village clerk shall
cause a call for such bids to be published at least once not less than ten (10)
days before the date for opening such bids in one or more newspapers with a
general circulation in the village.
   The published notice need give only a general description of the work to be
done or the materials to be furnished, but detailed drawings, plans, profiles
and specifications as prescribed by the president and board of trustees for
such improvement shall be made and placed on file in the office of the village
clerk prior to the publication of such advertisement and shall at all times be
open to public inspection.
   Such notice shall also contain such conditions and restrictions as to bids,
prerequisites as to bidders, obtaining of plans and specifications, security,
deposits, withdrawal or rejection of bids, proposals, contracts and performance
bonds as the village board may direct.
   In all advertisements the right to reject any and all bids shall be
expressly reserved.
   The public notice shall be in substantially the following form:
      LEGAL NOTICE
      STATE OF ILLINOIS
      COUNTY OF COOK
      VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN
      ADVERTISEMENT FOR BIDS
The Village of Midlothian, Illinois will receive sealed bids or proposals for
the construction of (insert public improvement) until       P.M. on the day of
                          20     , at the office of the Village Clerk,
Midlothian, Illinois. All proposals received will be publicly opened and read
aloud in the                                at the Village Hall at       (A.M./
P.M.) on                , 20     .
The improvements on which proposals are requested will require the following
construction:
   (Insert the general nature of the construction).
The contract items including plans and specifications are on file and available
for inspection at the office of the Village Manager. (Herein set forth any
additional conditions or restrictions ordered by President and Board of
Trustees).
No bid shall be withdrawn after the opening of proposals without the consent of
the Village for a period of 21 days after the scheduled time of opening and
reading bids. (Herein set forth any requirement for guarantee of the bid that
may be required). The Village reserves the right to reject any and all bids or
proposals and to waive any informalities, technicalities and irregularities in
bidding.
The successful bidder will be required to furnish a satisfactory performance
bond in the sum of $                
Dated at Midlothian, Illinois, this       day of             , 20     .
   (C)   All bids shall be sealed and addressed to the president and board of
trustees and shall conform to the conditions and restrictions set forth as to
the work or other public improvement by the president and board of trustees.
Bids may be opened and examined by the president and board of trustees in open
meeting at the time and place fixed in the public notice, if so designated, or
may be opened and examined by the public works superintendent or such other
personnel of the village at such time and place as may be designated by the
president and board of trustees and so stated in the public notice. Awarding of
the contract or rejection of said bids may be postponed to a later date. In the
discretion of the president and board of trustees, any and all bids may
thereafter be rejected.
Village officials shall comply with the provisions of section 5/33 e-1 of the
criminal code 1  making it a felony to interfere with public contracting or to
engage in bid rigging. (Ord. 1735, 9-22-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS.
1-21-2: WAGE RATES FOR PUBLIC WORKS PROJECTS:
   (A)   To the extent and as required by "an act regulating wages of laborers,
mechanics and other workmen employed in any public works by the state, county,
city or any public body or any political subdivision or by any one under
contract for public works", approved June 26, 1941, as amended 1 , the general
prevailing rate of wages in this locality for laborers, mechanics and other
workmen engaged in the construction of public works coming under the
jurisdiction of the village is hereby ascertained to be the same as the
prevailing rate of wages for construction work in the Cook County area as
determined by the department of labor of the state of Illinois as revised, a
copy of that determination being incorporated herein by reference. The
definition of any terms appearing in this section which are also used in
aforesaid act shall be the same as in said act.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed to apply said general
prevailing rate of wages as herein ascertained to any work or employment except
public works construction of the village to the extent required by the
aforesaid act.
   (C)   The village clerk shall publicly post or keep available for inspection
by any interested party in the main office of the village this determination of
such prevailing rate of wages, and the clerk shall mail a copy of this
determination to any employer, and to any association of employers and to any
person or association of employees who have filed, or file, their names and
addresses, requesting copies of any determination stating the particular rates
and the particular class of workmen whose wages will be affected by such rates.
The village clerk shall also promptly file a certified copy of this section
with both the secretary of state and the department of labor of the state of
Illinois. (Ord. 1735, 9-22-2010)
 
Notes
1 2. 820 ILCS 130/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 22
VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
1-22-1: Creation Of Office
1-22-2: Appointment Of Village Administrator
1-22-3: Tenure Of Office
1-22-4: Bond And Oath
1-22-5: Compensation
1-22-6: Powers And Duties With Reference To Village Administrator
1-22-7: Conflicts Of Interest Prohibited
1-22-8: Other Ordinances
1-22-1: CREATION OF OFFICE:
There is hereby created the office of village administrator. The village
administrator shall be the aide to the village president in the performance of
the village president's duties. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2011)
1-22-2: APPOINTMENT OF VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
The village administrator shall be appointed by the village president with the
advice and consent of the village board. The village administrator shall be
chosen by the village president and that choice shall be considered by the
board solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications,
with special reference to his actual experience in or his knowledge of accepted
practice in respect to the duties of his office. No trustee or village
president shall receive such appointment during the term for which he or she
shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of his or her
term.
During the absence or disability of the village administrator, the village
president with the advice and the consent of the village board may designate
some properly qualified person to act as village administrator pro tempore to
perform the duties of the office. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2011)
1-22-3: TENURE OF OFFICE:
The village administrator shall be appointed annually. The village
administrator may resign from his office or may be removed therefrom only in
such manner as is provided by the village code and/or the statutes of the state
of Illinois pertaining to the resignation or the removal of appointed officers.
(Ord. 1747, 3-23-2011)
1-22-4: BOND AND OATH:
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village administrator shall
furnish a surety bond to be approved by the village board, said bond to be
conditioned on the faithful performance of his duties. The premium of the bond
shall be paid by the village.
Before entering upon the duties of his office, the village administrator shall
take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the state of Illinois
in such case provided. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2011)
1-22-5: COMPENSATION:
The village administrator shall receive compensation in such amount and manner
as the village board shall fix from time to time. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2011)
1-22-6: POWERS AND DUTIES WITH REFERENCE TO VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
The village administrator shall perform the duties set forth in the job
description for such position and as set forth in this chapter. If there is a
conflict between the job description and the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail over the provisions of the job
description.
The village administrator shall be responsible to the village president for the
management and operation of all of the affairs and the departments of the
village as set forth in the job description or as directed by the village
president. He may, if so provided in his job description or if directed by the
village president, have the management and control of all matters and things
pertaining to the operation and maintenance of the properties of the village
and of all of the departments of the village, including the department of
public works, the fire department, the police department, the health
department, the building department and the general offices of the village,
except as provided otherwise in this code. He may also, if so provided in the
job description or if directed by the village president, have supervision of
such other administrative agencies and departments and officers as may be
hereafter created by the village board unless the management and control of
such departments and officers is expressly delegated elsewhere. He shall
perform his duties in conformity with the ordinances of the village, state and
federal laws, and with the rules of the police and fire commission.
Specifically, but not in limitation of the above, he shall have the following
powers and duties:
   (A)   He shall recommend to the village president and to the board the
appointment of all officers of the village who are required by law to be
appointed by the village president with the advice and consent of the village
board, and he may recommend to the village president the appointment of
employees and officers who are required to be appointed by the village
president. He shall further recommend the removal or suspension of any such
officer or employee when such removal or suspension shall be consistent with
the best interests of the village. All such recommendations for appointment or
removal shall be based on merit and on the qualifications or disqualifications
of such officer or employee without regard to political belief or affiliation.
   (B)   He shall attend all committee of the whole meetings and board meetings
of the village board unless excused therefrom by the village president, except
when his removal is under consideration by the board. He shall have the
privilege of taking part in the discussion of all matters coming before the
board and shall be entitled to notice of all meetings, regular and special, of
the board. He shall also attend all other committee or commission meetings as
directed by the village president.
   (C)   Meet the public on behalf of the village president and village board,
receive suggestions, hear and investigate complaints in relation to all matters
concerning the affairs of the village or any department or division thereof and
shall investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning village
services and village administration.
   (D)   He shall obtain information on federal, state, county and other
grants, determine if the village qualifies for such grants and prepare and
submit such grant applications, as well as prepare all schedules, papers, and
other documents required to be provided with such grant applications.
   (E)   He shall provide advice regarding economic development initiatives
within the village, including, but not limited to, negotiating with businesses,
developers and other agencies.
   (F)   He shall consult with the village engineer, corporation counsel and
department heads as necessary to carry out his duties.
   (G)   The village administrator, as a full time employee, shall work such
hours as shall be necessary to perform the duties required and to the discharge
of his official duties.
   (H)   He shall coordinate and supervise administrative work including:
coordinate the payment of approved salaries, wages, and bills; preparation and
use of authorized forms; review fidelity bonds and insurance; preparation and
release of articles and information to keep the public informed of its village
government; and informing the village president and village board of current
federal and state legislation affecting the village.
   (I)   Assist the village president, the corporation counsel and other
elected officials in the enforcement of the laws of the state and the
ordinances of the village.
   (J)   Take charge of and manage the village hall and all other village
buildings and properties not specifically assigned to other officers or
agencies of the village for management as directed by the village president.
   (K)   Administer the employment and personnel policies of the village as
approved by the village president and the village board. Recruit, interview,
and employ necessary personnel for the several village departments and offices
as required.
   (L)   Recommend amount of all salaries or wages of village employees not
fixed by the village board or not required to be fixed by the village board
pursuant to ordinance.
   (M)   Coordinate operations affecting more than one department, office, and
officers of the village as directed by the village president.
   (N)   Make, or cause to be made, monthly and annual reports to the village
president and village board of the activities of all departments under his
jurisdiction.
   (O)   Supply such information and recommend such measures to the village
president and village board as may be deemed advantageous to the village.
   (P)   Inform succeeding village presidents and village boards of the general
principles of administrative programs and policies of previous administrations
so that a continuity of programs and policies may be possible.
   (Q)   He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by the
village president from time to time or by his job description consistent with
this code and/or the statutes of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 1759, 8-24-2011)
1-22-7: CONFLICTS OF INTEREST PROHIBITED:
The village administrator shall not be interested directly or indirectly in any
contract, work, or business of the village, or in the sale of any article to
the village, or in the purchase of any property belonging to the village, or
sold for taxes or assessments, or sold by virtue of legal process at the suit
of the village. (Ord. 1747, 3-23-2011)
1-22-8: OTHER ORDINANCES:
All ordinances of the village prescribing the duties of heads of departments
shall remain in full force and effect. If there is any conflict between this
chapter and ordinances prescribing the duties of heads of departments, the
provisions of this chapter shall prevail over the ordinances prescribing the
duties of heads of departments. (Ord. 1759, 8-24-2011)
CHAPTER 23
INSPECTOR GENERAL
SECTION:
1-23-1: Office Of The Independent Inspector General Created
1-23-2: Designation Of The Cook County Sheriff
1-23-3: Purpose Of Office
1-23-4: Powers And Duties Of The OIG
1-23-5: Duty To Cooperate
1-23-6: Acknowledgment Of Duty To Cooperate
1-23-1: OFFICE OF THE INDEPENDENT INSPECTOR GENERAL CREATED:
There is hereby created the office of the "independent inspector general"
("OIG") for the village of Midlothian. (Ord. 1935, 7-6-2016)
1-23-2: DESIGNATION OF THE COOK COUNTY SHERIFF:
The office of the Cook County sheriff is hereby designated as the OIG. The OIG
shall serve for an initial term of one year, which shall commence on the
adoption of this chapter and expire on July 6, 2017. This office may be
reappointed thereafter for additional one year terms by a majority vote of the
corporate authorities of the village. The OIG shall serve without compensation
from the village. (Ord. 1935, 7-6-2016)
1-23-3: PURPOSE OF OFFICE:
The purpose of the OIG is to detect, deter and prevent corruption, fraud,
waste, mismanagement, misappropriation, unlawful political discrimination,
unlawful activity and/or misconduct in the operation of the village government
(collectively referred to elsewhere in this chapter as "misconduct"). "Unlawful
political discrimination" shall include, but not be limited to, basing the
terms and conditions of a nonexempt employee's employment such as hiring,
firing, promotion, transfer, discipline or termination on political reasons and
factors. (Ord. 1935, 7-6-2016)
1-23-4: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE OIG:
The OIG shall have the following powers and authorities:
   (A)   To receive and register complaints concerning misconduct in the
operation of village government, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Misconduct in connection with the village's award of any contract,
license or benefit;
      2.   Misconduct of any village employee for acts in the performance of
his or her employment with the village;
      3.   Misconduct of any elected or appointed official of the village in
the performance of his or her official duties;
      4.   Misconduct of contractors, vendors and professional service
providers who furnish goods and services to the village;
      5.   Misconduct of persons and businesses seeking to do business with the
village; and
      6.   Retaliation against any village employee or elected or appointed
officials of the village based upon their cooperation with the OIG.
   (B)   To investigate misconduct in the operation of village government,
either in response to such complaints or on the OIG's own initiative. The OIG
acknowledges that it has read and understands the applicable provisions in
state law (e.g., the uniform peace officers' disciplinary act 1 , and the
fireman's disciplinary act 2 ), the village's police and fire department
general orders and procedures and any collective bargaining agreements that
govern conducting internal investigations of village police and fire personnel,
and that failure to comply with the time periods and notice provisions
regarding these internal investigations can result in the village being barred
from prosecuting or taking employment related action against an employee for
misconduct. It is agreed by the OIG and the village that investigations of the
police or fire department employees by the OIG are subject to the applicable
internal investigation provisions of state law, the village's police and fire
department general orders and procedures and the applicable collective
bargaining agreements. In conducting its investigations of alleged misconduct,
the OIG agrees to cooperate with and assist the village attorney and/or the
police or fire chief, as warranted and appropriate, including providing
information, witness statements and other evidence, to allow the village to
pursue disciplinary action against village employees under applicable state
law, the village's personnel policies, the police and fire department general
orders and procedures and applicable collective bargaining agreements. The same
provisions above will govern any OIG investigations of alleged misconduct
within other village departments, subject to the applicable state laws, policy
manuals, departmental general orders and procedures and applicable collective
bargaining agreements.
   (C)   To refer complaints and information regarding possible misconduct to
the president and board of trustees, the village attorney and other outside law
enforcement agencies, including, but not limited to, the United States'
attorney's office, as warranted and as appropriate. The OIG's referral of
complaints and information regarding possible misconduct to the president and
board of trustees and the village attorney, as warranted and appropriate, shall
be done in order to ensure that appropriate discipline may be imposed in
accordance with applicable state laws, general policies, departmental orders
and procedures and applicable collective bargaining agreements.
   (D)   To obtain information from, and conduct interviews under oath with
village employees, agents, contractors and persons doing or seeking to do
business with the village for the purpose of investigating potential
misconduct.
   (E)   To make recommendations for corrective action to the president and
board of trustees and the village attorney with respect to combating
misconduct.
   (F)   To provide periodic reports to the president and the board of trustees
and the village attorney as to the status of matters within the scope of OIG's
authority, to the extent such reporting would not impair the integrity of
ongoing investigations.
   (G)   To maintain an OIG hotline number and e-mail address in order to
facilitate citizen and employee reports of misconduct.
   (H)   In the event of any grievance arbitration or hearing before the
village board of fire and police commissioners arising from disciplinary
charges or actions taken by the village against a village employee based upon
the results of an OIG investigation, the OIG will fully cooperate with the
village in the prosecution of the disciplinary action or defense of the
grievance arbitration. (Ord. 1935, 7-6-2016)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 725/1 et seq.
2 2. 50 ILCS 745/1 et seq.
1-23-5: DUTY TO COOPERATE:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of all village employees, elected and appointed
officials, agents, independent contractors to the village, licensees and those
doing or seeking to do business with the village to cooperate with the OIG in
the conduct of any investigation undertaken pursuant to the OIG's authority.
   (B)   Subject to federal and state constitutional protections, state law
employment rights, the village's policies and any applicable collective
bargaining agreements, failure of any village employee or appointed official to
cooperate with the OIG in regard to matters covered by this chapter shall be
considered cause for disciplinary action, up to and including termination of
employment or removal from office.
   (C)   It shall be the duty of any party doing business with the village to
likewise cooperate with the OIG in regard to matters covered by this chapter.
Refusal to so cooperate shall be considered cause for termination of a
contract, license or similar benefit, or as grounds for the village refusing to
enter into a future contract, license or other benefit. (Ord. 1935, 7-6-2016)
1-23-6: ACKNOWLEDGMENT OF DUTY TO COOPERATE:
All contracts for goods and services, and all future licenses or other benefits
issued by the village after the effective date hereof, shall be subject to the
requirement that the individual or entity receiving the contract, license or
benefit agree to fully comply with the requirements of this chapter relating to
cooperation with the inspector general's office. (Ord. 1935, 7-6-2016)
CHAPTER 24
COOK COUNTY ORDINANCES
SECTION:
1-24-1: Cook County Minimum Wage Ordinance
1-24-2: Cook County Earned Sick Leave Ordinance
1-24-3: Cook County Reporting Requirements
1-24-1: COOK COUNTY MINIMUM WAGE ORDINANCE:
The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Midlothian hereby opt out of
the Cook County ordinance creating a minimum wage and affirmatively state that
such Cook County ordinance shall not apply to the Village of Midlothian. (Ord.
1957, 6-14-2017)
1-24-2: COOK COUNTY EARNED SICK LEAVE ORDINANCE:
The Mayor and Board of Trustees of the Village of Midlothian hereby opt out of
the Cook County ordinance establishing earned sick leave for employees and
affirmatively state that such Cook County ordinance shall not apply to the
Village of Midlothian. (Ord. 1958, 6-14-2017)
1-24-3: COOK COUNTY REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
As mandated by the Illinois Tax Increment Allocation Redevelopment Act (65 ILCS
5/11-74.4-1 et seq.), (the "TIF Act") the Village shall comply solely with all
reporting requirements to the State Comptroller or as otherwise may be required
by the State from time to time. Any reporting requirements imposed by the
County of Cook as set forth in Section 2-243(c) of the Cook County Municipal
Code regarding the disclosure of any undertaking of the Village's designation
of a "redevelopment project area"; or, the administration and implementation of
the Village's redevelopment plan pursuant to the TIF Act are deemed in conflict
herewith. (Ord. 2164, 2-26-2025)
TITLE 2
COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Plan Commission   1
Zoning Commission   2
Community Involvement Liaison Committees   3
Civil Defense Organization 1  (Rep. by
Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)   4
Park Commission (Rep. by Ord. 739, 4-26-1972)   5
Zoning Board Of Appeals   6
Fire And Police Commission   7
Flood Control Commission   8
Midlothian Lodge Board   9
Emergency Management Agency   10
Reserved   11
Economic Development Committee   12
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10 of this title.
CHAPTER 1
PLAN COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1: Commission Created
2-1-2: Members Of Commission
2-1-3: Term Of Members
2-1-4: Officers Of Commission; Compensation
2-1-5: Powers Of Commission
2-1-6: Records To Be Kept
2-1-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A plan commission for the village is hereby created under the authority of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12. (Ord. 413, 4-10-1957)
2-1-2: MEMBERS OF COMMISSION:
The plan commission shall consist of a chairman and eight (8) members, one of
whom shall be a member of the zoning board of appeals, to be appointed by the
president with the approval of the board of trustees and in addition thereto
the village president and the president of the board of local improvements
shall be members ex officio of the commission. (Ord. 413, 4-10-1957)
2-1-3: TERM OF MEMBERS:
The chairman and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term of one year;
three (3) members shall be appointed for a term of two (2) years and three (3)
members for a term of three (3) years. Terms of all members of the commission
thereafter appointed shall be three (3) years. All vacancies occurring in the
plan commission shall be filled by appointment for the remainder of the
unexpired term in the same manner as original appointments. (Ord. 413, 4-10-
1957)
2-1-4: OFFICERS OF COMMISSION; COMPENSATION:
The plan commission shall complete its organization by the election of a vice
chairman, secretary and such other officers as in their judgment may be
necessary. All members and officers of the plan commission shall serve without
compensation. If the plan commission shall deem it advisable to secure
technical advice or service, it may do so upon authority from the board of
trustees and appropriation therefor by the board of trustees. (Ord. 413, 4-10-
1957)
2-1-5: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
The plan commission shall have power:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the president and board of trustees a plan
for the development and redevelopment of the village and contiguous
unincorporated territory not more than one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the
corporate limits of the village and not included in any other municipality. The
plan when adopted by the president and board of trustees shall be designated as
the official plan, or part thereof, of the village. The plan may be adopted in
whole or in separate geographical or functional parts, each of which, when
adopted shall be the official plan, or part thereof, of the village. Thereafter
from time to time, the plan commission may recommend changes in the official
plan or in any part thereof. To provide for the health, safety, comfort and
convenience of the inhabitants of the village and contiguous territory, the
plan may establish reasonable standards of design for subdivisions and for
resubdivisions of unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment,
including reasonable requirements for public streets, alleys, ways for public
service facilities, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, and other public
grounds.
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the president and board of trustees, from
time to time, plans for specific improvements in pursuance of the official
plan.
   (C)   To give aid to the village officials charged with the direction of
projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of these projects, and generally to promote the realization of the
official plan.
   (D)   To exercise such other powers, germane to the powers granted herein,
as may be conferred by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 413, 4-10-
1957)
2-1-6: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
The plan commission shall keep written records of its proceedings and they
shall be open to inspection by the president and board of trustees at all times
1 . (Ord. 413, 4-10-1957)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-12-4.
CHAPTER 2
ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-2-1: Commission Created
2-2-2: Members
2-2-3: Powers Of Commission
2-2-4: Records To Be Kept
2-2-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A zoning commission for the village is hereby created under the authority of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13. (Ord. 233, 8-29-1945)
2-2-2: MEMBERS:
The zoning commission shall consist of seven (7) members appointed by the
president and confirmed by the board of trustees. (Ord. 233, 8-29-1945)
2-2-3: POWERS OF COMMISSION:
The zoning commission shall:
   (A)   Recommend the boundaries of the zoning districts and appropriate
regulations to be enforced therein.
   (B)   Prepare a tentative report and proposed zoning ordinance for the
entire village.
   (C)   Hold a hearing thereon and shall afford persons interested an
opportunity to be heard, by publishing notices of such hearing at least fifteen
(15) days in advance thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village, which notice shall state the time and place of hearing and the place
where copies of the proposed ordinance shall be accessible for examination by
interested parties. The hearing may be adjourned from time to time.
   (D)   Make a final report within thirty (30) days after the final
adjournment of such hearing, and submit the proposed ordinance for the entire
village to the board of trustees, to be enacted with or without change, or to
be referred back to the commission for further consideration. (Ord. 233, 8-29-
1945)
2-2-4: RECORDS TO BE KEPT:
The zoning commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which shall
be open to inspection by the board of trustees at all times 1 . (Ord. 233, 8-
29-1945)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-2.
CHAPTER 3
COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT LIAISON COMMITTEES
SECTION:
2-3-1: Community Involvement Liaison Committee Established
2-3-2: Appointment
2-3-3: Terms Of Office
2-3-4: Meetings
2-3-5: Compensation
2-3-6: Duties
2-3-7: Ethics And Conflict Of Interest
2-3-8: Penalties
2-3-1: COMMUNITY INVOLVEMENT LIAISON COMMITTEES ESTABLISHED:
The Village of Midlothian hereby establishes Community Involvement Liaison
Committees for the purpose of providing increased participation of residents
and the community in enhancing the quality of life in the Village of
Midlothian. The committees shall provide input regarding community enhancing
activities and the manner and extent that services of the Village Departments
are provided. The committees in this Chapter shall be advisory in nature.
The committees shall consist of the Community Policing and Safety Committee,
Veterans Committee, the Beautification Committee, Keep Midlothian Beautiful
Committee, Community Service Committee, Historical Society, and Events
Committee. (Ord. 2087, 12-8-2021)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENT:
Membership of the committees designated in
2-3-1 of this chapter shall be composed of seven (7) members. The committees
shall consist of the trustee designated to oversee the subject and a Village
employee designated to facilitate the activities of the committees as ex
official members and up to five (5) residents of the village. The chairperson
and the resident members of the committees shall be appointed by the president
of the village with the advice and consent of the board of trustees. (Ord.
2087, 12-8-2021)
2-3-3: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All members of the committees shall serve for a term of one year commencing on
the second regular board meeting of May and serve until a successor has been
duly appointed and qualified, and any vacancies which shall occur shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment. (Ord. 2087, 12-8-2021)
2-3-4: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the committees shall be every other month or as necessary to
complete the business of the committees and shall be noticed in compliance with
the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings Act, (5 ILCS 120/). (Ord. 2087,
12-8-2021)
2-3-5: COMPENSATION:
Upon application to and approval of the Village Clerk, qualified resident
members of the Community Involvement Liaison Committees that serve for the
entire one-year term shall be eligible to receive one complimentary Village of
Midlothian Vehicle License for each year of service as compensation. (Ord.
2087, 12-8-2021)
2-3-6: DUTIES:
The duties of the committees shall be as follows:
   (A)   To submit an initial mission statement, revise the mission statement
from time to time and establish yearly goals of the Committee to the Village
Board for review and approval by July 1, of each year.
   (B)   Provide input and recommendation to the Village Board on matters that
are relevant to the Committee. (Ord. 2087, 12-8-2021)
2-3-7: ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
All members of any Community Involvement Liaison Committee, whether voting
members or nonvoting members, shall be governed by the following rules or
ordinances:
   (A)   Ethics: The ethics ordinance contained in title 1, chapter 19 of this
code shall apply to all members of any Community Involvement Liaison Committee,
whether the member is a voting or nonvoting member. The penalties for the
violation of the village ethics ordinance shall be those set forth in the
ethics ordinance in section
1-19-8 of this code.
   (B)   Conflict of Interest: No member of any Community Involvement Liaison
Committee shall engage in a conflict of interest with regard to his or her
duties as a member of the Community Involvement Liaison Committee. Matters that
will be considered to be a conflict of interest include, but are not limited
to, the following:
      1.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for a member's personal advantage, benefit or use.
      2.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for a member's relative's personal advantage,
benefit or use.
      3.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for the benefit of any third party, even if the
member does not benefit from such use of documents, data or other information
that has not been communicated to the public.
      4.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for the benefit of any third party's relative, even
if the member does not benefit from such use of documents, data or any other
information that has not been communicated to the public.
      5.   The representation of, acting as agent of, or in any other manner
assisting a client, customer or other individual with whom a member has a
business relationship and which is adverse to the interests of the village or
which utilizes documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public.
      6.   The representation of, acting as agent of, or in any other manner
assisting a business in which a member has any type of an ownership or
financial interest and which is adverse to the interests of the village or
which utilizes documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public.
      7.   A member shall not enter into a business transaction utilizing data
or information which has not been made available to the general public by
acquiring an ownership, possessory, security or other pecuniary interest in a
business entity, parcel of real estate, or otherwise.
      8.   A member shall not provide financial assistance with regard to any
matter that has come before any Community Involvement Liaison Committee and
which would benefit the member, a member's relative, a business entity in which
the member has an interest, or any other third party, including one whom the
member may represent or act as an agent.
      9.   Any act or omission in which the member behaves or acts
inconsistently with his or her duties as a member of the economic development
committee or in which the member could be said to be acting in a dual capacity.
(Ord. 2087, 12-8-2021)
2-3-8: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violation of section
2-3-7 of this chapter shall be one or more of the following:
   (A)   The member shall be removed by the president from the committee; and/
or
   (B)   The penalties provided under section
1-19-8 of this code. (Ord. 2087, 12-8-2021)
CHAPTER 4
CIVIL DEFENSE ORGANIZATION 1
(Rep. by Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
 
Notes
1 1. See chapter 10 of this title.
CHAPTER 5
PARK COMMISSION
(Rep. by Ord. 739, 4-26-1972)
CHAPTER 6
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS
SECTION:
2-6-1: Board Established; Members
2-6-2: Powers And Duties
2-6-3: Vote By Board
2-6-4: Appeal; Cash Deposit Required
2-6-5: Fair Housing Duties
2-6-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS:
A zoning board of appeals is hereby established. The members of the board of
appeals shall be appointed by the president and the board of trustees. The
board of appeals shall consist of seven (7) members, to serve respectively for
the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3)
years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for six (6) years
and one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so appointed to serve
for a term of five (5) years. The board of appeals shall adopt from time to
time such rules and regulations as it may deem necessary to interpret and to
carry into effect the provisions of the zoning title of this code. (Ord. 474,
3-10-1960)
2-6-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of appeals may hold hearings on zoning changes after giving proper
public notice and send their recommendations to the village board per
subsection 11-2-3(B)1 of this code.
The board of appeals may hold hearings on zoning variation requests which vary
the application of any of the provisions or regulations of the zoning title
relating to the use, construction or alteration of buildings or structures, or
the use of land whenever it is alleged that strict enforcement would cause
practical difficulties or particular hardship not intended or not common to
other property in the vicinity or in the same districts; provided, the board:
   (A)   Holds a public hearing of which there shall be an advance notice of
fifteen (15) days published in a newspaper of general circulation in the
village, stating the time and place of such hearing and the nature of the
variation requested.
   (B)   Finds at such hearing that the variation will not:
      1.   Impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property.
      2.   Increase materially the hazard from fire and other dangers.
      3.   Diminish the taxable value of land and buildings throughout the
village.
      4.   Increase congestion in the public streets.
      5.   Otherwise impair the public health, safety, comfort, morals or
general welfare.
   (C)   Shall not reduce the required dimensions of open space by more than
twenty percent (20%), nor reduce the required total area of open spaces or the
required total lot area by more than ten percent (10%), whether such
requirements are applicable to new buildings, or to additions to or
alterations, or extensions of existing buildings.
   (D)   Shall not permit an increase in the height of structures more than ten
percent (10%) above the maximum height permitted by the zoning title of this
code.
   (E)   Shall not permit any extensions of a nonconforming use throughout a
building or lot contrary to the limitations imposed in subsections (C) and (D)
of this section.
   (F)   Shall make and record findings of fact specifying the reasons for
recommending a variation.
   (G)   Must submit the recommendation to the village board and must attach
copies of exhibits, plans and specifications for the proposed use or variation.
   (H)   The power to determine and authorize variation is reserved to the
village board and can be made only by passing an appropriate ordinance. Where a
variation is to be made by ordinance, upon the report of the board of appeals,
the corporate authorities, by ordinance, without further public hearing, may
adopt any proposed variation or may refer it back to the zoning board for
further consideration, and any proposed variation which fails to receive the
approval of the zoning board of appeals shall not be passed except by the
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees of the village. (Ord.
945, 12-13-1978)
2-6-3: VOTE BY BOARD:
When a quorum is present a majority of the votes cast is sufficient to adopt
any motion. (Ord. 946, 12-13-1978)
2-6-4: APPEAL; CASH DEPOSIT REQUIRED:
An appeal to the board of appeals for a variation as permitted in this chapter
shall be accompanied by cash or certified check in the amount determined by the
village board, which shall be delivered to the treasurer to the credit of the
general fund of the village to cover the approximate cost of the procedure in
this chapter, and under no circumstances shall the sum of money or any part
thereof be refunded for failure of the proposal or request to be enacted or if
the appeal is not granted. The village board shall set the amount of the fee by
resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained by the village clerk
and which shall be made available to the public upon request. (Ord. 1651, 10-
10-2007)
2-6-5: FAIR HOUSING DUTIES:
The zoning board of appeals is hereby authorized to hold appropriate hearings
and to take any action required to implement their duties as set out in the
village fair housing ordinance, title 5, chapter 18 of this code. (Ord. 1696,
7-8-2009)
CHAPTER 7
FIRE AND POLICE COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-7-1: Appointment; Terms Of Office
2-7-2: First Appointments
2-7-3: Qualifications; Oath; Bond; Removal
2-7-4: Fire And Police Departments; Appointment Of Members; Certificates Of
Appointments
2-7-5: Rules; Publications
2-7-6: Examination Of Applicants; Disqualifications
2-7-7: Fingerprints To Be Furnished
2-7-8: Veterans And Educational Preference
2-7-9: Original Appointments; Preferences; Limitation
2-7-10: Preference; Time For Allowance
2-7-11: Notice Of Examination
2-7-12: Register Of Eligibles
2-7-13: Promotions; Merit; Seniority
2-7-14: Temporary Appointments
2-7-15: Removal Or Discharge; Investigation Of Charges; Retirement
2-7-16: Fire Or Police Departments; Reduction Of Force; Reinstatement
2-7-17: Annual Report; Budget Request
2-7-18: Secretary Of Board; Duties; Seal Of Board
2-7-19: Rooms And Funds For Operation Of Boards
2-7-20: Compensation Of Secretary And Members Of Board
2-7-21: Attorney For Board
2-7-22: Application Of This Chapter
2-7-1: APPOINTMENT; TERMS OF OFFICE:
The village president shall appoint a board of fire and police commissioners.
This board shall consist of three (3) members, whose terms of office shall be
three (3) years and until their respective successors are appointed and have
qualified, except as provided in section 2-7-2 of this chapter. No such
appointment, however, shall be made by the village president within thirty (30)
days before the expiration of his term of office. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-2: FIRST APPOINTMENTS:
   (A)   Within thirty (30) days after this chapter becomes effective, the
village president, shall appoint the members of the board. One of the members
shall be appointed to serve until the end of the then current fiscal year,
another to serve until the end of the fiscal year next ensuing, and the third
to serve until the end of the fiscal year second next ensuing. But every member
shall serve until his successor is appointed and has qualified.
   (B)   Vacancies on the board of fire and police commissioners shall be
filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
   (C)   The village president shall appoint a chairman to serve during each
fiscal year.
   (D)   A majority of the board constitutes a quorum for the conduct of all
business. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-3: QUALIFICATIONS; OATH; BOND; REMOVAL:
   (A)   No person holding an office under a village, shall be a member of the
board of fire and police commissioners or the secretary thereof. The acceptance
of any such office by a member of the board shall be treated as a resignation
of his office as a member of the board or the secretary thereof.
   (B)   No person shall be appointed a member of the board of fire and police
commissioners who has been convicted of a felony under the laws of this state
or comparable laws of any other state or the United States.
   (C)   Members shall not be subject to removal, except for cause, upon
written charges, and after an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days
in his or their own defense, before a regular meeting of the village board. A
majority vote by a quorum of the village board shall be required to remove any
such member from office. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-4: FIRE AND POLICE DEPARTMENTS; APPOINTMENT OF MEMBERS; CERTIFICATES OF
APPOINTMENTS:
   (A)   The board of fire and police commissioners shall appoint all officers
and members of the fire and police departments of the village after
authorization from the village president and board of trustees, except the
chief of police, deputy chief of police and the chief of the fire department.
   (B)   The chief of the fire department shall be appointed in accordance with
subsection 3-2-1(A) of this code.
   (C)   The chief of the police department shall be appointed in accordance
with subsection 3-1-3(A) of this code. A deputy chief of police may, but is not
required to, be appointed. If a deputy police chief is appointed, he shall be
appointed in accordance with subsection 3-1-3(B) of this code.
   (D)   The chief of the fire department, chief of the police department and
deputy chief of police may be removed or discharged by the village president,
with the advice and consent of the board of trustees.
   (E)   If a member of the department is appointed chief of police or chief of
the fire department prior to being eligible to retire on pension, he shall be
considered as on furlough from the rank he held immediately prior to his
appointment as chief. If he resigns as chief or is discharged as chief prior to
attaining eligibility to retire on pension, he shall revert to and be
established in whatever rank he currently holds, except for previously
appointed positions, and thereafter be entitled to all the benefits and
emoluments of that rank, without regard as to whether a vacancy then exists in
that rank.
   (F)   All appointments to each department other than that of the lowest rank
shall be from the rank next below that to which the appointment is made except
as otherwise provided in this section, and except that the chief of police and
the chief of the fire department may be appointed from among members of the
police and fire departments, respectively, regardless of rank. A chief of
police or the chief of the fire department, having been appointed from among
members of the police or fire department, respectively, shall be permitted,
regardless of rank, to take promotional exams and be promoted to a higher
classified rank than he currently holds, without having to resign as chief of
police or chief of the fire department.
   (G)   The sole authority to issue certificates of appointment shall be
vested in the board of fire and police commissioners and all certificates of
appointments issued to any officer or member of the fire or police department
shall be signed by the chairman and secretary of the board of fire and police
commissioners. The village of Midlothian and the board of fire and police
commissioners shall comply with section 10-2.1-4 of the Illinois municipal code
1  regarding the hiring of temporary or substitute members of the fire
department.
   (H)   The term policemen or police officer as used in this chapter does not
include auxiliary police officers except as provided for in section 2-7-6 of
this chapter.
   (I)   Pursuant to section 10-2.1-4 of the Illinois municipal code, no
firefighter appointed to the lowest rank shall serve a probationary employment
period of longer than one year. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in
this section, the probationary employment period limitation may be extended for
a firefighter who is required, as a condition of employment, to be a certified
paramedic, during which time the sole reason that a firefighter may be
discharged without a hearing is for failing to meet the requirements for
paramedic certification. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/10-2.1-4.
2-7-5: RULES; PUBLICATIONS:
   (A)   The board of fire and police commissioners shall make rules to carry
out the purpose of this chapter, and for appointments and removals in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Illinois law. The board,
from time to time, may make changes in these rules.
   (B)   All rules and changes thereto shall be printed immediately for
distribution. The board shall give notice of the places where the printed rules
may be obtained, and of the date, not less than five (5) days subsequent to the
time of publication, when the rules or changes thereto shall go into effect.
This notice shall be published in one or more newspapers published in the
village, or in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the
village.
   (C)   These rules of the board shall apply only to the conduct of
examinations for original appointments, for promotions, and to the conduct of
hearings on charges brought against a member of the police or fire department.
No such rule shall be made by the board to govern the operation of the police
or fire department or the conduct of its members unless the village board
specifically authorizes the board of fire and police commissioners to make such
rules; however, the village board may also rescind such authorization. (Ord.
1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-6: EXAMINATION OF APPLICANTS; DISQUALIFICATIONS:
   (A)   Age Limitation: All applicants for a position in either the fire or
police department of the village shall be under thirty five (35) years of age,
shall be subject to an examination that shall be public, competitive, and open
to all applicants and shall be subject to reasonable limitations as to
residence, health, habits, and moral character. The village may not charge or
collect any fee from an applicant who has met all prequalification standards
established by the village for any such position. With respect to a police
department, a veteran shall be allowed to exceed the maximum age provision of
this section by the number of years served on active military duty, but by no
more than ten (10) years of active military duty.
   (B)   Age Limitation Exceptions: The age limitation in subsection (A) of
this section does not apply:
      1.   To any person previously employed as a policeman or fireman in a
regularly constituted police or fire department of:
         (a)   Any village, regardless of whether the village is located in
Illinois or in another state, or
         (b)   A fire protection district whose obligations were assumed by a
village under section 21 of the fire protection district act,
      2.   To any person who has served a village as a regularly enrolled
volunteer fireman for five (5) years immediately preceding the time that
village begins to use full time firemen to provide all or part of its fire
protection service, or
      3.   To any person who has served as an auxiliary police officer under
section 3.1-30-20 of the Illinois municipal code for at least five (5) years
and is under forty (40) years of age,
      4.   To any person who has served as a deputy under section 3-6008 of the
counties code and otherwise meets necessary training requirements, or
      5.   To any person who has served as a sworn officer as a member of the
Illinois department of state police.
   (C)   Applicants Under Twenty One Years Of Age: Applicants who are twenty
(20) years of age and who have successfully completed two (2) years of law
enforcement studies at an accredited college or university may be considered
for appointment to active duty with the police department. An applicant
described in this subsection who is appointed to active duty shall not have
power of arrest, nor shall the applicant be permitted to carry firearms, until
he or she reaches twenty one (21) years of age.
   (D)   Examinations:
      1.   The examinations shall be practical in character and relate to those
matters that will fairly test the capacity of the persons examined to discharge
the duties of the positions to which they seek appointment. No person shall be
appointed to the police or fire department if he or she does not possess a high
school diploma or an equivalent high school education. The board of fire and
police commissioners may, by its rules, require police applicants to have
obtained an associate's degree or a bachelor's degree as a prerequisite for
employment.
      2.   The examinations shall include tests of physical qualifications and
health.
      3.   The board of fire and police commissioners may, by its rules, waive
portions of the required examination for police applicants who have previously
been full time sworn officers of a regular police department in any municipal,
county, university, or state law enforcement agency, provided they are
certified by the Illinois law enforcement training standards board and have
been with their respective law enforcement agency within the state for at least
two (2) years.
      4.   No applicant shall be examined concerning his or her political or
religious opinions or affiliations.
   (E)   Conscientious Objector: No person who is classified by his local
selective service draft board as a conscientious objector, or who has ever been
so classified, may be appointed to the police department.
   (F)   Character: No person shall be appointed to the police or fire
department unless he or she is a person of good character and not a habitual
drunkard, gambler, or a person who has been convicted of a felony or a crime
involving moral turpitude. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-7: FINGERPRINTS TO BE FURNISHED:
A classifiable set of the fingerprints of every person who is now employed, or
who hereafter becomes employed, as a full time member of the fire or police
department of the village, whether with or without compensation, shall be
furnished to the Illinois department of state police and to the federal bureau
of investigation by the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. 1723, 5-
12-2010)
2-7-8: VETERANS AND EDUCATIONAL PREFERENCE:
   (A)   Persons who have successfully obtained an associate's degree in the
field of law enforcement, criminal justice, fire service, or emergency medical
services, or a bachelor's degree from an accredited college or university;
persons who have been awarded a certificate attesting to the successful
completion of the minimum standards basic law enforcement training course as
provided in the Illinois police training act and are currently serving as a law
enforcement officer on a part time or full time basis within the state of
Illinois; and persons who were engaged in the active military or naval service
of the United States for a period of at least one year and who were honorably
discharged therefrom, or who are now or may hereafter be on inactive or reserve
duty in such military or naval service (not including, however, in the case of
offices, positions and places of employment in the police department, persons
who were convicted by court martial of disobedience of orders, where such
disobedience consisted in the refusal to perform military service on the ground
of religious or conscientious objections against war) shall be preferred for
appointments to offices, positions, and places of employment in the fire and
police departments of the village.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, if a person has been deployed, then
active duty military or naval service of the United States includes training
and service school attendance, as defined in 10 USC 101(d), which is ordered
pursuant to 10 USC 12301(d). The preference points awarded under this section
shall not be cumulative. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-9: ORIGINAL APPOINTMENTS; PREFERENCES; LIMITATION:
   (A)   The board of fire and police commissioners shall give preference for
original appointment to persons designated in section 2-7-8 of this chapter
whose names appear on any register of eligibles resulting from an examination
for original entrance in the classified service of the fire and police
departments of the village by adding to the final grade average which they
receive or will receive as the result of any examination held for original
entrance, five (5) points. The numerical result thus attained shall be applied
by the board of fire and police commissioners in determining the position of
such persons on any eligibility list which has been created as the result of
any examination for original entrance for purposes of preference in
certification and appointment from such eligibility list.
   (B)   The board shall strike off the names of candidates for original
appointment after such names have been on the list for more than two (2) years.
(Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-10: PREFERENCE; TIME FOR ALLOWANCE:
A person entitled to preference or credit for military or naval service shall
be required to claim military credit for service in the armed forces before any
examination is held under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-
2010)
2-7-11: NOTICE OF EXAMINATION:
Notice of the time and place of every examination shall be given by the board
by a publication at least two (2) weeks preceding the examination, in one or
more newspapers published in the village, or, if no newspaper is published
therein, then in one or more newspapers with a general circulation within the
village, except on promotional examinations, notice may be waived in writing by
all members of the fire or police department, for which the promotional
examination is to be given. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-12: REGISTER OF ELIGIBLES:
   (A)   Register:
      1.   The board of fire and police commissioners shall prepare and keep a
register of persons whose general average standing, upon examination, is not
less than the minimum fixed by the rules of the board, and who are otherwise
eligible. These persons shall take rank upon the register as candidates in the
order of their relative excellence as determined by examination, without
reference to priority of time of examination.
      2.   The board of fire and police commissioners may prepare and keep a
second register of persons who have previously been full time sworn officers of
a regular police department in any municipal, county, university, or state law
enforcement agency, provided they are certified by the Illinois law enforcement
training standards board and have been with their respective law enforcement
agency within the state for at least two (2) years.
      3.   The persons on the list referenced in subsection (A)2 of this
section shall take rank upon the register as candidates in the order of their
relative excellence as determined by members of the board of fire and police
commissioners. Applicants who have been awarded a certificate attesting to
their successful completion of the minimum standards basic law enforcement
training course, as provided in the Illinois police training act, may be given
preference in appointment over noncertified applicants.
      4.   Applicants for appointment to fire departments who are licensed as
an EMT-B, EMT-I, or EMT-P under the emergency medical services (EMS) systems
act, may be given preference in appointment over nonlicensed applicants.
   (B)   Eligibility List: Within sixty (60) days after each examination, an
eligibility list shall be posted by the board, which shall show the final
grades of the candidates without reference to priority of time of examination.
Appointment shall be subject to a final physical examination.
   (C)   Age Requirements: If a person is placed on an eligibility list and
becomes over age before he or she is appointed to a police or fire department,
the person remains eligible for appointment until the list is abolished
pursuant to authorized procedures. Otherwise no person who has attained the age
of thirty six (36) years shall be inducted as a member of a police department
and no person who has attained the age of thirty five (35) years shall be
inducted as a member of a fire department, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter. With respect to a police department, a veteran shall be allowed to
exceed the maximum age provision of this section by the number of years served
on active military duty, but by no more than ten (10) years of active military
duty. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-13: PROMOTIONS; MERIT; SENIORITY:
   (A)   The board of fire and police commissioners, by its rules, shall
provide for promotion in the fire and police departments on the basis of
ascertained merit and seniority in service and examination, and shall provide
in all cases, where it is practicable, that vacancies shall be filled by
promotion.
   (B)   All examinations for promotion shall be competitive among such members
of the next lower rank as desire to submit themselves to examination.
   (C)   All promotions shall be made from the three (3) having the highest
rating, as set forth in subsection (D) of this section, and where there are
less than three (3) names on the promotional eligible register, as originally
posted, or remaining thereon after appointments have been made therefrom,
appointments to fill existing vacancies shall be made from those three names
having the highest ranking remaining on the promotional register.
   (D)   The chief of the police department or chief of the fire department
shall be allowed to choose for promotion from any one of the three (3) names on
the list having the highest rating ("promotional eligible register") and such
choice shall be made based on merit and at the sole discretion of the chief of
the police department or the chief of the fire department.
   (E)   The method of examination and the rules governing examinations for
promotion shall be the same as provided for applicants for original
appointment, except that original appointments only shall be on probation, as
provided by the rules. The board shall strike off the names of candidates for
promotional appointment after they have remained thereon for more than three
(3) years. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-14: TEMPORARY APPOINTMENTS:
In order to prevent a stoppage of public business, to meet extraordinary
exigencies, or to prevent material impairment of either the police or fire
department, the board of fire and police commissioners may make temporary
appointments, to remain in force until regular appointments may be made under
the provisions of this chapter, but never to exceed one hundred eighty (180)
days. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-15: REMOVAL OR DISCHARGE; INVESTIGATION OF CHARGES; RETIREMENT:
   (A)   Except as hereinafter provided, no officer or member of the fire or
police department of the village appointed pursuant to this chapter shall be
removed or discharged except for cause, upon written charges, and after an
opportunity to be heard in his own defense.
   (B)   The hearing shall be as hereinafter provided.
   (C)   The chief of the fire department, the chief of the police department
or the deputy chief of the police department, may be removed or discharged by
the village president. In such case the village president shall file with the
village board of trustees the reasons for such removal or discharge, which
removal or discharge shall not become effective unless confirmed by a majority
vote of the corporate authorities, after fourteen (14) days' notice to the fire
chief, police chief or deputy police chief and after an opportunity for the
fire chief, police chief or deputy fire chief to be heard by the village board.
   (D)   With regard to any member of the fire department or police department
appointed pursuant to this chapter (not including the chief of the fire
department, the chief of the police department or the deputy chief of the
police department), the board of fire and police commissioners shall conduct a
fair and impartial hearing of the charges, to be commenced within thirty (30)
days of the filing thereof, which hearing may be continued from time to time
upon mutual agreement of the parties, but in no event beyond one hundred twenty
(120) days from the filing of the charges or appeal pursuant to subsection (J)1
of this section.
   (E)   In case an officer or member is found guilty, the board may discharge
him, or may suspend him not exceeding thirty (30) days without pay. The board
may suspend any officer or member pending the hearing with or without pay, but
not to exceed thirty (30) days.
   (F)   If the board of fire and police commissioners determines that the
charges are not sustained and the officer or member has been suspended pursuant
to subsection (E) of this section, the officer or member shall be reimbursed
for all wages withheld, if any.
   (G)   In the conduct of this hearing, each member of the board shall have
power to administer oaths and affirmations, and the board shall have power to
secure by its subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of books and papers relevant to the hearing.
   (H)   The age for retirement of policemen or firemen in the service of the
village is sixty five (65) years.
   (I)   The provisions of the administrative review law, and all amendments
and modifications thereto, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern all proceedings for the judicial review of final administrative
decisions of the board of fire and police commissioners hereunder. The term
administrative decision is defined as in section 3-101 of the code of civil
procedure.
   (J)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the chief of the
fire department or the chief of the police department from suspending without
pay a member of his department for a period of not more than five (5) calendar
days, but he shall notify the board in writing of such suspension.
      1.   Any policeman or fireman so suspended may appeal to the board of
fire and police commissioners for a review of the suspension within five (5)
calendar days after such suspension, and upon such appeal, the board may
sustain the action of the chief of the department, may reverse it with
instructions that the man receive his pay for the period involved, or may
suspend the officer for an additional period of not more than thirty (30) days
or discharge him, depending upon the facts presented. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-16: FIRE OR POLICE DEPARTMENTS; REDUCTION OF FORCE; REINSTATEMENT:
   (A)   When the force of the fire department or of the police department is
reduced, and positions displaced or abolished, seniority shall prevail and the
officers and members so reduced in rank, or removed from the service of the
fire department or of the police department shall be considered furloughed
without pay from the positions from which they were reduced or removed.
   (B)   Such reductions and removals shall be in strict compliance with
seniority and in no event shall any officer or member be reduced more than one
rank in a reduction of force. Officers and members with the least seniority in
the position to be reduced shall be reduced to the next lower rated position.
For purposes of determining which officers and members will be reduced in rank,
seniority shall be determined by adding the time spent at the rank or position
from which the officer or member is to be reduced and the time spent at any
higher rank or position in the department.
   (C)   For purposes of determining which officers or members in the lowest
rank or position shall be removed from the department in the event of a layoff,
length of service in the department shall be the basis for determining
seniority, with the least senior such officer or member being the first so
removed and laid off. Such officers or members laid off shall have their names
placed on an appropriate reemployment list in the reverse order of dates of
layoff.
   (D)   If any positions which have been vacated because of reduction in
forces or displacement and abolition of positions, are reinstated, such members
and officers of the fire department or of the police department as are
furloughed from the said positions shall be notified by the board by certified
mail of such reinstatement of positions and shall have prior right to such
positions if otherwise qualified, and in all cases seniority shall prevail.
Written application for such reinstated position must be made by the furloughed
person within thirty (30) days after notification as above provided and such
person may be required to submit to examination by physicians of both the board
of fire and police commissioners and the appropriate pension board to determine
his physical fitness. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-17: ANNUAL REPORT; BUDGET REQUEST:
At any time the village president or the village board request, the board of
fire and police commissioners shall submit to the village president a report of
its activities, and of the rules in force and the practical effect thereof. In
this report, the board of fire and police commissioners may make suggestions
which the board of fire and police commissioners believes would result in
greater efficiency in the fire or police department. The board of fire and
police commissioners shall also submit an annual budget request to the
municipal governing body prior to the end of each fiscal year. The village
president shall transmit the report to the board of trustees. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-
2010)
2-7-18: SECRETARY OF BOARD; DUTIES; SEAL OF BOARD:
The board of fire and police commissioners may employ a secretary, or may
designate one of its own members to act as secretary. The secretary shall keep
the minutes of the board's proceedings, shall be the custodian of all records
pertaining to the business of the board, shall keep a record of all
examinations held, shall perform all other duties the board of fire and police
commissioners prescribes, and shall be custodian of the seal of the board of
fire and police commissioners, if one has been adopted. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-19: ROOMS AND FUNDS FOR OPERATION OF BOARDS:
The corporate authorities shall provide suitable rooms for the board of fire
and police commissioners, and shall allow reasonable use of public buildings
for holding examinations by the board of fire and police commissioners and
shall further provide adequate funds in the annual appropriation ordinance for
the operation of the board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. 1723, 5-12-
2010)
2-7-20: COMPENSATION OF SECRETARY AND MEMBERS OF BOARD:
The corporate authorities may fix compensation to be paid to the members of the
board of fire and police commissioners, but until the corporate authorities
make such provision, the members of the board shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-21: ATTORNEY FOR BOARD:
The village attorney shall serve to prosecute charges brought by the chief of
the fire department or the chief of the police department and shall also serve
to defend appeals brought pursuant to subsection 2-7-15(J)1 of this chapter.
The board of fire and police commissioners shall retain, hire and employ an
attorney of its own choosing to represent the board of fire and police
commissioners in disciplinary proceedings brought under this chapter. (Ord.
1723, 5-12-2010)
2-7-22: APPLICATION OF THIS CHAPTER:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to full time firemen and full
time policemen and not to any other personnel of any kind or description. (Ord.
1723, 5-12-2010)
CHAPTER 8
FLOOD CONTROL COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-8-1: Commission Created
2-8-2: Members Of Commission
2-8-3: Powers And Duties Of The Commission
2-8-1: COMMISSION CREATED:
A village flood control commission is hereby created. (Ord. 955, 7-25-1979)
2-8-2: MEMBERS OF COMMISSION:
The flood control commission shall consist of the following: the chairman shall
be the village trustee in charge of building; the other members shall be the
building commissioner, the chairman of the planning commission, the
superintendent of public works, the village engineer and any other persons or
consultants deemed necessary by the village president. (Ord. 955, 7-25-1979)
2-8-3: POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION:
The flood control commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To review and hear requests for variations from the regulatory
standards of the flood control ordinance and make recommendations to the
village board and to comply with the requirements of the flood control
ordinance 1 .
   (B)   To review any building permit application for structures within the
regulatory flood area as shown on the flood hazard boundary map and to ensure
compliance with the terms of the ordinance.
   (C)   To review and make recommendations to the village board regarding
requests for channel straightening.
   (D)   To review and make recommendations to the village board on special use
permit applications.
   (E)   To interpret the flood hazard maps and critical elevations.
   (F)   To initiate or require investigations to verify or change, if
necessary, official maps and profiles and to make recommendations for necessary
changes.
   (G)   To review for completeness and accuracy submittal of required flood
data for subdivision as regards flood hazard protection.
   (H)   To review or investigate such other flood control matters as may from
time to time be requested by the village board.
   (I)   To keep all records and to review all documents as required by the
village flood control ordinance.
   (J)   The commission shall be responsible for the proper administration of
the flood control ordinance and shall keep appropriate minutes.
   (K)   The commission shall have authority to make inspections and to require
petitioners or applicants to provide any documentation deemed necessary by the
board or required by the flood control ordinance. (Ord. 955, 7-25-1979)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12, chapter 2 of this code.
CHAPTER 9
MIDLOTHIAN LODGE BOARD
SECTION:
2-9-1: Board Established; Members
2-9-2: Manager; Leases
2-9-3: Powers And Duties
2-9-1: BOARD ESTABLISHED; MEMBERS:
A "Midlothian Lodge board" is hereby established. The board shall consist of
seven (7) members who shall be appointed by the village president and approved
by the village board of trustees. The village president shall appoint a
chairman to serve for three (3) years. Three (3) members shall be appointed to
serve two (2) year terms and three (3) members shall be appointed to serve a
one year term. There shall be no pay for the board members. The board shall
adopt its own rules of procedure and shall appoint one of its members as
secretary to keep records and minutes. (Ord. 1024, 2-10-1982)
2-9-2: MANAGER; LEASES:
The village president may appoint a full or part time manager to run the events
of the Midlothian Lodge and said manager may approve the standard leases for
the use of the premises. All leases must be on an approved village form. All
leases must be sponsored by a legal homeowner in the village. Any lease for
more than two (2) nights must be approved by the village president. Any
extraordinary or unusual lease shall require the review of the village board of
trustees and the approval of the village president. (Ord. 1024, 2-10-1982)
2-9-3: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The manager shall report to the Midlothian Lodge board and said manager shall
make recommendations on return of deposits to lessee. Said board shall review
procedures for the day to day operation and maintenance of the building,
property and parking lot. The Midlothian Lodge board shall make recommendations
to the village board on any unusual or extraordinary leases and shall provide
input to the village board on any remodeling or revisions to the building or
for any contracts which are to be signed. All expenditures of funds and all
contracts must be approved by the village board. All rental payments and
deposits must be made at the village hall. (Ord. 1024, 2-10-1982)
CHAPTER 10
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY
SECTION:
2-10-1: Establishment
2-10-2: Purpose
2-10-3: Functions
2-10-4: Coordinator
2-10-5: Location Of Office
2-10-6: Oath
2-10-7: Emergency
2-10-8: Ability To Negotiate Mutual Aid Agreements
2-10-9: Authority To Contract And Purchase In Event Of Disaster
2-10-10: Mobile Support Team
2-10-11: Reimbursement By State For Expenses Of EMA Members
2-10-12: Compensation Of Members Called For Training
2-10-13: Appropriation/Levy Of Taxes
2-10-14: Acceptance Of Gifts
2-10-15: Utilization Of Existing Agency, Facility And Personnel
2-10-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
Pursuant to the authority granted by the Illinois emergency management agency
act, there is hereby created an emergency management agency ("EMA") for the
village. The EMA shall subsume and perform all of the duties of the previously
designated emergency services and disaster agency ("ESDA") of the village.
(Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the EMA is to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or
damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, other hostile
action or natural causes or manmade disasters. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-3: FUNCTIONS:
The EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the village as shall be
prescribed in and by the Illinois emergency management agency (IEMA) plan and
program prepared by the IEMA and such orders, rules and regulations as may be
promulgated by the IEMA and village ordinances. In addition, the EMA shall
perform such duties outside the corporate limits of the village as may be
required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or taxing district entered into as provided by the
Illinois emergency management agency act. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-4: COORDINATOR:
A coordinator of EMA shall be appointed by the village president, and shall
serve for a period of one year, commencing May 1 of each year, or until a
successor shall be appointed or until he is relieved of his duties by the
village president. In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability
of the coordinator to serve, the village president or any person designated by
him shall be and act as coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided
in this section. The coordinator of the EMA shall have the direct
responsibility for the organization, administration, training and operation of
the EMA, subject to the direction and control of the village president as
provided by statute. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-5: LOCATION OF OFFICE:
The office space to be occupied by the EMA shall be designated by the village
president in the village hall or elsewhere in facilities under the jurisdiction
of the village. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-6: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the EMA shall before
entering upon his/her duties, subscribe to an oath which shall be filed with
the coordinator of the EMA. Such oath shall be in substantially the following
form:
I                     , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and
defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter.
And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate nor am I, nor have I
ever been, a member of a political party or organization that advocates the
overthrow of the government of the United States or of this State by force or
violence, and that during such time as I am affiliated with the Village of
Midlothian EMA, I will not advocate nor become a member of any political party
or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United
States or of this State by force or violence.
(Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-7: EMERGENCY:
If the governor declares that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or in the event of a major disaster
within the state resulting from enemy sabotage, other hostile action or from
natural causes, it shall be the duty of the EMA to cooperate fully with
municipal officials, with the state IEMA as the governor in the exercise of
emergency powers, as provided by law. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-8: ABILITY TO NEGOTIATE MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS:
The coordinator of the EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
municipal corporations, political subdivisions, and taxing districts, but no
such agreement shall be effective until it has been approved by the corporate
authorities of each of the participating municipalities, political subdivisions
or taxing districts. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-9: AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT AND PURCHASE IN EVENT OF DISASTER:
In the event of enemy caused or natural disaster, the coordinator is authorized
on behalf of the village, subject to the approval of the village president, to
procure such services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for
the purposes stated in this section in view of the exigency, without regard to
the statutory procedures or formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining
to municipal contracts or to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to municipal contracts or obligations, as
authorized by the Illinois emergency management agency act. However, if the
village board meets at the time of such disaster, the coordinator's action
shall be subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by the village
board.
The village president or, in his absence, the president pro tempore, may on
recommendation of the coordinator of the EMA, authorize any purchase or
contract necessary to place the village in a position to effectively combat any
disaster, to protect the public health and safety, to protect property and to
provide emergency assistance to victims, whether such disaster results from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile or from any natural cause or
manmade disasters. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-10: MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All members of the EMA may be designated as members of a mobile support team
created by the state director of IEMA. The leader of such mobile support team
shall be designated by the coordinator of the EMA. Any member of a mobile
support team is a municipal employee or officer while serving on call to duty
by the governor or the director of IEMA and shall receive the compensation and
have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to such employee or
office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or employee of the
municipality while so serving shall receive from the state such reasonable
compensation as is or may be provided by law. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-11: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE FOR EXPENSES OF EMA MEMBERS:
The village treasurer, or any person fulfilling his duties, may receive and
allocate to the appropriate funds any reimbursement by the state to the village
for expenses incident to training members of the EMA or for compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
of the village in response to a call by the governor or director of IEMA, as
provided by law, and any reimbursement made by the state incident to EMA
activities, as provided by law. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-12: COMPENSATION OF MEMBERS CALLED FOR TRAINING:
The members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if
called for training by the director of IEMA, shall receive for time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held in the
village. Members of the EMA who are not such municipal employees or officers
shall receive for such training time such compensation as may be established by
the board of trustees. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-13: APPROPRIATION/LEVY OF TAXES:
The village board may make appropriations for emergency services and disaster
operations in the manner provided by law for making appropriations for the
ordinary expenses of EMA. The board of trustees may also levy for emergency
services and disaster operations a tax not to exceed 0.05 percent of the full,
fair cash value as equalized or assessed on all taxable property in the village
for the current year. However, the amount collectible under such a levy shall
in no event exceed twenty five cents ($0.25) per capita. The annual tax shall
be in addition to and in excess of the amount authorized to be levied for
general corporate purposes. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-14: ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS:
Whenever the federal or state governments, or any agency or officer thereof, or
whenever any person, firm or corporation shall offer to the village services,
equipment, supplies, materials or funds by way of gift or grant for purposes of
emergency management, the village, acting through the village president or the
board of trustees, may accept such offer and upon such acceptance the village
president or the board of trustees may authorize any officer of the village to
receive such services, equipment, supplies, materials or funds on behalf of the
village. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
2-10-15: UTILIZATION OF EXISTING AGENCY, FACILITY AND PERSONNEL:
In carrying out the provisions of this chapter, the coordinator is directed to
utilize the services, equipment, supplies and facilities of existing village
departments, offices and agencies to the maximum extent practicable, and the
officers and personnel of all such departments, offices and agencies are
directed, upon request, to cooperate and extend such services and facilities to
the coordinator and the EMA. (Ord. 1907, 11-11-2015)
CHAPTER 11
RESERVED
(Ord. 1936, 7-20-2016)
CHAPTER 12
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-12-1: Economic Development Committee Established
2-12-2: Appointment
2-12-3: Terms Of Office
2-12-4: Meetings
2-12-5: Compensation
2-12-6: Duties
2-12-7: Ethics And Conflict Of Interest
2-12-8: Penalties
2-12-1: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED:
A Midlothian economic development committee is hereby established for the
purpose of promoting and encouraging quality economic development within the
village. (Ord. 1364, 9-13-1995)
2-12-2: APPOINTMENT:
Membership of the economic development committee shall be composed of seven (7)
members, two (2) of whom shall be Village Trustees and five (5) public members.
The public members shall be composed of three (3) residents of the village and
two (2) owners of businesses in the Village who need not be residents. The
Chairperson and the six (6) other members of the committee shall be appointed
by the President of the Village with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees. (Ord. 1703, 9-9-2009; amd. Ord. 2099, 5-11-2022)
2-12-3: TERMS OF OFFICE:
All members of the committee shall serve for a term of one year or until a
successor has been duly appointed and qualified, and any vacancies which shall
occur shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment. (Ord.
1364, 9-13-1995)
2-12-4: MEETINGS:
Meetings of the economic development committee shall be every other month or as
necessary to complete the business of the committee and shall be noticed and
conducted in compliance with the requirements of the Illinois Open Meetings
Act. (Ord. 2099, 5-11-2022)
2-12-5: COMPENSATION:
Upon application to and approval of the Village Clerk, qualified resident
members of the economic development committee that serve for the entire one-
year term shall be eligible to receive one complimentary Village of Midlothian
Vehicle License for each year of service as compensation. (Ord. 1364, 9-13-
1995; amd. Ord. 2099, 5-11-2022)
2-12-6: DUTIES:
The duties of the committee shall include the following:
   (A)   Development of a villagewide marketing strategy for undeveloped
business properties, including the development of promotional material.
   (B)   Meet with owners of undeveloped business property to determine ways in
which the village can assist them in marketing of the property.
   (C)   Advise the board on whether or not the employment of a professional
marketing consultant is necessary to accomplish quality economic development.
   (D)   Assist property owners in finding tenants for vacant businesses.
   (E)   Meet with businesses that are considering leaving the community to
encourage them to remain in the village and to identify if there is any action
that can or should be taken to assist them.
   (F)   Study the conditions and trends of development, advise the village
board of its growth and potential.
   (G)   Work closely with the Midlothian area chamber of commerce to
accomplish the above items.
   (H)   The committee may also be given other duties by the president of the
board of trustees to help the committee coordinate their efforts with the
village board and other community groups. (Ord. 1364, 9-13-1995)
2-12-7: ETHICS AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST:
All members of the economic development committee, whether voting members or
nonvoting members, shall be governed by the following rules or ordinances:
   (A)   Ethics: The ethics ordinance contained in title 1, chapter 19 of this
code shall apply to all members of the economic development committee, whether
the member is a voting or nonvoting member. The penalties for the violation of
the village ethics ordinance shall be those set forth in the ethics ordinance
in section 1-19-8 of this code.
   (B)   Conflict Of Interest: No member of the economic development committee
shall engage in a conflict of interest with regard to his or her duties as a
member of the economic development committee. Matters that will be considered
to be a conflict of interest include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for a member's personal advantage, benefit or use.
      2.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for a member's relative's personal advantage,
benefit or use.
      3.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for the benefit of any third party, even if the
member does not benefit from such use of documents, data or other information
that has not been communicated to the public.
      4.   The use of documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public for the benefit of any third party's relative, even
if the member does not benefit from such use of documents, data or any other
information that has not been communicated to the public.
      5.   The representation of, acting as agent of, or in any other manner
assisting a client, customer or other individual with whom a member has a
business relationship and which is adverse to the interests of the village or
which utilizes documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public.
      6.   The representation of, acting as agent of, or in any other manner
assisting a business in which a member has any type of an ownership or
financial interest and which is adverse to the interests of the village or
which utilizes documents, data or any information that has not been
communicated to the public.
      7.   A member shall not enter into a business transaction utilizing data
or information which has not been made available to the general public by
acquiring an ownership, possessory, security or other pecuniary interest in a
business entity, parcel of real estate, or otherwise.
      8.   A member shall not provide financial assistance with regard to any
matter that has come before the economic development committee and which would
benefit the member, a member's relative, a business entity in which the member
has an interest, or any other third party, including one whom the member may
represent or act as an agent.
      9.   Any act or omission in which the member behaves or acts
inconsistently with his or her duties as a member of the economic development
committee or in which the member could be said to be acting in a dual capacity.
(Ord. 1703, 9-9-2009)
2-12-8: PENALTIES:
The penalties for violation of section 2-12-7 of this chapter shall be one or
more of the following:
   (A)   The member shall be removed by the president from the economic
development committee; and/or
   (B)   The penalties provided under section 1-19-8 of this code. (Ord. 1703,
9-9-2009)
TITLE 3
DEPARTMENTS
Police Department   1
Fire Department   2
Water Department   3
Building Department (Rep. by Ord. 1242, 2-12-1992)   4
Public Sewers And Charges   5
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
3-1-1: Department Established
3-1-2: Authorized Positions
3-1-3: Appointments To Sworn Positions
3-1-4: Duties Of Chief Of Police
3-1-5: Duties Of Deputy Chief Of Police
3-1-6: Custodian Of Seized Property; Record
3-1-7: Seized Property; Proceeds From Sale
3-1-8: Seized Weapons; Sale Forbidden
3-1-9: Duties Of Members
3-1-10: Arrests
3-1-11: Service Of Warrants
3-1-12: Assistance To The Fire Department
3-1-13: Part Time Police Officers
3-1-14: Auxiliary Police Officers
3-1-15: Police Pension Fund
3-1-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a Police Department of the Village for the
protection of lives and property within the limits of the Village, the
enforcement of Federal and State Statutes and Village ordinances, and related
police functions. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-2: AUTHORIZED POSITIONS:
   (A)   The Village President and the Board of Trustees shall, from time to
time, determine the number of police officers and civilian employees necessary
for the effective operation of the Police Department, and the Police Department
shall have the following authorized positions:
      1.   Chief of Police.
      2.   Administrative Aide to the Chief of Police (civilian position).
      3.   Deputy Chief of Police.
      4.   Lieutenant.
      5.   Sergeant.
      6.   Patrol officer.
      7.   Part time police officers.
      8.   Auxiliary police officers. (Ord. 1803, 9-12-2012)
3-1-3: APPOINTMENTS TO SWORN POSITIONS:
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Village President, with
the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, for a term of one year unless
the Village Board authorizes the Village President to sign a contract with the
Chief for a longer period of time. The Chief may be removed by the Village
President upon the Village President filing with the Corporate Authorities the
reasons for such removal or discharge, which removal or discharge shall not
become effective unless confirmed by a majority vote of the Corporate
Authorities. If the Chief of Police holds a rank or position attained under the
Board of Police and Fire Commissioners, he shall revert to the rank or position
if he is not reappointed Chief of Police upon the expiration of his term or if
he resigns as Chief or is discharged as Chief prior to obtaining eligibility to
retire on pension. (Ord. 1803, 9-12-2012)
   (B)   The Deputy Chief of Police shall be appointed by the Chief of Police
from any rank of sworn, full time officer with at least five (5) years of full
time service as a police officer in the State of Illinois. The Deputy Chief of
Police's position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of Chief. He
shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police and, if removed from the
position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to the appointment to
the Deputy Chief position. (Ord. 1964, 10-11-2017)
   (C)   The Administrative Aide to the Chief of Police shall be appointed by
the Chief of Police and the position shall be a civilian position. The
Administrative Aide to the Chief of Police's position shall be an exempt
position. He shall serve at the discretion of the Chief of Police. The
Administrative Aide shall have those duties assigned from time to time by the
Chief of Police.
   (D)   All original sworn appointments (except part time police officers and
auxiliary police officers) to the police department and promotions within the
department, other than the chief of police, deputy chief of police and
administrative aide to the chief of police shall be made and effected by the
board of fire and police commissioners as prescribed by village ordinance or
state statute. (Ord. 1803, 9-12-2012)
3-1-4: DUTIES OF CHIEF OF POLICE:
The police chief shall be responsible for the performance of the police
department, and all persons who are members of the police department shall
serve subject to the orders of the chief of police. He shall perform those
duties prescribed by the rules and regulations governing the police department,
as approved by the village president and board of trustees, and shall in
addition perform the following duties:
   (A)   Be the keeper of the village jail and have custody of all persons
incarcerated therein.
   (B)   Keep such books and records and make such reports concerning the
activities of his department as may be required by statute or by the village
president and board of trustees.
   (C)   Provide for the custody, care and control of the public property of
the police department, including all vehicles, firearms and other equipment.
   (D)   Preserve the peace, order and safety of the village.
   (E)   Execute and enforce the state and federal laws, all village
ordinances, police regulations and orders of the village president and board of
trustees.
   (F)   Protect the rights of persons and property within the village.
   (G)   Appoint the deputy police chief and provide for his duties.
   (H)   Promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct and guidance of the
members of the department. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-5: DUTIES OF DEPUTY CHIEF OF POLICE:
The deputy chief of police shall have those duties assigned from time to time
by the chief of police. (Ord. 1748, 4-13-2011)
3-1-6: CUSTODIAN OF SEIZED PROPERTY; RECORD:
The chief of police shall act as custodian of all property seized or taken by
the police.
All members of the department into whose possession may come any property
seized or taken shall deliver the same at once to the chief of police.
The chief of police shall keep a record of all property which may be seized or
otherwise taken possession of by the police department. If such property shall
not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof and possession surrendered to the
owners within sixty (60) days from the date of the final disposition of the
court proceedings in connection with which such property was seized or
otherwise taken possession of, or, in case there are no such court proceedings,
then if such property shall not be claimed by the rightful owner thereof and
possession surrendered to the owner within sixty (60) days of the date of such
seizure or taking by the police, the chief of police shall cause to be
published in a local newspaper a description thereof, together with the date of
seizure and shall give notice that if the property be not claimed by the
rightful owner thereof within ten (10) days of the date of publication such
property will be sold at public auction at such place as the chief of police
may direct and in such manner as to expose to the inspection of bidders all
property so offered for sale; provided, that the unclaimed property, if deemed
by the chief of police to be of use to the department may be retained for the
use of the department; and provided further, that no member of the department,
directly or indirectly, shall purchase such unclaimed property.
If any property so seized or taken shall be of perishable nature or so bulky or
of such a nature as to make it dangerous or inadvisable to retain possession
thereof for the length of time herein set forth, the chief of police, with the
approval of the chairman of the committee on public safety, may cause such
property to be advertised immediately and shall sell the property at public
auction at any time after three (3) days shall have elapsed from the seizure or
taking thereof, but no sooner than three (3) days after advertising the same.
(Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-7: SEIZED PROPERTY; PROCEEDS FROM SALE:
The proceeds of any such sale after deducting the costs and expenses incident
thereto shall be paid to the police association or as directed by the village
board. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-8: SEIZED WEAPONS; SALE FORBIDDEN:
None of the provisions of section 3-1-6 of this chapter shall apply to pistols,
revolvers, knives, metallic knuckles or other deadly weapons of like character.
These items shall be kept or disposed of or destroyed as directed by a court
order. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-9: DUTIES OF MEMBERS:
It shall be the duty of the members of the police department to see to the
enforcement of all the ordinances of the village, federal and state laws and
statutes applicable therein, to preserve order, and to prevent infractions of
the law and arrest violators thereof. Each member shall obey the orders and
directions of his or her superior officer and shall perform the duties as
prescribed by the rules and regulations governing the police department. (Ord.
1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-10: ARRESTS:
Police officers are conservators of the peace and shall have power to arrest,
with or without process, all persons found violating any village ordinance or
any state or federal law or statute. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-11: SERVICE OF WARRANTS:
All warrants for the violation of village ordinances or the state criminal law,
directed to any person, may be served and executed within the limits of the
village by any police officer of the village. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-12: ASSISTANCE TO THE FIRE DEPARTMENT:
It shall be the duty of police officers of the village to aid the fire
department by giving alarm in case of fire and by clearing the streets or
grounds in the immediate vicinity of a fire, so that members of the fire
department shall not be hindered or obstructed in the performance of their
duties. (Ord. 1541, 6-12-2002)
3-1-13: PART TIME POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   The village of Midlothian may employ part time police officers from
time to time as it deems necessary.
   (B)   A part time police officer shall have all the responsibilities of a
full time police officer and such specific duties as delineated in the general
orders of the village of Midlothian police department, but the number of hours
a part time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part time
police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time police
officers. Part time police officers shall be trained in accordance with the
Illinois police training act 1  and the rules and requirements of the ILETSB.
   (C)   All applicants for the position of part time police officer must
comply with all state laws requiring certification standards and must meet the
following hiring standards of the village:
      1.   Must be at least twenty one (21) years of age.
      2.   Must be a high school graduate or equivalent.
      3.   Must provide a certified physician's statement of good health.
      4.   Must possess a valid Illinois driver's license and have a good
driving record.
      5.   Must pass an oral interview with the chief of police or his
designee.
      6.   Need not be a resident of Midlothian but must live within the limits
of the boundaries set out in police union contract.
      7.   Must be in good physical shape and pass the state of Illinois POWER
test.
      8.   Must be able to qualify with a firearm and pass the required firearm
training course certified by the state.
      9.   Must be able to complete the mandatory police training required by
the state and pass the final test for certification by the state or receive a
waiver from the Illinois law enforcement training and standard board for prior
training or experience.
      10.   Must be of good character and pass a background investigation.
      11.   Must not have been convicted of any felony or other crime of moral
turpitude.
      12.   Must have fingerprints submitted to the state and FBI for purposes
of checking criminal history record.
      13.   Must pass any physical, written, lie detector or psychological
tests required by the village.
      14.   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (D)   All applicants must be approved by the village president with the
advice and consent of the village board.
   (E)   All salaries are to be set by the village board.
   (F)   Any part time police officer who is terminated or leaves the position
within three (3) years of passing all hiring standards for the position of part
time police officer for the village must reimburse the village for all training
costs and expenses incurred by the village during said time. If any funds are
due the officer they may be used by the village to pay a portion or all of the
training funds.
   (G)   Part time officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the
chief of police. Part time police officers shall comply with all applicable
rules and general orders issued by the police department.
   (H)   A part time police officer has no vested interest in the position and
the village may discipline or discharge a part time officer at any time. A part
time officer shall be a member of the regular police department except for
pension purposes. They shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full time
police officers of the police department and they shall not be used as
permanent replacements for permanent full time police officers.
   (I)   Initial appointment as a part time police officer is to the position
of "probationary" part time police officer. This means a recruit, a part time
police officer, who is required to successfully complete the state mandated
certification standards as well as the minimum standards set forth in this
section. (Ord. 1787, 6-13-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 705/1 et seq.
3-1-14: AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS:
   (A)   The chief of police may appoint auxiliary police officers from time to
time as he or she deems necessary.
   (B)   Auxiliary police officers shall not be conservators of the peace and
shall only carry firearms while on duty, with the permission of the chief of
police, and only after completing the state certified forty (40) hour mandatory
firearms training as provided under 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 710/2, as
amended.
   (C)   Auxiliary police officers shall only be assigned to perform the
following duties in the village of Midlothian:
      1.   To aid or direct traffic within the municipality;
      2.   To aid in control of natural or manmade disasters; and
      3.   To aid in case of civil disorder as directed by the chief of police.
   (D)   Auxiliary police officers shall, at all times during the performance
of their duties, be subject to the direction and control of the chief of
police.
   (E)   Auxiliary officers shall be under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the
chief of police. Auxiliary police officers shall serve at the discretion of the
mayor and the board of trustees, shall not have any property rights in said
employment, and may be removed by the chief of police, mayor and/or the board
of trustees at any time.
   (F)   Identification symbols and collar brass, worn by the auxiliary police
officers shall be different and distinct from those used by the regular police
department. (Ord. 1803, 9-12-2012)
3-1-15: POLICE PENSION FUND:
The provisions of "an act to provide for the setting apart, formation and
disbursement of a police pension fund in cities, villages and incorporated
towns having a population of not more than 200,000 inhabitants approved June
14, 1909, as amended by an act approved July 17, 1959", is hereby adopted by
the village, and the village shall take such steps as may be necessary to
comply with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 1803, 9-12-2012)
CHAPTER 2
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
3-2-1: Department Established
3-2-2: Duties Of Chief
3-2-3: Command At Fires
3-2-4: Deputy Fire Chief; Duties
3-2-5: Enforcement Of Department Regulations
3-2-6: Protection Against Fires
3-2-7: Board Of Officers And Rules And Regulations
3-2-8: Fire Record To Be Kept
3-2-9: Prescribe Limits At Fires
3-2-10: Spectators At Fires; Disobedience
3-2-11: Damaging Equipment
3-2-12: Driving Over Fire Hose
3-2-13: Tampering With Alarm Boxes
3-2-14: Removal From Office
3-2-15: Delivery Of Books And Equipment To Successor
3-2-16: Compensation Of Firemen
3-2-17: Suspension Of Members
3-2-18: Minimum Standards For Members Of The Midlothian Fire Department
3-2-19: Filing Charges Against Fire Chief
3-2-20: Fire Department; Payment By Village
3-2-21: Firemen's Pension Fund
3-2-22: Fire Calls Outside Limits; Charges
3-2-23: Foreign Fire Insurance Board
3-2-24: Spiller Pay
3-2-25: Adoption Of Occupational Health And Safety Program For The Midlothian
Fire Department
3-2-26: Knox Box Requirements
3-2-27: Ambulance Service And Fees
3-2-28: Fire Service And Fee Mitigation Rates
3-2-29: Fire Alarm Response And Fees
3-2-30: Fire Department Vehicle Replacement Fund
3-2-1: DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby established a fire department for the village, the equipment of
which shall be used and managed by full time and by volunteer fire companies,
and which may consist of a chief of the fire department, chief emeritus and the
following volunteer officers: four (4) deputy chiefs, two (2) captains, four
(4) lieutenants, a chief of the fire prevention bureau and such other
assistants and firefighters as may, from time to time, be appointed by the
village board.
   (A)   1. A chief of the fire department, who within seven (7) months of his
official retirement, takes his vacation/due time until his actual retirement
date, may be appointed chief emeritus by the village president with the advice
and consent of the board of trustees. The duties of the chief emeritus shall be
to provide counsel and guidance to the new chief of the fire department. The
chief emeritus will be entitled to his normal pay until his actual retirement
date, and nothing in this section affects his pensions or retirement benefits.
Upon retirement the position of said chief emeritus shall end. If a chief
emeritus is appointed, the president of the village board with the advice and
consent of the board of trustees shall appoint a new chief of the fire
department, and he shall have all the duties and powers as set forth in the
state statutes and village ordinances.
      2.   The chief of the fire department shall be appointed by the
president, with the advice and consent of the board of trustees, for a term of
one year. If the fire chief holds a rank or position attained under the board
of fire and police commissioners, he shall revert to that rank or position if
he is not reappointed chief of the fire department upon the expiration of his
term.
      3.   Upon recommendation of the fire chief, the deputy chiefs of the fire
department shall be appointed by the president upon the advice and consent of
the board of trustees for a term of one year. If a deputy chief holds a
volunteer rank of captain or lieutenant, he shall revert to that rank or
position if he is not reappointed deputy chief of the fire department upon the
expiration of his term. (Ord. 1339, 11-9-1994)
   (B)   Volunteer officer appointments of captain and lieutenant shall be made
as follows: With the consent of the president and board of trustees competitive
written examinations shall be given to the rank below. To the examination score
the board of officers shall add the individual's annual "proficiency" rating.
The criteria for the annual proficiency rating shall include, but not be
limited to, their most recent annual percentage of: 1) responses to alarms, 2)
attendance at drills and training, and 3) completion of duty assignments.
   The examination score plus the annual proficiency rating shall produce a
"gains" score. To this gains score the board of officers shall add an
"efficiency" rating. The efficiency rating shall be on a scale of one to ten
(10). Criteria to be used in determining the efficiency rating shall include,
but not be limited to, character, work performance, ability to learn, job
knowledge, loyalty, displays initiative and leadership, oral and written
communication skills, uses good judgment and ability to make sound decisions.
   The proficiency rating and the efficiency ratings shall be determined by the
board of officers before the written examination is taken. After the efficiency
rating has been added to the gains score it shall produce a final grade which
shall be used for the ranking on the promotion list. Once the list is
established the complete list and the proposed names for promotion shall be
submitted by the fire chief to the president and board of trustees for their
approval of those to be promoted. The promotion list shall be valid for two (2)
years.
   The volunteer officers may be made up of both volunteers and/or full time
members of the department. If full time officers are required by the president
and board of trustees, they shall advise the board of fire and police
commissioners to conduct the necessary tests required by state statute. This
chapter shall not affect the existing rank of the current volunteer officers.
   (C)   Regular full time firemen and officers may be appointed by the board
of fire and police commissioners after authorization has been received from the
village president and board of trustees to conduct the necessary tests. (Ord.
1153, 5-25-1988)
   (D)   The chief of the fire department with the approval of the village
board, may set up a program for cadet firefighters of the Midlothian fire
department. A group of young adults will consist of applicants fifteen (15)
years of age and not more than eighteen (18) years of age, who would be
eligible for membership. The objectives of the organization will be to prepare
its members to become regular members of the Midlothian fire department by: 1)
participating in all training sessions, meetings, and other fire department
activities; 2) performing all duties and responsibilities that may be required;
3) abiding by all rules and regulations of the Midlothian fire department and
cadet program; and 4) creating good fellowship towards all men. The chief of
the department, with the approval of the village board, shall establish a
constitution and bylaws of the Midlothian fire department cadet program, which
constitution and bylaws may be amended from time to time by the chief with the
approval and consent of the Midlothian village board. (Ord. 1382, 1-24-1996)
3-2-2: DUTIES OF CHIEF:
The chief of the fire department (subject to the authority of the president and
board of trustees) shall have complete command and control of the department
and all members thereof. He has the right to delegate to others duties as he
deems appropriate. He shall have the general care and custody of all apparatus,
equipment and all other property of the department, and shall personally attend
to any and all repairs required to be made upon same. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-3: COMMAND AT FIRES:
The fire chief shall respond to all fires occurring within the village and take
command of the organization and see that the members of the fire department
faithfully perform their respective duties. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-4: DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF; DUTIES:
The duties of the deputy chief of the fire department shall be to act in place
and stead of the chief of the fire department. In the event of his absence or
inability to act, he shall assist the chief of the fire department in the
exercise of all of his duties and shall also perform such duties as may be
assigned to him by the fire chief. There may be four (4) deputy chiefs. (Ord.
1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-5: ENFORCEMENT OF DEPARTMENT REGULATIONS:
It shall be the special duty of the fire chief to see that all the provisions
of this code and the department regulations having any relation to the
protection of life or property in the village from fire or relating to the fire
department are strictly enforced and that all the members of the fire
department are faithful in the discharge of their duties. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-
1988)
3-2-6: PROTECTION AGAINST FIRES:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to visit and examine all places reported
or known to him as being liable to cause or occasion the breaking out or spread
of fire, and to make such orders in relation thereto as the protection of life
and the property in the village may require. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-7: BOARD OF OFFICERS AND RULES AND REGULATIONS:
There is hereby established a "board of officers". This board of officers may
consist of three (3) officers with the rank of captain or deputy chief. The
board shall be appointed by the fire chief after approval of the president and
board of trustees. The fire chief shall have authority to appoint an alternate
to the board of officers if anyone on the existing board is not available to
attend a particular meeting. In addition to the annual efficiency and
proficiency ratings referred to in subsection 3-2-1(B) of this chapter, the
duty of the board shall be to work with the fire chief in establishing a set of
rules and regulations for the conduct of the fire department and any proposed
revisions in this chapter. The chief shall work with the board of officers on
the rules and regulations and any revisions. They shall review the rules and
regulations periodically to ensure they remain current. No change shall be made
in said rules and regulations unless the change is approved by a majority of
the board of officers and has been submitted and approved by the village board.
The board of officers may also hear appeals of suspended volunteer officers or
volunteer members per section 3-2-17 of this chapter. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-8: FIRE RECORD TO BE KEPT:
The fire chief shall keep a full, true and complete record of all the property
and equipment of the fire department, together with a record of all
transactions in the fire department and of all property placed in his charge
and custody; and he shall annually, at the close of each calendar year, make a
written report to the president and board of trustees showing the condition of
the department under his management, together with a complete list of all fires
occurring in the village during the preceding year, the loss incurred thereby,
and such other information as he may deem important to the village. The fire
chief shall provide an incident report for every alarm to which the fire
department responds. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-9: PRESCRIBE LIMITS AT FIRES:
The fire chief or other officer in command may prescribe limits in the vicinity
of any fire, within which no persons except those who reside therein, firemen,
policemen, and those admitted by order of any officer of the fire department be
permitted to go. He shall have power to cause a removal of any property
whenever it shall become necessary for the preservation of such property from
fire, to prevent the spreading of fire, or to protect adjoining property. (Ord.
1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-10: SPECTATORS AT FIRES; DISOBEDIENCE:
Every person who shall be present at a fire shall be subject and obedient to
the orders of the fire chief and other officers of the fire department engaged
in extinguishing the fire and in the removal and protection of property; and in
case any person shall refuse to obey such orders, he shall be deemed guilty of
a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-11: DAMAGING EQUIPMENT:
Any person who shall offer any hindrance to any officer or firemen in the
performance of his duty at a fire, or shall in any manner destroy, damage or
deface any hose cart, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the village,
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-12: DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE:
No car, truck, wagon, railroad car, or other vehicle shall be driven over any
unprotected hose of the fire department when laid down on any street or alley
by order of the fire chief or other proper officer, without the consent of the
fire chief or officers or members in charge of such hose; and any person
violating this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 1153, 5-
25-1988)
3-2-13: TAMPERING WITH ALARM BOXES:
No person, except those connected with the management of the fire department,
shall open any signal box unless it be to communicate an alarm of fire; or
break, cut, deface, derange, or in any manner meddle or interfere with any
signal box or fire alarm, telegraph or telephone wires. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-14: REMOVAL FROM OFFICE:
If charges are filed against anyone on the fire department requesting removal
of that person from the department, the matter will be referred either to the
president and board of trustees or to the board of fire and police
commissioners.
The fire chief (as chief) and any volunteer firemen or volunteer officers may
be removed by the president and board of trustees for any violation of the
provisions of this code, bylaws, rules and regulations pertaining to the fire
department. The village board may hold a hearing if it feels a hearing is
necessary. All full time men who were appointed by the board of fire and police
commissioners can only be removed from any position attained under the board of
fire and police commissioners after full compliance with state statutes and
after appropriate hearings before the board of fire and police commissioners.
(Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-15: DELIVERY OF BOOKS AND EQUIPMENT TO SUCCESSOR:
On the expiration of his term of office or his resignation thereof or removal
therefrom, the fire chief shall, on demand, deliver to his successor in office
all books, records, equipment, and property of every description in his
possession belonging to the village or appertaining to his office. (Ord. 1153,
5-25-1988)
3-2-16: COMPENSATION OF FIREMEN:
The fire chief and members of the department shall receive for their services
such compensation and shall be granted such privileges and immunities as the
president and board of trustees may lawfully allow and prescribe. (Ord. 1153,
5-25-1988)
3-2-17: SUSPENSION OF MEMBERS:
The chief may suspend for up to thirty (30) days any volunteer officer or
volunteer member. When any such suspension shall be ordered by the chief, he
shall at once file with the chairman of the committee on public safety a
written report of such suspension and of the reasons therefor. An appeal of
said suspension may be made by the suspended person within five (5) calendar
days of such action to the board of officers who, after proper hearing, may
sustain the suspension, or reinstate the member or may modify the suspension as
they feel appropriate.
If a volunteer officer is a full time fireman, his suspension by the chief
shall only apply to his officer's rank, unless the suspension is in accordance
with state statutes as to full time men. Any suspension of a full time man must
be in accordance with the state statutes and any appeals must be to the board
of fire and police commissioners. All hearings on full time men shall be by the
board of fire and police commissioners. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-18: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR MEMBERS OF THE MIDLOTHIAN FIRE DEPARTMENT:
   (A)   All members of the Midlothian fire department shall maintain the
following level of performance to remain in good standing in the department:
      1.   Volunteer members must respond to thirty three percent (33%) of the
total number of alarms received. Full time paid members must respond to twenty
five percent (25%) of all off duty calls.
      2.   Volunteer members must acquire one hundred twenty (120) hours of
creditable training in a fiscal year. Full time members must acquire three
hundred twelve (312) hours of creditable training in a fiscal year.
      3.   Members must be certified by the Illinois fire protection personnel
standards and education commission as having successfully completed an approved
training course, and such basic training must be completed by the trainee
within his probationary period of twelve (12) months.
   (B)   The fire chief shall review or cause to be reviewed the performance of
all members of the fire department at three (3), six (6), nine (9) and twelve
(12) month intervals. Upon completion of each review, written notice shall be
given to any member who has not met the minimum standard requirements. Said
notice shall advise the member that he has thirty (30) days in which to bring
his performance up to minimum standards. Failure of the member to bring his
performance up to standard within the allotted time will result in disciplinary
action. Said disciplinary action may include, but is not limited to, a request
for dismissal of the member.
   (C)   Any member of the Midlothian fire department who resigns or is
expelled shall return all fire department equipment, badges, uniforms, and all
other department property in his possession within ten (10) days of his
resignation or expulsion. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-19: FILING CHARGES AGAINST FIRE CHIEF:
Charges may be filed against the fire chief. If said charges reflect on his
position as chief of the fire department, they are to be filed with the
president and board of trustees. If the charges are of such a nature that they
require discipline against the chief in his position attained under the board
of fire and police commissioners, charges must be filed with the board of fire
and police commissioners. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-20: FIRE DEPARTMENT; PAYMENT BY VILLAGE:
The village shall pay to the fire department such amount biannually as shall be
fixed from time to time by the village board, which sum shall be payment for
all calls answered by the volunteer members and volunteer officers. (Ord. 1153,
5-25-1988)
3-2-21: FIREMEN'S PENSION FUND:
The provisions of "an act to create a firemen's pension fund in cities,
incorporated towns, villages, townships and fire protection districts having a
population of not less than 5,000 nor more than 200,000 inhabitants, filed July
11, 1919 as amended by act approved July 24, 1959" is hereby adopted by the
village and the village shall take such steps as may be necessary to comply
with the provisions thereof. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-22: FIRE CALLS OUTSIDE LIMITS; CHARGES:
The fire department is hereby authorized to furnish fire protection service
outside the limits of the village under written mutual aid agreements with
political subdivisions desiring said protection.
The fire department is authorized to answer calls outside the village limits
where no mutual aid agreement exists and they shall make the following charges
for the service: one hundred seventy five dollars ($175.00) for the first hour
plus one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for every additional hour or fraction
thereof. This charge shall apply for every piece of apparatus that responds to
the call. The time shall be figured from the receipt of the alarm to the time
each individual piece of apparatus is back in service. (Ord. 1153, 5-25-1988)
3-2-23: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE BOARD:
   (A)   Foreign Fire Insurance Board: There is hereby created for the village
fire department a foreign fire insurance board (insurance board). (Ord. 1203,
10-10-1990)
   (B)   Members; Officers: There shall be an election by all the members of
the Midlothian fire department to elect seven (7) members to the foreign fire
insurance board.
   (C)   Election:
      1.   The first election shall take place before December 1, 1990. Any
member elected at the first election shall serve up to and including April 30,
1992. The term of each member elected in April of 1992 shall be for one year.
Starting with the election in April 1993, the term of each member elected shall
be for two (2) years.
      2.   All members of the fire department shall be eligible to be elected
as officers of the foreign fire insurance board.
      3.   After the election of the seven (7) members to the insurance board,
those members shall then elect the following officers: president, vice
president, secretary and treasurer, whose duties and powers are set forth
below. (Ord. 1796, 7-11-2012)
   (D)   Duties And Powers:
      1.   President: The president shall preside at all meetings of the
officers. The president shall have such other powers as he may be given from
time to time by action of the village board of trustees, consistent with the
Illinois municipal code.
      2.   Vice President: The vice president shall carry out the duties of the
president during the absence or inability of the president to perform such
duties and shall carry out such other functions as are assigned from time to
time by the insurance board president or the village board of trustees.
      3.   Secretary: The secretary shall take minutes at any and all meetings
of the officers. The secretary shall keep these minutes in a manner identical
to the manner in which village board minutes are kept. The secretary shall also
perform any other duties and functions as are assigned from time to time by the
insurance board president or the village board of trustees. (Ord. 1203, 10-10-
1990)
      4.   Treasurer:
         (a)   The officers of the fire department foreign fire insurance board
shall develop and maintain a list of those items that the board feels are
appropriate expenditures under this section. All the monies paid to the
municipal treasury as provided in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1 shall
be set apart and shall be appropriated annually by the corporate authorities to
the department foreign fire insurance board, and the treasurer of the
department foreign fire insurance board shall receive the appropriated money
and shall pay out the money upon the order of the department of foreign fire
insurance board for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department;
         (b)   The treasurer shall maintain, on the same fiscal year as the
village, the financial books and records of the foreign fire insurance board;
         (c)   The treasurer shall provide, on or before April 30 of each
calendar year, a written statement indicating the amounts to be appropriated by
the village board pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-2, which
shall be based upon expected revenues to be generated in the upcoming fiscal
year which starts on May 1 of each calendar year;
         (d)   The treasurer shall perform all duties incident to the office of
treasurer and such other duties as from time to time may be assigned to him/her
by the insurance board president or the village board of trustees;
         (e)   The treasurer of the foreign fire insurance board shall give a
sufficient bond to the village. This bond shall be approved by the village
president, conditioned upon the faithful performance by the treasurer of his or
her duties under this section, the rules and regulations provided herein and
the Illinois municipal code. The cost of said bond shall be paid from the funds
collected from the foreign fire insurance company fees. (Ord. 1705, 9-23-2009)
   (E)   Rules And Regulations: The officers shall make all needful rules and
regulations with respect to the management of the foreign fire insurance board.
All such rules and regulations promulgated by the foreign fire insurance board
officers must be passed by the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the
then presiding officers. All rules and regulations promulgated by the foreign
fire insurance board officers must be approved by the village board of trustees
in the same manner as a village ordinance must be passed. (Ord. 1796, 7-11-
2012)
   (F)   Budget:
      1.   Preliminary Budget: By March of each year the foreign fire insurance
board officers shall approve a preliminary budget for the expenditure of the
foreign fire insurance company fees.
      2.   Final Budget: The foreign fire insurance board officers shall, by
May 1 of each year, adopt a final budget for the collection and payment of the
foreign fire insurance company fees. The final budget shall be approved by the
village board of trustees in the same fashion as any other regular village
ordinance. The village board shall appropriate annually to the department
foreign fire insurance board all the funds paid to the village treasurer per 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-10-1.
      3.   Budget Amendments: The foreign fire insurance board budget referred
to in subsection (F)2 of this section may be amended at any time by the
unanimous vote of the foreign fire insurance board officers and a majority vote
of the village board of trustees.
   (G)   Annual Audit: The foreign fire insurance board officers shall provide
to the village board an annual audit of the financial affairs of the foreign
fire insurance board to be made by a certified public accountant at the end of
each fiscal year in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards. As
part of the annual municipal audit, these funds shall be audited to verify that
the foreign fire insurance board purchases are for maintenance, use, and
benefit of the department. The annual report shall be delivered to the village
president and each village trustee. Said audit shall be paid for from the funds
collected from the foreign fire insurance company fees. (Ord. 1366, 9-27-1995)
3-2-24: SPILLER PAY:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
   COSTS: All expenses incurred by the village of Midlothian or its fire
department or any other public agency assisting the village of Midlothian or
its fire department as a result of any removal or remedial action.
   FACILITY: Any building, structure, installation, equipment, pipe or
pipeline, including, but not limited to, any pipe into a sewer or publicly
owned treatment works, well, pond, lagoon, impoundment, ditch, landfill,
storage container, tank, motor vehicle, truck trailer, rolling stock or
aircraft. Also, any site or area where a hazardous material has been deposited,
stored, disposed of, abandoned, placed or otherwise come to be located.
   HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, substance or mixture of materials or
substances which are toxic, flammable, corrosive, explosive, carcinogenic or
radioactive including, but not limited to, any substance or material which is
designated a hazardous material pursuant to the "hazardous materials
transportation act" (49 USCA, section 1801 et seq.) in a quantity and form
which may pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health,
property or the environment when improperly released, treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
   MUTUAL AID: Any action taken by Midlothian fire department or any other
public agency pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement, including, but not
limited to, the district II mutual aid agreement.
   PERSON: Any individual, business, firm, partnership, corporation,
association, trust, estate, joint venture or other legal entity, or their legal
representative, agent or assign.
   RELEASE: Any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, escaping,
emptying, discharging, injecting, leaching, dumping or disposing of a hazardous
material into or on any land, air, water, well, stream, sewer or pipe so that
such hazardous material or any constituent thereof may enter the environment.
   REMEDIAL ACTION: Any action consistent with permanent remedy taken instead
of, or in addition to, removal actions in the event of a release or threatened
release of a hazardous material into the environment, to prevent or minimize
the release of hazardous materials so that they do not migrate to cause a
substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or the
environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, such actions at the
location of the release as storage, confinement, perimeter protection using
dikes, trenches or ditches, clay cover, neutralization, cleanup of released
hazardous materials or contaminated materials, recycling or reuse, diversion,
destruction, segregation of reactive wastes, repair or replacement of leaking
containers, collection of leachate and runoff, on site treatment or
incineration, provision of alternate water supplies, and any monitoring
reasonably required to assure that such actions protect the public health and
welfare and the environment.
   REMOVAL: The cleanup or removal of released hazardous materials from the
environment, such actions as may be necessary or appropriate to monitor,
assess, and evaluate the release or threat of release of hazardous materials,
the disposal of removed material, or the taking of such action as may be
necessary to prevent, minimize, or mitigate damage to the public health or
welfare of the environment. The term includes, but is not limited to, security
fencing, provision of alternative water supplies, and temporary evacuation of
threatened individuals.
RESPONSE: Any removal or remedial action.
   (B)   Prohibited Acts: No person shall cause, threaten or allow the release
of hazardous materials into the environment unless such release is in
accordance with an appropriate permit granted by the Illinois environmental
protection agency or other state or federal agency having primary jurisdiction
over the release, and such release is in such place and manner as will not
create a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, property or
the environment.
   (C)   Response Authority:
      1.   The fire chief or his authorized representative shall have authority
to respond to any release or threatened release of hazardous materials within
the territory of the village or affecting the public water supply, wells or
sewage treatment works located within the village or pursuant to any lawful
intergovernmental agreement of which the village or its fire department is a
party. This authority includes, but is not limited to, remedial action and
removal.
      2.   The fire chief shall have primary authority to respond to any
release or threatened release of hazardous materials as described above. The
fire chief shall report any release or threatened release of hazardous
materials to all appropriate federal, state and local public health, safety and
emergency agencies within twenty four (24) hours of any substantial release of
hazardous materials. The fire chief shall relinquish his response authority at
such time, if any, as the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release has assumed responsibility for response to the release or threatened
release.
      3.   The fire chief, during such time as response authority is vested in
him, shall be authorized to utilize all district personnel and equipment, and
he may, in his sole discretion, take such remedial or removal action as he may
deem necessary or appropriate to respond to the release or threatened release
of hazardous material.
      4.   All responding personnel shall cooperate with and operate under the
direction of the fire chief or other person then exercising response authority
under this section until such time as the person exercising such response
authority has determined that the response is complete or responsibility for
response is assumed by the federal, state or local public health, safety or
emergency agency having primary jurisdiction over the release or threatened
release.
      5.   The person exercising response authority under this section shall
coordinate and/or cooperate with other federal, state or local public health,
safety or emergency agencies involved in response to the release or threatened
release of hazardous materials.
   (D)   Liability For Costs: Notwithstanding any other provision or rule of
law, and subject only to the defenses set forth in subsection (E) of this
section, the following persons shall be jointly and severally liable for all
costs of removal and remedial action incurred by the village or its fire
department as a result of a release or threatened release of a hazardous
material:
      1.   The owner and operator of a facility or vessel from which there is a
release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous material.
      2.   Any person who, at the time of disposal, transport, storage or
treatment of a hazardous material, owned or operated the facility or vessel
used for such disposal, transport, treatment or storage from which there was a
release or substantial threat of a release of any such hazardous material.
      3.   Any person who by contract, agreement or otherwise has arranged with
another party or entity for transport, storage, disposal or treatment of
hazardous materials owned, controlled or possessed by such person at a facility
owned or operated by another party or entity from which facility there is a
release or substantial threat of a release of such hazardous materials.
      4.   Any person who accepts or accepted any hazardous materials for
transport to disposal, storage or treatment facilities from which there is a
release or a substantial threat of release of such hazardous substances.
   (E)   Defenses: There shall be no liability under subsection (D) of this
section for a person otherwise liable who can establish by a preponderance of
the evidence that the release or substantial threat of release of a hazardous
material and the damages resulting therefrom were caused solely by:
      1.   An act of nature over which he or she had no control;
      2.   An act of war; or
      3.   Any combination of the foregoing.
   (F)   Costs And Penalties:
      1.   Any person who is liable for the release or threatened release of a
hazardous material who fails without sufficient cause to pay for or provide
removal or remedial action upon or in accordance with a notice and request of
the village or its fire department, or in accordance with any order of any
court having jurisdiction on the matter, shall be liable to the village for any
costs incurred by the village or its fire department as a result of such
failure to provide or take such removal or remedial action, together with the
cost of any removal or remedial action taken by the village or its fire
department in accordance with this section, and all attorney fees and related
legal costs incurred in connection therewith.
      2.   In addition, any such person shall be guilty of a violation of this
section and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed for each day on which a violation occurs or
continues. Where such violation is found to be the result of wilful and/or
wanton conduct or gross negligence, or the person committing such violation
attempts to evade responsibility hereunder by leaving the scene of the
occurrence or by other means, that person shall be subject to a fine as
provided for above or a fine in an amount equal to three (3) times the costs,
including attorney fees and legal costs, for which it is liable under
subsection (F)1 of this section, whichever is greater.
      3.   Charges for removal or remedial action when rendered by the village
or its fire department or any other agency rendering mutual aid shall be as
follows:
         (a)   The reasonable cost of each vehicle responding as determined by
the responding agency, but in no case less than seventy five dollars ($75.00)
per hour per vehicle, and
         (b)   The cost of all personnel including any overtime cost to the
village or to any responding agency, incurred as a result of the removal or
remedial action, and
         (c)   The cost of all materials and equipment used, expended,
depleted, destroyed or removed from service in accordance with federal, state
or local ordinance as a result of the mitigation or containment operations if
or at the request of the village or its fire department or any responding
agency.
         (d)   The cost of services and/or goods provided by a private or
public entity which are used, expired, depleted, or destroyed as a result of
the response at the request of the village or its fire department or any
responding agency. (Ord. 1421, 8-13-1997)
3-2-25: ADOPTION OF OCCUPATIONAL HEALTH AND SAFETY PROGRAM FOR THE MIDLOTHIAN
FIRE DEPARTMENT:
The village, for the purpose of prescribing minimum requirements for the
occupational health and safety program as it relates to the fire department,
states that a certain program known as "village of Midlothian, Midlothian fire
department, occupational health and safety program, December 1994" including
all national fire protection association (NFPA) standards referred to in
appendix C and as modified by said appendix, and any subsequent amendments
thereto, be and the same are hereby adopted as the occupational health and
safety program for the fire department. For thirty (30) days previous to the
passage of this section, three (3) copies of said program and appendices have
been filed with and are currently on file with the village clerk. The program
and appendices and the NFPA standards referred to in the appendices are hereby
adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the
date on which this amendment shall take effect, the program and any subsequent
amendments thereto shall be in full force and effect within the fire
department. (Ord. 1347, 1-11-1995)
3-2-26: KNOX BOX REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Knox Boxes Required: All properties, businesses or multi- family
building of five (5) units or more or two (2) floors or more, where common ways
(hallways) are encountered or as prescribed by the fire prevention bureau,
shall be required to have knox boxes.
   (B)   Specifications: All knox boxes shall be UL listing and shall be
compatible with existing fire department equipment and current master keys to
keep current uniformity, as approved by the fire department.
   (C)   Contents: All knox boxes shall contain keys for the following:
      1.   All entrance/exit doors, whether on the exterior or the interior of
the building;
      2.   Mechanical and electrical rooms;
      3.   Closet storage rooms;
      4.   Fire alarm control panels;
      5.   Elevator controls (where applicable); and
      6.   Any other keys required by the fire prevention bureau.
   (D)   Compliance Of Existing And New Buildings: Existing properties and
buildings must comply with the provisions of this section within twelve (12)
months from the date of enactment of this section. All newly constructed
buildings or buildings under construction must comply with the provisions of
this section immediately.
   (E)   Current Key Required: The owner, tenant or organization in control of
a building shall have current keys placed in the knox box by the fire
department upon any change of locks in the building or ownership of the
premises.
   (F)   Violation; Penalty:
      1.   Whoever violates any of the provisions or if they do not comply with
this section, they shall be fined one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for the
first offense and three hundred dollars ($300.00) for the second offense. The
second offense effective after reasonable time given to comply. For all
subsequent offenses the fine shall be seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
      2.   Whoever fails to place the required keys inside his or her knox box
or changes locks without notification to the department shall be fined one
hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and three hundred dollars
($300.00) for all subsequent offenses. (Ord. 1586, 2-25-2004)
3-2-27: AMBULANCE SERVICE AND FEES:
   (A)   General: The Village of Midlothian Fire Department is hereby
authorized to operate an emergency service providing Basic Life Support
Services ("BLS") and Advanced Life Support Services ("ALS") and to impose and
collect fees for certain services provided to those persons receiving said BLS
and/or ALS services from the Village of Midlothian Fire Department.
   (B)   Fees: The Village of Midlothian shall charge the fees for BLS Services
as provided from time to time by the Village Board which shall be published by
the Village Clerk and made readily available to the public for the following
categories of service:
      1.   BLS Services:
         Resident Flat Rate
         Non-Resident Flat Rate
         Mileage at per mile rate
      2.   ALS I Services:
         Resident Flat Rate
         Non-Resident Flat Rate
         Mileage at per mile rate
      3.   ALS II Services:
         Resident Flat Rate
         Non-Resident Flat Rate
         Mileage at per mile rate
   (C)   Discretion: It shall be in the sole discretion and best judgement of
the persons providing BLS and/or ALS services to determine the medical facility
to transport the patient(s) receiving aid services.
   (D)   Charges: Each resident or non-resident refusing transport but
requiring on scene BLS or ALS services shall be charged the applicable BLS and
ALS fee as set forth from time to time by the Village Board in the following
circumstances without any charge for mileage:
   (E)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall be applicable:
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS) SERVICES: An advanced level of pre-hospital and
inter-hospital emergency care and non-emergency medical care that includes
basic life support care, cardiac monitoring, cardiac defibrillation,
electrocardiography, intravenous therapy, administration of medications, drugs
and solutions, use of adjunctive medical devices, trauma care, and other
authorized techniques and procedures, as provided in rules adopted by the
Illinois Department of Public Health pursuant to the Emergency Medical Systems
Act 1 .
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT SERVICE, LEVEL I (ALS I): The provision of ALS
services and/or assessment at a level below that specified for ALS II services
described below.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT SERVICE, LEVEL II (ALS II): The provision of ALS
service and/or assessment with treatment including the administration of three
(3) or more different medications or the provision of at least one of the
following ALS procedures:
         Cardiac pacing
         Central venous line insertion
         Chest decompression
         Endotracheal intubation
         Intraosseous line insertion
         Manual defibrillation/cardioversion
         Surgical airway
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS) SERVICES: A basic level of pre- hospital and inter-
hospital, emergency care and non-emergency medical care that includes airway
management, cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), control of shock and bleeding
and splinting of fractures, as provided in rules adopted by the Illinois
Department of Public Health pursuant to the Emergency Medical Systems Act 2 .
   MILEAGE: A fee for each mile, or portion thereof, that an ambulance travels
when transporting a patient in need of medical care to a hospital or other care
providing facility.
   RESIDENT: A person whose primary, regular and fixed nighttime place of abode
is within the corporate limits of the Village of Midlothian. (Ord. 1960, 7-26-
2017; amd. Ord. 2125, 7-26-2023)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
2 2. 210 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
3-2-28: FIRE SERVICE AND FEE MITIGATION RATES:
   (A)   General: The Village hereby establishes cost mitigation rates for the
deployment of certain emergency services by the Fire Department of the Village
for services provided and/or rendered, including the provision of personnel,
supplies and equipment to the scene of motor vehicle incidents and other
emergency incidents as provided below, which are based on the actual costs of
the services and those costs that are usual, customary and reasonable ("UCR")
and set by the Village Board.
   (B)   The Village of Midlothian shall charge the rates as set and amended
from time to time by the Village Board which shall be published by the Village
Clerk and made readily available to the public for the following categories of
service:
      1.   Motor Vehicle Incidents: Shall apply for the provision of technical
services to residents and nonresidents at the levels indicated for response to
motor vehicle incidents:
         Level 1: This service includes hazardous materials assessment, scene
stabilization and basic response services.
         Level 2: Includes level 1 services, cleanup and material use
(sorbents) for hazardous fluid cleanup and disposal. Billing at this level will
occur if the Fire Department must clean up any gasoline or other automotive
fluids that are spilled as a result of the accident/incident.
         Level 3: Relating to a car fire, provision of scene safety, fire
suppression, breathing air, rescue tools, hose, tip use, foam, exposure
protection and cleanup of gasoline or other automotive fluids that are spilled
as a result of the accident/incident.
         Level 4: Includes level 1 and 2 services as well as extrication of
occupant (heavy rescue tools, ropes, airbags, cribbing, etc.). Billing at this
level will occur if the Fire Department is required to free/remove anyone from
the vehicle(s) using any powered equipment. Billing at this level will not
occur if the person to be extricated is unconscious or unable to move and the
Fire Department is able to open a door to the vehicle to access and safely
remove the person.
      2.   Hazardous Materials: The following rate categories shall apply for
the provision of technical services to residents and nonresidents at the levels
indicated for responses involving hazardous materials:
         Level 1: Basic response includes engine response, first responder
assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations, setup and command.
         Level 2: Intermediate response includes level 1 services, HAZMAT
certified team and appropriate equipment, level A or B suit donning, breathing
air and detection equipment, and setup and removal of decon center as
necessary.
      Level 3: Advanced response includes provisions of level 1 and level 2
services as well as robot deployment, recovery and identification of material,
disposal and environmental cleanup. Also includes any disposal rates for
contaminated equipment and material used at scene. This level includes three
(3) hours of on scene time. Any hour in excess of three (3) hours shall be
billed at the published rate per hour for each HAZMAT team present. This
additional amount shall be charged in fifteen (15) minute increments.
      3.   Pipeline Incidents/Power Line Incidents: The published hourly rate
shall apply for technical services provided to residents and nonresidents for
responding to incidents involving all of the following: gas, sewer, septic to
sewer, water pipelines and power lines:
         Level 1: Provision of basic response services including engine
response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations,
first responder setup and command. This charge also includes inspection without
damage or breakage.
         Level 2: Includes provision of level 1 services as well as HAZMAT
certified team and appropriate equipment, level A or B suit donning, breathing
air, detection equipment and the supervision and/or assisting of pipeline
repair.
         Level 3: Itemized claim charge: Advanced response includes provisions
of levels 1 and 2 as well as supervision and/or assisting of intermediate to
major pipeline damage, setup and removal of decon center, detection, recovery
and identification of material, disposal and environmental cleanup.
      4.   Fire Investigation Team: Fire investigation services will be charged
at the published hourly rate. These services include scene safety,
investigation, source identification, K-9/arson dog unit, identification
equipment, mobile detection equipment and fire report. For purposes of this
charge, the claim shall begin when the fire investigator or investigation team
responds to the incident. This charge is limited to logged time only. This fee
will only be levied if it is determined that fire investigation is necessary
based upon the facts and circumstances of the fire in question.
      5.   Fires: Fire suppression services will be charged at the published
hourly rates, per incident, per engine and per truck. This service shall
include scene safety, investigation and fire/hazard control. For purposes of
this charge, the claim shall begin when the Village Fire Department responds to
the incident and this charge is only for logged time. This charge is only
assessed against property owner's properties in an unincorporated area without
a fire contract.
      6.   Water Incidents: The following rates shall apply for the provision
of technical services to residents and nonresidents at the levels indicated for
response to water incidents:
         Level 1: Will be charged a flat fee plus the published hourly rates
per rescue person. Provision of basic response services including engine
response, first responder assignment, perimeter establishment, evacuations,
first responder setup and command, scene safety and investigation (including
possible patient contact and hazard control).
         Level 2: Will be charged a flat fee plus the published hourly rates,
per rescue person. Intermediate response includes provision of level 1 services
as well as cleanup and material used (sorbents), minor hazardous cleanup and
disposal. Billing will occur at this level if the Fire Department of the
Village must clean up small amounts of gasoline or other fluids that are
spilled as a result of the incident.
         Level 3: Will be charged a flat fee plus the published hourly rates,
per rescue person and per HAZMAT team member. Advanced response includes
provisions of level 1 and 2 services as well as DART activation, donning
breathing apparatus, detection equipment, setup and removal of decon center,
recovery and identification of material, and disposal and environmental
cleanup. Also includes any disposal rates of contaminated equipment and
material used at scene.
         Level 4: Itemized response. In the case of an unusual incident, the
Fire Department may bill each incident as an independent incident with actual
costs and/or customary mitigation rates using itemized rates deemed usual,
customary and reasonable (UCR). Such incidents will be billed using itemized
amounts for each trained rescue person plus rescue products and equipment used.
      7.   Special Rescue: Will be charged a minimum flat fee plus the
published hourly rates per rescue person. Each incident will be billed in
accordance with actual costs and/or customary mitigation rates using itemized
rates deemed usual, customary and reasonable ("UCR"), subject to the minimum
amounts described above. Such incidents will be billed using itemized amounts
for each apparatus and each trained rescue person per hour, plus rescue
products and equipment used.
      8.   Fire Chief Response To Incident: For any incident for which a
response attended to by the fire chief, will be charged the published hourly
rate. This will be charged when the fire chief directly responds to an
incident, including the setup of command and providing direction of the
operations, safety and administration of the incident.
      9.   Equipment Charges: The charges for equipment used for the services
identified in this section, including specialized rescue services to the extent
the same is not limited by law, may include the published hourly rates for:
         (a)   Engine.
         (b)   Truck/squad.
         (c)   Boat rescue.
         (d)   Other/miscellaneous equipment.
   (C)   Implementation, Procedures, Waiver and Remedies:
      1.   The mitigation rates above are flat fees, except as otherwise
identified, and have been determined to be usual, customary and reasonable for
the incident responses listed. The mitigation rates were determined by
itemizing costs for a typical incident (from the time a fire apparatus leaves
the station until it returns to the station) and are based on the actual costs,
using amortized schedules for apparatus (including useful life, equipment,
repairs and maintenance) and labor rates (based upon an average department's
"actual personnel expense", and not simply a firefighter's basic wage). The
actual personnel expense includes costs such as wages, retirement, benefits,
workers' compensation, insurance, etc. When a claim is submitted, it will be
itemized and based on the actual services provided in accordance with the above
rates.
      2.   The mitigation rates shall represent an additional cost of the claim
for damages of the vehicles, property and/or injuries, and shall be filed with
the insurance carrier of the owner of the vehicle, owner of the property or the
responsible party/parties as set forth above. In some circumstances, the
responsible party will be billed directly. In all cases, however, the fire
department will endeavor to obtain insurance coverage as a primary mitigation
source. The fire department will exhaust all avenues related to insurance
coverage, and will only charge individuals as a last line of defense when all
insurance companies involved deny the claim(s).
      3.   The fees imposed by this section may be reduced or waived upon
recommendation by the fire chief and approval by the village president in cases
where in their discretion it is deemed to be in the best interests of the
village or when payment of the fee would be an undue hardship or the person
receiving said services is incapable of paying said fees. Under no
circumstances, however, shall any party have the ability to require the fire
chief or village president to make such a discretionary determination.
      4.   The village board may make rules or regulations and from time to
time may amend, revoke or add rules and regulations as they may deem necessary
or expedient in respect to billing for services under this section and the
collection of rates as established herein.
      5.   Any person or entity that refuses to pay or fails to pay charges
billed will be deemed to have violated this section. The village may pursue all
remedies at law and equity to recover service charges due and owing, including
the use of the services of a collection agency. (Ord. 1862, 2-12-2014; amd.
Ord. 2125, 7-26-2023)
3-2-29: FIRE ALARM RESPONSE AND FEES:
   (A)   Purpose:
      1.   The purpose of this section is to encourage owners and fire alarm
businesses to properly use and maintain the operational effectiveness of fire
alarm systems in order to improve the reliability of fire alarm systems and
reduce or eliminate false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms.
      2.   This section governs fire alarm systems intended to summon fire
department personnel, and requires registration, assessment of fees for
excessive false fire alarms and nuisance fire alarms, and provides procedures
for repeat offenders.
   (B)   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and terms
shall have the following meanings:
   ADOPTED CODE(S): Code adopted by the jurisdiction and in the absence of
adopted code, the National Fire Protection Association national fire alarm code
72 (NFPA 72) and the National Fire Protection Association life safety code 101
(NFPA 101).
   ALARM INITIATING DEVICE: A device that is designed to respond either
manually or automatically to smoke, fire, or activation of a fire suppression
system.
   ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL: The fire chief or his designated representative.
   FALSE FIRE ALARM: The activation of any fire alarm system which results in a
response by the fire department and which is caused by the negligence or
intentional misuse of the fire alarm system by the owner, its employees, agents
or any other activation of a fire alarm system not caused by heat, smoke or
fire, exclusive of a nuisance fire alarm.
   FEE: The assessment of a monetary charge payable to the village in order to
defray the expenses of responding to a false fire alarm or nuisance fire alarm.
   FIRE ALARM ACTIVATION REPORT: A document issued by the enforcement official
indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a fire alarm
activation due to fire, a nuisance fire alarm, or a false fire alarm.
   FIRE ALARM BUSINESS: Any individual, partnership, corporation or other
entity that is appropriately licensed in the state/jurisdiction and installs,
causes to be installed, permits to be installed, alters, maintains, repairs,
replaces or services (including runner services) any fire alarm system.
   FIRE ALARM SYSTEM: A system or portion of a combination system consisting of
components and circuits arranged to monitor and/or exterior annunciate the
status of a fire alarm or supervisory signal initiating devices and to initiate
the appropriate response to those signals.
   FIRE WATCH: An enforcement official approved person or persons assigned to
the premises for the purpose of protecting the occupants from fire or similar
emergencies. A fire watch may involve at least some special action beyond
normal staffing, such as assigning an additional security guard(s) to walk the
premises, who has been specially trained in fire prevention and in the use of
fire extinguishers, in notifying the fire department, in sounding the fire
alarm system located on the premises, and in understanding the particular fire
safety situation.
   MONITORED SYSTEM: The process by which a fire alarm business receives
signals from a fire alarm system and notifies emergency forces.
   NUISANCE FIRE ALARM: The activation of any fire alarm system, which results
in a response by the fire department, caused by mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, lack of proper maintenance or any other
response for which the fire department personnel are unable to determine the
apparent cause of the alarm activation.
   OWNER: Any person who owns the premises in which a fire alarm system is
installed or the person or persons who lease, operate, occupy or manage the
premises.
   PREMISES: Any building, structure or combination of buildings and structures
which serve as dwelling units such as single-family, multi-family or any other
area within a building, structure or combination thereof which is used for any
purpose, wherein a fire alarm system is installed.
   QUALIFIED FIRE ALARM TECHNICIAN: Any person who inspects, installs, repairs
or performs maintenance on fire alarm systems. This person shall be: 1) factory
trained and certified; 2) National Institute Of Certification In Engineering
Technologies (NICET) fire alarm level II certified; or 3) licensed or certified
by state or local authority.
   (C)   Inspection, Testing And Maintenance:
      1.   The owner shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are inspected and
tested at least once per year in accordance with adopted codes.
      2.   The owner shall ensure that all fire alarm systems are periodically
maintained per manufacturer specifications and adopted codes.
   (D)   Fire Alarm Activation; Response:
      1.   The owner shall be responsible for the activation of a fire alarm
system.
      2.   A response to the activation of a fire alarm system shall result
when any officer or member of the fire department is dispatched to the premises
where the fire alarm system has been activated.
         (a)   At the time of response, the enforcement official shall notify
any person identified in the registration required pursuant to title 4, chapter
15 of this code of the activation of the fire alarm system and shall require
such person to respond to the premises.
         (b)   In the event the fire alarm system is a monitored system, it is
the responsibility of the company monitoring the fire alarm system to notify
any person identified in the registration at the request of the enforcement
official.
         (c)   In the event the household fire alarm system is a monitored
system, it is the responsibility of the fire alarm business to offer the owner
the option to verify the fire alarm signal before dispatch, as allowed by
adopted code.
         (d)   In the event the household fire alarm system is a monitored
system, it is the responsibility of the fire alarm business to forward
cancellation of a fire alarm signal to the fire department.
      3.   The officer or member of the fire department who responded to said
premises shall serve the owner or authorized representative with a fire alarm
activation report.
   (E)   Nuisance Fire Alarms:
      1.   In the event the activation of a fire alarm system is deemed by the
enforcement official to be a nuisance fire alarm, the owner shall be served
with a fire alarm activation report by an officer or member of the fire
department, indicating that the activation was deemed to be the result of a
nuisance fire alarm.
      2.   This shall require the owner to return a completed report of
service/repair within fifteen (15) days of receipt of the fire alarm activation
report to verify, to the reasonable satisfaction of the enforcement official,
that:
         (a)   The fire alarm system has actually been examined by a qualified
fire alarm technician; and
         (b)   A bona fide attempt has been made to identify and correct any
defect of design, installation or operation of the fire alarm system which was
identifiable as the cause of the nuisance fire alarm.
      3.   Failure to return a report of service/repair within said fifteen
(15) day period, which is reasonably satisfactory to the enforcement official,
shall result in assessment against the owner of a fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00) in addition to any fees for the false fire alarm.
   (F)   Grace Period:
      1.   The fee provisions of this section shall not apply to any newly
installed fire alarm system for a period of forty five (45) days from the date
of installation, but shall apply from and after the expiration of said forty
five (45) day period.
   (G)   Fee Schedule:
      1.   One false alarm within twelve (12) months in a calendar year tracked
by the fire department or billing company is free of charge.
      2.   The second false alarm in a twelve (12) month calendar year will be
billed at one hundred dollars ($100.00).
      3.   The third false alarm in a twelve (12) month calendar year will be
billed at two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      4.   Any subsequent false alarms to the third false alarm within a twelve
(12) month calendar year will be billed at three hundred dollars ($300.00) per
event not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per calendar day.
   (H)   Collection:
      1.   The owner and lessee of any alarmed premises shall be jointly and
severally responsible to pay the fees for each occasion on which the fire
department responds to a false alarm from an alarmed premises.
      2.   The fire department shall report, monthly, a list of false alarms
identifying the alarmed premises and the responsible owners and lessees. The
treasurer or billing services contracted by the village shall bill each
responsible owner and lessee for the amounts due in accordance with the
established schedule of fees. All amounts billed by the village treasurer/
billing service under this section shall be due within thirty (30) days after
each billing. The village is authorized to prosecute collection procedures for
any overdue amounts. (Ord. 1868, 5-14-2014)
3-2-30: FIRE DEPARTMENT VEHICLE REPLACEMENT FUND:
   (A)   Creation: A fund, hereinafter called the "fire department vehicle
replacement fund", is hereby created. The fire department vehicle replacement
fund shall be separately maintained by the village for the purposes set forth
herein.
   (B)   Funding: The fire department vehicle replacement fund shall be funded
solely by the collection of fees by the village for the provision of fire and
ambulance services as set forth in sections 3-2-27 and 3-2-28 of this chapter.
The village shall cause the fees collected pursuant to sections 3-2-27 and 3-2-
28 of this chapter each month to be placed into the fire department vehicle
replacement fund up to a maximum contribution of ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) monthly. Any fees collected pursuant to sections 3-2-27 and 3-2-28
of this chapter in excess of the ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) monthly
maximum contribution shall be placed into the village corporate fund.
   (C)   Use: The funds contained in the fire department vehicle replacement
fund shall be used to pay for the purchase or lease costs incurred for the
replacement of fire department vehicles which have reached or exceeded their
level of economic usefulness or to pay for the purchase or lease costs incurred
for the acquisition of additional vehicles deemed necessary for the operation
of and use by the village fire department.
   (D)   Accumulations: Monies in the fire department vehicle replacement fund
may be accumulated from year to year beyond that which may be expended in any
particular fiscal year. All interest earned on the investment of monies in the
fire department vehicle replacement fund shall become part of the fire
department vehicle replacement fund.
   (E)   No Restriction: The creation of the fire department village
replacement fund shall not limit or restrict the village's authority to
otherwise purchase vehicles for the fire department as deemed necessary and in
conformity with state and local law. (Ord. 1896, 7-8-2015)
CHAPTER 3
PUBLIC WORKS, WATER DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
3-3-1: Department Of Public Works
3-3-2: Jurisdiction Of Department Of Public Works
3-3-3: Duties Of Superintendent
3-3-4: Monthly Report Of Superintendent
3-3-5: Annual Report Of Superintendent
3-3-6: Employees Of Department
3-3-7: Office Hours
3-3-8: Records Of Account
3-3-9: Bills
3-3-10: Discontinuance Of Service
3-3-11: Deferred Payment Agreements
3-3-12: Liability Of Owner Or Occupant
3-3-13: Delinquent Bills; Liens Against Real Estate
3-3-14: Connections With Water System
3-3-15: Connections With Sewer System
3-3-16: Turning Water On; Charge; Deposit
3-3-17: Tapping Mains
3-3-18: Rates; Combined Waterworks And Sewerage System
3-3-19: Obstructing Hydrant; Other Offenses
3-3-20: Care Of Meters
3-3-21: Meter Failure
3-3-22: Interruption Of Service; Village Not Liable
3-3-23: Access To Premises
3-3-24: Opening Streets
3-3-25: Pipes Between Main And Meter; Regulations
3-3-26: Valves In Connections
3-3-27: Approval Of Service Pipes And Meters
3-3-28: Extraordinary Use; Rates
3-3-29: Rules, Regulations For Takers And Plumbers
3-3-30: Owner To Notify Of Property Lease
3-3-31: Grease Traps; Catch Basins
3-3-32: Restrictions On Lawn Sprinkling And Other Water Uses
3-3-33: Water Main Cross Connection Control
3-3-34: Water Certification Of Payment Fee
3-3-35: Use Of Groundwater As Potable Water Supply Prohibited
3-3-1: DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
There is hereby established an executive department of the village to be known
as the department of public works. Said department shall be under the general
supervision of the superintendent of public works, and said department shall
consist of the superintendent and such other officers, employees and workers as
may from time to time be provided. The president is hereby authorized to
appoint the superintendent of public works for a term of one year by and with
the advice and consent of the board of trustees. There is hereby created the
office of assistant superintendent of public works. The duties of the assistant
superintendent shall be to act in place and instead of the superintendent of
public works in the event of his absence or inability to act. He shall assist
the superintendent in the exercise of all his duties and shall perform such
other duties as may be assigned to him by the superintendent. The duties and
salary of said director and assistant of public works shall be as set forth
from time to time by the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-
2025)
3-3-2: JJURISDICTION OF DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS:
The department of public works shall have two (2) sections. Number 1, the water
department which shall have supervision, management and control of the
maintenance, enlargement and operation of the combined waterworks and sewer
system, the securing and provision of water, and all matters and things
connected with the operation, maintenance and extension of the waterworks
system and the selling of water therefrom, and preserving the property
belonging thereto, and all matters connected with the operation of the sewer
system and maintenance and extension thereof. Number 2, the street department
which shall have special charge of the maintenance of streets, sidewalks and
public ways of the village and of the improvements and repair thereof, except
where such repair or improvement of streets, sidewalks and public ways is to be
wholly or in part, paid for by special assessment, also of the cleaning of
streets and removal of dirt, garbage, refuse and water therefrom. (Ord. 2169,
4-23-2025)
3-3-3: DUTIES OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent of the water department, subject to the general direction of
the president and board of trustees shall have the general direction and
control of the water department and shall see that the object and purposes
thereof are carried out, and that the waterworks system and sewer system are
conducted on an economical, businesslike basis and for this purpose it shall be
the duty of the superintendent and all of the officers, employees and workers
of the department to enforce all the provisions of this chapter and to observe
and obey and carry out the orders and directions of the president and board of
trustees, and it shall be the further duty of the superintendent to see that
such orders and directions are faithfully observed, carried out and obeyed. The
superintendent shall, when requested by the president and board of trustees,
report upon the condition of the department and the affairs thereof, and the
matters and things relating thereto. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-4: MONTHLY REPORT OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent shall prepare, or cause to be prepared, each month a full
and complete report of all activities, claims, salaries and expenses incurred
by the department in the discharge of its duties, which report shall be signed
by the superintendent and submitted to the president and board of trustees, and
the claims, salaries and expenses of the water department shall be paid upon
warrants drawn against the "water, sewer and street funds" in accordance with
the order of the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-5: ANNUAL REPORT OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent shall present to the president and board of trustees an
annual report each year including a detailed report of all transactions,
revenues, cost of repairs, maintenance, condition and management of the water
department for the preceding fiscal year, including a complete statement of the
financial condition and property interests of the department and any required
water quality reports. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-6: EMPLOYEES OF DEPARTMENT:
The superintendent shall submit to the president and board of trustees his
recommendation as to the employees necessary to be employed in and about the
department of public works and the compensation to be paid to non-bargaining
unit employees, the same shall be fixed by the president and board of trustees.
The president and board of trustees shall fix the compensation and terms of
employment for bargaining unit members by approval of lawfully negotiated
collective bargaining agreements. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-7: OFFICE HOURS:
The office of the department shall be open to the public as determined, from
time to time, by the president and/or village board. (Ord. 1821, 1-23-2013;
amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-8: RECORDS OF ACCOUNT:
The superintendent or his designee shall keep, or cause to be kept, full and
complete books and or electronic records of account showing the exact condition
of the financial affairs of the department and for that purpose shall establish
a complete and comprehensive system of recordkeeping regarding the same. The
system shall show how much sewer service and water each piece of property
consumes and the amount charged therefor. The superintendent shall also cause
to be made a complete and correct map or profile of all water and sewer mains
now or hereafter laid, showing their location, connections, valves, hydrants
and shutoffs, and all such records of account, maps and profiles shall be open
at all times for the inspection of the president and members of the village
board. It shall be the duty of the superintendent at the time each permit, as
herein required, is granted, to enter into a book and or electronic record
documentation of such permit showing the size of the connection, the size of
the meter and the amount of all charges and fees collected. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-
2025)
3-3-9: BILLS:
(A)   Bills; Preparation And Collection: Regular bills for water service and
other charges under this code shall be rendered to the person designated on
village records as soon as practicable, but in no event later than the tenth
day of the month following the most recent meter reading subject to each
billing cycle. Upon request, in connection with a sale or other transfer of the
premises or other change of person responsible for charges hereunder, the
village may make a special meter reading and render a special billing for water
services and other charges incurred up to the date of such meter reading.
Except as hereinafter provided, a bill for water usage shall be rendered for
each primary meter in accordance with the consumption registered thereon and in
accordance with section 3-3-16 of this chapter. Bills for buildings used for
multiple-family residence purposes or mixed business and residential uses which
have more than one primary meter (but not having separate meters for each
dwelling unit or use therein) shall be based upon the combined consumption
registered on the several meters except that separate bills shall be rendered
for each meter for which the number of dwelling units or uses served by such
meter can be determined from inspection of the plans for such building. All
billed accounts shall include a water infrastructure fee, which shall be set
from time to time by the president and board of trustees.
(B)   Billing Cycle: Residential water users up to a maximum of two (2) units
in a single building and commercial establishments, in the discretion of the
village board, may be billed monthly, every two (2) months, or quarterly.
(C)   Commercial Establishments And Apartments: Commercial establishments and
apartments other than as provided in subsection (C) of this section shall be
billed monthly.
(D)   Gross And Net Bills: The gross bills shall be computed by adding ten
percent (10%) to the total water, sewer, and garbage net charges. The bills
shall be mailed as soon as practicable, but in no event later than the fifth
day of the month following the end of a billing period. If the bill is paid
within twenty-one (21) days of the mailing, the net bill shall be paid. If the
bill is not paid within twenty-one (21) days of the mailing, then the gross
amount will be due. If the gross amount is not paid within thirty-five (35)
days of the mailing, a final disconnection notice may be mailed notifying the
consumer that water service will be turned off in accordance with subsection
(F) of this section. (Ord. 1901, 8-26-2015; amd. Ord. 2024, 4-24-2019)
(E)   Garbage Collection Charges: The village shall add to the water and sewer
bill a monthly charge as determined by section
8-2-12 of this code for garbage collection for each residential unit up to a
maximum of two (2) units. Commercial, industrial or business establishments and
multiple dwellings over two (2) units shall contract individually for garbage
collection. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-10: DISCONTINUANCE OF SERVICE:
(A)   Actions Causing Discontinuance: The village may discontinue service when
any customer pays a shutoff notice with an NSF check or fails to do any of the
following:
   1.   Correct the condition of waste, tampering or unauthorized use by a
notice issued under this code;
   2.   Make a deposit or increase a deposit as required by this Code;
   3.   Pay a past due bill owed to the village for the water service furnished
at the same or at another location;
   4.   Make payment in accordance with the terms of a deferred payment
agreement as described in this code;
   5.   Provide village representatives with access to the metering devices as
required by this code;
   6.   Provide village representatives with access or easements for the
purposes of inspecting, repairing, replacing or upgrading the potable water
pipes and fixtures as required by this code; or
   7.   Refrain from engaging in theft of services. (Ord. 1901, 8-26-2015)
(B)   Procedure:
   1.   Notice shall be mailed via first-class mail to the customer whose water
service may be discontinued. The notice shall inform the customer of the
payment or other action required to prevent discontinuance of service, the date
by which such payment or other action must be made (which date shall not be
less than ten (10) days from the date such notice is mailed; unless a shutoff
noticed bill balance was paid with a non-sufficient funds (NSF) check, then no
additional notice shall be required). The notice shall also include the charges
for disconnection and reconnection of the service and the person or department
with the authority to resolve disputes. (Ord. 2024, 4-24-2019)
   2.   Except as provided in subsection (F)2(c) of this section, water service
may be discontinued at the sole discretion of the village, without further
notice to the owner or occupants of the premises, in the event that the
customer has failed to correct the conditions specified in the written notice.
   3.   Water service shall not be discontinued to any building in which
multiple residential or commercial units are served through a common metering
device until the village has mailed, delivered or posted on the premises a
notice to all lessees or tenants, which notice shall comply with the
requirements of subsection (F)2(a) of this section.
   4.   Except for matters of safety, emergency maintenance and cooperation
with civil authorities, the village shall not:
      (a)   Disconnect water service within one hour before or during any time
during which the Village does not have customer service personnel available to
handle customer contact;
      (b)   Disconnect water service after four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on Monday
through Thursday unless village staff is able to take customer payment and
reconnect the customer the same day if the customer remedies the reason for
disconnection;
      (c)   Disconnect residential water service after twelve o'clock (12:00)
noon on Friday or a nonresidential customer after four o'clock (4:00) P.M. on
Friday unless village staff is able to take customer payment and reconnect the
customer the same day if the customer remedies the reason for disconnection;
      (d)   Disconnect water service on a Saturday or Sunday unless village
staff is able to take customer payment and reconnect the customer the same day
if the customer remedies the reason for disconnection;
      (e)   Disconnect water service on a State of Illinois or utility holiday
or after twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on any day preceding a State of Illinois
or utility holiday unless village staff is able to take customer payment and
reconnect the customer the same day if the customer remedies the reason for
disconnection. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-11: DEFERRED PAYMENT AGREEMENTS:
(A)   Customers who are indebted to the village for past due water service
shall have the opportunity to make arrangements to retire the debt by periodic
payments referred to hereinafter as a deferred payment agreement; except that
customers who have failed to make payment under such a plan during the past
twelve (12) months shall not be afforded such an opportunity.
(B)   The terms and conditions of a deferred payment agreement, shall be
determined by the clerk or his/her designee, after consideration of the
following:
   1.   Size of the past due account;
   2.   Customer's payment history;
(C)   A deferred payment agreement shall be in writing, with a copy provided to
the customer, and shall conform to the following requirements:
   1.   The customer shall be required to pay all future bills for utility
service by the due date;
   2.   The customer shall retire the debt according to the terms of the
deferred payment agreement, which shall allow a minimum of two (2) months and a
maximum of twelve (12) months to retire the debt.
   3.   If a customer defaults on any payment due under the deferred payment
agreement, the village shall have the right to discontinue service in
accordance with this code.
   4.   Any customer account receiving water as a tenant in a leasehold, shall
obtain approval from the landlord in writing before entering into a deferred
payment agreement.
(D)   Renewal Of Service:
   1.   If water service is shut off for any reason permitted under this code,
the water service shall not be turned on except upon the payment of the
reconnection fees set forth in subsection (D)(3) of this section, payment of
the unpaid bills and payment of the current service charge, plus all late fees
and any and all unpaid fines or fees owed to the village or the entry of a
deferred payment agreement as provided herein.
   2.   Resumption of service may not be immediately available upon payment of
the bill. If a payment is made by the customer no later than three o'clock (3:
00) P.M. Monday through Friday, every reasonable effort will be made to
reconnect water service within twenty-four (24) hours. The renewal of water
service will take place within a reasonable period of time after the water
department is advised by the clerk or his designee that the reasons for
disconnection have been remedied and it is instructed to reconnect service. The
reasonableness of the time will consider the time of day the payment is made,
the availability of manpower to do the work, the day of the week payment is
made, and other services being performed by the water department employees.
Reconnection shall be made within three (3) calendar days of receipt of all
outstanding amounts due and fees required under subsection (G)3 of this
section.
   3.   A reconnection fee shall be charged when the water supply is
reconnected after having been shut off for any reason permitted under this
code. The reconnection fee shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each
reconnection for any particular owner or occupant of a particular property.
(Ord. 2024, 4-24-2019; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-12: LIABILITY OF OWNER OR OCCUPANT:
The owner of the real estate, and the occupant thereof and user of either the
water or sewer service, or both the water and sewer service, shall be jointly
and severally liable to pay for the service furnished to or upon the real
estate, and the water and sewer services are furnished by the village only upon
the condition that the owner of the real estate, and the occupant thereof and
user of the services are jointly and severally liable for the service charge to
the village, and each tenancy shall be deemed to have been entered into in
consideration of this provision. (Ord. 169, 11-22-1938; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-
2025)
3-3-13: DELINQUENT BILLS; LIENS AGAINST REAL ESTATE:
Delinquent water bills shall be liens against the real estate pursuant to the
provisions of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-139-8 (1961). (Ord. 2169, 4-
23-2025)
3-3-14: CONNECTIONS WITH WATER SYSTEM:
(A)   Any person desiring to make any connection with the water division of the
combined waterworks and sewerage system shall first make application to the
superintendent or his/her designee for that purpose upon a blank form to be
furnished by the department. Every applicant shall pay all charges, state
specifically and in detail the place, location and kind of connection and
appendages sought, the purpose for which the water is to be used, and all the
plumbing or plumbing work in any manner or way connected therewith. Every
person so making the connection with the system, or using water therefrom,
shall make such connection and use such water and maintain the same subject at
all times to the provisions and conditions of this chapter.
(B)   When the applicant has complied with all the provisions of this chapter,
a permit shall then be issued by the superintendent of buildings or his/her
designee authorizing the connection to be made and specify the size thereof.
All plumbing and plumbing work, also all excavating, filling and replacement of
pavement, shall be done by a plumber authorized by this code to do such
plumbing. The permit shall authorize any plumber who may be selected by the
applicant to do the plumbing work, in the permit described. A permit must be
obtained for each connection and such connection shall serve only a single
building, residence, premises or place.
(C)   The village board shall set the amount of the fee from time to time by
resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-15: CONNECTIONS WITH SEWER SYSTEM:
(A)   Each owner or builder of a business interest desiring to connect with the
sewer system shall comply with chapter 5 of this title.
(B)   Upon receipt of a proper application, and when the applicant has complied
with the provisions of this chapter and chapter 5 of this title, a permit shall
be issued by the Superintendent authorizing the making of the connection to the
sewerage system. A permit shall be obtained for each connection made. The
connection to the sewerage system shall be made within thirty (30) days after
the date of the permit, or if the sewerage system has not been constructed at
the expiration of thirty (30) days to such an extent that such connection can
be made, then within thirty (30) days after such construction has been
completed, otherwise the permit shall become null and void.
(C)   It shall be the duty of every person connecting or causing to be
connected any pipe with the sewerage system, to cause such connecting pipe to
be at all times adequate for its purpose, and of such size and dimensions as to
convey and allow freely to pass whatever may properly enter same. All plumbing
and plumbing work, and also all excavating, filling and replacement of pavement
shall be done by a licensed plumber and in such manner as the superintendent
shall direct.
(D)   All connections shall be made by circular saw cut of sewer mains by
proper tools (sewer tap machine or similar) and installation of wye saddle or
tee saddle in accordance to manufacturer's recommendations. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-
2010)
3-3-16: TURNING WATER ON; CHARGE; DEPOSIT:
Before any water is turned on in residential, business or multiple dwelling
property, an application shall be made to the village, and the applicant shall
deposit the following amounts with the application:
(A)   On residential property, the sum of seventy-five dollars ($75.00).
(B)   On business property, the applicant shall deposit the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) for each business unit involved.
(C)   On multiple dwellings, the applicant shall deposit the sum of seventy-
five dollars ($75.00) for each living unit.
The deposits made under the provisions of this chapter shall be held by the
village as security for the payment of water used by the applicant upon the
premises to which its application pertains, and may be so applied when any
default is made in the payment of the water bill. (Ord. 903, 12-14-1977; amd.
Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-17: TAPPING MAINS:
Whenever any permit is issued for a connection to the water system, the
superintendent shall tap the main where such a connection is to be made and
shall insert the corporation valve. For tapping the main, charges shall be made
as determined by the village board. The village board shall set the amount of
the fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained by the
village clerk and which shall be made available to the public upon request.
(Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-18: RATES; COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM:
For the use and service of the combined waterworks and sewerage system of the
village, there are hereby established the following rates and charges:
(A)   Sewer Rates: Sewer rates are set forth in chapter 5 of this title. (Ord.
1728, 6-22-2010)
(B)   Water Meter Rates: The charge for water supplied through meters shall be
as follows: There shall be a basic water usage rate which shall be calculated
from actual gallon usage and billed on a monthly basis. In addition to said
basic water usage rate, there may be a capital improvement surcharge and a debt
service surcharge. The basic water usage rate, the capital improvement
surcharge and debt service surcharge shall be set from time to time by the
village board by ordinance or resolution. The basic water usage rate will be
based upon a cost per one thousand (1,000) gallons. Bills may be issued every
month or every two (2) months or every three (3) months as determined by the
village board.
(C)   Unmetered Water Users: If there are any unmetered water users, their rate
shall be set by the village board by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 2110, 12-
14-2022; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-19: OBSTRUCTING HYDRANT; OTHER OFFENSES:
No person shall in any manner obstruct the access to any stop valve, hydrant or
valve or any public faucet or opening for taking water in any street, alley,
public ground or place connected with or part of the water system or plant, nor
pile or place any lumber, brick or building material or other article, thing or
hindrance whatsoever within twelve feet (12') of the same or so as to in any
manner hinder, delay or obstruct the members of the fire department in reaching
the same. It shall be unlawful for any person in any manner to interfere with
or obstruct the flow, retention, storage or authorized use of water in the
water system or plant or any part thereof, or to injure, deface, remove or
displace any water main, hydrant, service pipe, water meter, shutoff box,
public fountain, valve, engine or building connected with the combined
waterworks and sewer system, or to cause, suffer or permit any of said things
to be done. Any person not duly authorized who turns the water on at any fire
hydrant or service cock, or uses water therefrom when so turned on shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and the person so using or wasting water in such
unlawful manner shall be liable to pay therefor at the regular water rates
without discount. (Ord. 148, 12-10-1935; amd.Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-20: CARE OF METERS:
All water consumers supplied by the village shall be supplied through meters
only, and shall pay for the water at the rates and in the manner hereinafter
specified.
No water meter shall be used by any consumer unless and until such meter is
sealed by the superintendent, or by someone acting under his direction and
authority.
Every consumer of water shall afford to the superintendent and any and all
persons acting under his direction and authority, free access to any water
meter used by such consumer for the purpose of enabling the same to be sealed
as herein provided. (Ord. 156, 6-22-1937)
All meters shall be placed in a frostproof meter box of approved pattern in the
parkway in front of the building where such parkway exists, and in such manner
as to afford easy access for examining and reading. After the meter is placed,
only members or employees of the water department shall be allowed to repair,
remove or in any manner interfere with the same. A stop valve shall be placed
on each side of the meter. Only the cost of the meter shall be paid by the
village. All repairs and renewals of such meters shall be at the expense of the
village but the owner of, or the applicant for, such meter shall at all times
be responsible for any damage done to the meter, including that done by
freezing or breakage, and also the theft thereof. It shall be unlawful for any
person to injure, deface, mar, destroy or in any manner interfere with any
meter. It shall be the duty of the owner of or applicant for such meter
promptly to notify the department of all defects in any meter or of its failure
properly to register the quantity of water. (Ord. 280, 3-10-1948; amd. Ord.
2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-21: METER FAILURE:
Whenever any meter, by reason of its being out of repair, or for any cause
fails promptly to register the water passing through the same, the consumer
shall be charged at the rate shown for the corresponding time of the previous
year under like conditions.
If no record of the previous year exists, then it shall be the duty of the
superintendent to estimate or determine so far as he can the amount of water
consumed during the time such meter failed to operate, and the consumer shall
pay the amount so estimated by the superintendent. The superintendent shall
make every effort to cause the immediate repair of any malfunctioning meter
upon having notice of the same. (Ord. 148, 12-10-1935; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-
2025)
3-3-22: INTERRUPTION OF SERVICE; VILLAGE NOT LIABLE:
All connections and water applied for hereunder, and all the water used
hereunder shall be upon the express condition that the village shall not be
liable, nor shall any claim be made against it for damages or injury caused by
reason of the breaking of any main, branches, service pipes, apparatus or
appurtenances connected with the system or plant, or any part or portion of the
plant, or for any interruption of the supply by reason of the breakage of
machinery or by reason of stoppage, alterations, extensions or renewals or the
refusal of a property owner to provide access to the property to service or
upgrade water lines. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-23:  ACCESS TO PREMISES:
The superintendent and every person authorized by him or the department, shall
have ready access to the premises where meters and waterlines are located for
the purpose of installing, inspecting, repairing and testing village meters and
water supply lines and water quality. The superintendent and every person
authorized by him or the department, and all meter inspectors, shall have ready
access to the premises where meters are located for the purpose of reading,
examining, testing and repairing the same, and examining and testing the
consumption, use and flow of water, and it shall be unlawful for any person to
interfere with, prevent or obstruct the superintendent or such other person or
inspector in his work hereunder. Every consumer of village water shall take the
same upon the conditions prescribed in this section. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-24: OPENING STREETS:
No street, alley, or public place shall be disturbed or opened for the purpose
of laying water or sewer pipes or making connections with water or sewer pipes
unless a permit so to do is first obtained from the superintendent. The
provisions of this section are not intended to apply to the water department.
(Ord. 143, 12-10-1935)
No person shall make any excavation in any street or highway, within four and
one-half feet (4 ½') of any laid water pipe while the ground is frozen, except
by special order of the Superintendent. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-25: PIPES BETWEEN MAIN AND METER; REGULATIONS:
The connection from the main to the meter shall be placed at least four feet
(4') below the surface of the ground and shall be made of copper type "K".
Minimum diameter size is one inch (1"). (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-26: VALVES AND CONNECTIONS:
A stop valve, to be known as the "service valve", shall be inserted in each
connection at a convenient point in the public ground or place through which
the connection passes and whenever there are curb lines established, the
service valve shall be placed one foot (1') inside of such curb line with a
buffalo box to grade. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-27: APPROVAL OF SERVICE PIPES AND METERS:
All service pipes and meters shall be inspected and approved by the
superintendent or some other person under his direction, and no such service
pipes shall be covered until they have been so inspected. The village shall
have the right to test any meter at any time; however, if the test is made at
the request of the consumer, the consumer shall pay the cost for such test,
which will be set, from time to time, by the public works superintendent. (Ord.
1728, 6-22-2010; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-28: EXTRAORDINARY USE; RATES:
For purposes not hereinbefore specified, and for peculiar and extraordinary
purposes, the rates and conditions for the use of water shall be subject to
special permit and contract with the Village as approved by the president and
board of trustees. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-29: RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR TAKERS, PLUMBERS:
The following rules and regulations for the government of water takers and
plumbers are hereby adopted and established and authority is hereby conferred
upon the superintendent to make and establish such additional rules and
regulations as he may deem advisable from time to time and with the consent and
approval of the president and board of trustees:
Rule 1. The president subject to the ratification of the village board shall
appoint all the necessary officers and agents for furnishing water and sewer
service, collecting water and sewer rates, and assessments, and the board shall
determine the term of office, duties and salaries or compensation of such
officers and agents.
Rule 2. All work on the streets and alleys contemplated by this chapter must be
done under the supervision of the superintendent and subject to his direction
and approval.
Rule 3. The corporation valve inserted in the distributing pipes and the
service pipe laid shall be of the size specified in the permit and order. The
superintendent shall keep a complete record and profile of the exact location
and number and sizes of all taps inserted and length of service pipe laid, the
tapper being hereby required to make immediate returns to the superintendent of
such details.
Rule 4. Notice must be left at the office of the superintendent by the plumber
about to lay down a service pipe fixing the day on which he wishes the ferrule
inserted.
Rule 5. No tap shall be any closer than six inches (6") from the bell of the
pipe. The size of the corporation valve to be inserted shall be that specified
in the permit.
Rule 6. It shall be the duty of the superintendent to superintend and direct
all work connected with the combined water and sewer system which may be done
upon the streets of the village, and from time to time to report to the
president and board of trustees as to the manner in which the plumbers perform
their work and the condition in which they find the streets repaired.
Rule 7. Hydrants, taps, hoses, water closets, urinals, baths, and other
fixtures will not be permitted to be kept running when not in actual use; all
faucets connected with the service pipes must be of such pattern as may be
approved by the superintendent.
Rule 8. No private hydrant shall be located on the sidewalk or elsewhere beyond
the limits of the lot of the party to whom the permit is issued.
Rule 9. Every residence or building must have its own separate service line
from the main to the building/residence.
Rule 10. No owner or occupant of any building, premises or enclosure into which
water shall be introduced, will be allowed to supply water to other persons or
families; if so supplied, the water will be cut off.
Rule 11. Applications for water must state fully and truly the purposes for
which it is required, and when paying the charges for it, parties must frankly
and without concealment, answer all questions put to them, relative to the
consumption. The applicant shall, in such application, agree that in
consideration of the insertion of the corporation valve he will pay the
assessments levied or rates charged on the premises for the water pipe that is
proposed to be tapped, and that he will faithfully comply with the rules
established by this chapter, and as changed from time to time. In case of
fraudulent misrepresentation on the part of the applicant or of uses of water
not embraced in the applicant's bill, or of willful or unreasonable use of
water, the supply of water will be cut off and all payments shall be forfeited
to the village.
Rule 12. The superintendent and his authorized agents shall have free access at
all hours of the day between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00)
P.M. to all parts of every building in which the water is delivered and
consumed, in order to examine the pipes and fixtures and ascertain whether
there is any unnecessary waste, and, if such access be refused, the supply of
water may be cut off without further notice.
Rule 13. The right is reserved to suspend the use of lawn fountains and hose
for sprinkling lawns and gardens, whenever in the opinion of the president and
board of trustees the public exigencies require it.
Rule 14. Every water consumer shall have a water meter, to be approved by the
water department, attached to his water supply pipes; provided, no water meter
shall be so connected until it has been tested by the proper officer and a
permit granted by the superintendent as hereinbefore provided.
Rule 15. All meters must be placed by a licensed plumber or the water
department. The plumber doing the work must flush the pipe thoroughly before
connecting the meter.
Rule 16. The conducting pipes of meters shall be joined with unions or flanges,
ball valves or gate valves inserted to conveniently provide for draining pipes
and meter repairs. The shutoff must be as low as the meter connection. The
meter must not be set in a place where the ground and surface water can rise
and cover it.
Rule 17. No meter shall be removed or disturbed without first having obtained
permission from the superintendent.
Rule 18. The water will not be turned on into any house or private service pipe
except upon the order of the superintendent nor until the applicant shall have
paid his rent for the current term; and the plumbers are strictly prohibited
from turning the water into any service pipe except upon the order and
permission of the superintendent. This rule shall not be construed to prevent
any plumber admitting water to test pipes and for that purpose only.
Rule 19. No hydrants, except public drinking fountains, shall be placed within
the limits of any street, and no drinking fountain shall be erected for public
use which has openings by which it can be used as a source of domestic supply.
Rule 20. All water supplied by the village shall be measured by meter except as
hereinafter provided. Any tap heretofore made in any private water service
pipe, which is located between the public water supply pipe and the meter,
shall be plugged at the main supply pipe and the use of any such tap
discontinued. Consumers of water supplied through any meter shall make all
necessary repairs for the proper operations of the meter, and in case the
superintendent shall deem it necessary or expedient to repair a defective
meter, the expense of such repair shall be charged to the consumer and paid for
when the repair is made.
Rule 21. All bills must be paid to the water department billing staff promptly
when due, and extension of payment in full date shall only be allowed pursuant
to 3-3-9(b) of this chapter.
Rule 22. In all cases where one service pipe supplies two (2) or more separate
consumers in a building occupied by several families, one meter may be placed
at the service connection for either or all of the consumers and the water
rent, as registered by the meter, shall be charged to and be payable by the
owner of the premises or building.
Rule 23. The setting, taking off or repairing of meters shall be done under the
supervision of the superintendent or any other person authorized by the
president.
Rule 24. Whenever two (2) or more persons shall be supplied with one service
pipe connecting with the distribution main, the failure on the part of any one
of the parties to comply with the rules and restrictions provided for the use
of water shall authorize the superintendent to withhold the supply of water
from the main without any liability whatever, and all payments shall be
forfeited. (Ord. 148, 12-10-1935)
Rule 25. For the violation of any of these rules and regulations and such
others as the president and board of trustees may hereafter adopt, the village
reserves the right to stop the supply of water without any preliminary notice,
nor will it be restored until all back water rent, cost and damages shall be
paid, together with the expense of turning off the water and turning it on
again, and upon the satisfactory understanding with the party that no further
cause for complaint shall arise, and the village hereby reserves to itself the
full right, power and authority, to cut off the supply of water at any time,
without incurring any liability or cause of action for damages of any kind; any
permit granted or regulation to the contrary notwithstanding. The expense for
turning off the water and turning it on again shall be established, from time
to time, by the public works superintendent. (Ord 1728, 6-22-2010; amd. Ord.
2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-30: OWNER TO NOTIFY OF PROPERTY LEASE:
Every owner of property in the village shall, within five (5) days, after
making any lease or contract of sale thereof or any portion thereof to any
person, whether the lease or contract be written or oral, notify the
superintendent of public works in writing of the making of the lease or
contract giving the name of the tenant or purchaser, the duration of the lease
or period of contract, and the street number of the property. The owner and
tenant or occupant of such property shall be jointly and severally liable for
all water and sewer service provided by the village and shall be jointly and
severally liable for all such charges and bills as set forth in section
3-3-10 of this chapter. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-31: GREASE TRAPS; CATCH BASINS:
(A)   Business Property: On property used for business purposes, kitchen or
other greasy wastes shall not be emptied directly into the sewerage system, but
the same shall be intercepted by a catch basin or grease trap and thence
conducted to the sanitary sewer.
(B)   Residential Property: The use of catch basins and/or grease traps shall
be optional on property used for residential purposes. (Ord. 633, 12-14-1966;
amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-32: RESTRICTIONS ON LAWN SPRINKLING AND OTHER WATER USES:
(A)   So as to comply with the Illinois department of transportation's "rules
and regulations for the allocation of water from Lake Michigan", it shall be
unlawful for any person to use water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns,
gardens or shrubbery on any day of the week between the dates of May 15 and
September 15 of any year, except between the hours of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
to eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to eleven o'clock
(11:00) P.M. Provided, however, that in the event of a drought, as to be
determined and declared by the village board, it shall be unlawful for any
person with an even numbered address to use water for the sprinkling or
irrigation of lawns or gardens on any day of the week, except on even numbered
calendar days between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. to eleven o'clock
(11:00) A.M. or eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M., and
it shall be unlawful for any person with an odd numbered address to use water
for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns or gardens on any day of the week,
except on odd numbered calendar days between the hours of eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) A.M. or eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. to eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M.
(B)   The village reserves the right to further limit or suspend entirely the
use of water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or shrubbery
or for any other special purpose(s) whenever the president and board of
trustees shall determine that the public exigencies require such action. If
public exigencies so require, the president may unilaterally take such action
prior to the earliest opportunity available for consultation with the board of
trustees.
(C)   Whenever the president/president and board of trustees limit or suspend
the use of water for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for
any other special purpose(s), it shall be unlawful for any person to use water
for the sprinkling or irrigation of lawns and gardens or for any other special
purpose(s) designated, other than during the times allowed for such use(s) of
water, provided that said person has been given notice of said limitation on,
or the suspension of, the use of water, from the village, by telephone, United
States mail or personal service or other notification. (Ord. 1196, 8-8-1990)
(D)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-33: WATER MAIN CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
(A)   All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in
accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, 77 Illinois administrative code
890. If in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code or in the judgment of the
village superintendent of public works, an approved backflow prevention device
is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the
superintendent of public works will give notice to the water customer to
install such an approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his
own expense, install such an approved device at a location, and in a manner,
which is in accordance with the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental
protection agency requirements and all applicable local regulations, and shall
have inspections and tests made of such approved devices upon installation and
as required by the Illinois plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection
agency and local regulations.
(B)   No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or
permit to be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or
emergency water supply other than the regular public water supply of the
village may enter the supply or distribution system of said municipality,
unless such private, auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of
connection and use of such supply has been approved by the village and the
Illinois environmental protection agency.
(C)   It shall be the duty of the superintendent of public works to cause
inspections, surveys and investigations to be made of industrial and other
properties served by the public water supply to determine whether actual or
potential hazards to the public water supply exist. Such inspections, surveys
and investigations shall be made a matter of public record and shall be
repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the superintendent of
public works shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be maintained
and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
(D)   Duly authorized cross connection control device inspector(s) as
designated by the superintendent of public works or Illinois environmental
protection agency shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water distribution system of the
village for the purpose of verifying the presence or absence of cross
connections, and the superintendent of public works or his duly authorized and
designated agent shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any
property served by a connection to the public water distribution system of the
village for the purpose of verifying information submitted by the customer
regarding the required cross connection control inspection. On demand, the
owner(s), lessee(s) or occupant(s) of any property so served shall furnish to
the superintendent of public works any information which he may request
regarding the piping system(s) or water use on such property. The refusal to
provide such information within a reasonable time, subject to the discretion of
the superintendent of public works, may be deemed evidence of the presence of
improper connections as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1234, 11-13-1991)
(E)   The superintendent of public works of the village is hereby authorized
and directed, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, to discontinue
the water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water distribution mains. Water service to such
property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated or
corrected in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and until a
reconnection fee as established by the village board is paid to the village.
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
superintendent of public works is assured that imminent danger of harmful
contamination of the public water supply system exists. Such action shall be
followed by written notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate
disconnection without notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or
anticipated contamination or pollution of the water supply; provided, that in
the reasonable opinion of the superintendent of public works or the Illinois
environmental protection agency, such action is required to prevent actual or
potential contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the
village, nor the superintendent of public works or his agents or assigns shall
be liable to any customer for injury, damages, or lost revenues which may
result from termination of said customer's water supply in accordance with the
terms of this chapter, whether or not said termination was with or without
notice. The village board shall set the amount of the fee by resolution or
ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained by the village clerk, and which
shall be made available to the public upon request. (Ord. 1651, 10- 10-2007)
(F)   The consumer responsible for back siphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1234, 11-13-1991;
amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-34: WATER CERTIFICATION OF PAYMENT FEE:
(A)   Unless otherwise provided by law or rule, a full payment certificate
shall be required in all transfers of real property, whether such transfers are
subject to or exempt from the real property transfer stamp requirements of this
code. In order to obtain a full payment certificate, an application with an
application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be made to the finance
director or their designee. Provided, however, if the property is exempt from
the real property transfer tax under section 4-21-4 of this code, the full
payment certificate application fee shall not be charged. If a full payment
certificate was required and such certificate was not obtained when the real
property was transferred, both the transferor and the transferee will be
jointly and severally liable for any outstanding water fees, sewer charges, and
penalties that have accrued to the water account.
(B)   Where a townhome or condominium property has a single meter and the
respective association's assessments include the individual owner's share of
the water bill, the finance director or their designee may issue a certificate
of condo or townhome owner payment or notice of account arrears as applicable,
upon application and payment of an application fee of twenty-five dollars
($25.00). (Ord. 2124, 6-14-2023; amd. Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
3-3-35: USE OF GROUNDWATER AS A POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED:
(A)   Groundwater As Potable Water Supply: The use or attempt to use as a
potable water supply groundwater from within the corporate limits of the
Village of Midlothian, by the installation or drilling of wells or by any other
method, is hereby prohibited. The prohibitions stated in this section shall be
applicable to units of local government, including the Village of Midlothian.
(Ord. 2001, 9-12-2018)
(B)   Definitions:
 
               Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
PERSON:        limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock
               company, trust estate, political subdivision, or any other legal
               entity, or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns.
               Any water used for human or domestic consumption, including, but
POTABLE WATER: not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
               washing dishes, preparing foods, or watering outside vegetation.
 
(C)   Penalty: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
subject to a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
Each day a violation exists is a separate offense. (Ord. 1790, 6-27-2012; amd.
Ord. 2169, 4-23-2025)
CHAPTER 4
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 1242, 2-12-1992)
CHAPTER 5
PUBLIC SEWERS AND CHARGES
SECTION:
3-5-1: Use Of Public Sewers Required
3-5-2: Private Sewage Disposal
3-5-3: Building Sewers And Connections
3-5-4: Prohibited Discharges; Tests And Analyses
3-5-5: Protection Of Sewage Works From Damage
3-5-6: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
3-5-7: Penalties
3-5-8: Wastewater Service Charges
3-5-9: General Provisions
3-5-10: Setting Of Rates
3-5-11: Validity
3-5-12: Rate Information
3-5-13: Definitions
3-5-1: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any human or animal
excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the
village, or in any area under the jurisdiction of said village, any sewage or
other polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility
intended or used for the disposal of sewage.
   (D)   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human
occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the
village and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is
now located or may in the future be located any public sanitary (or combined)
sewer of the village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable
toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the
proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within
ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said
public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') of the property line. (Ord.
1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-2: PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Private sewage disposal is not allowed. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-3: BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof
without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
   (B)   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except
those discharges in compliance with federal standards promulgated pursuant to
the federal act and more stringent state and local standards. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-
1990)
   (C)   1. There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits:
         (a)   For residential wastewater service; and
         (b)   For commercial, institutional/governmental or industrial
wastewater service.
      2.   In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a
special form furnished by the village. The permit application shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the village. A sewer tap fee shall be set by the
village board from time to time by ordinance or resolution. The owner or agent,
as a condition of permit authorization, must provide information describing its
wastewater constituents, characteristics, and type of activity.
      3.   The village board shall set the amount of the fees and/or bonds from
time to time by resolution or ordinance. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010)
   (D)   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection
shall only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of
the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
   (F)   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the
building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and
the whole considered as one building sewer.
   (G)   No old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings.
   (H)   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual Of Practice No. 9" and "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main
Construction In Illinois" shall apply.
   (I)   Only overhead sewers will be allowed in the village for new
construction.
   (J)   No person(s) shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected
directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
   (K)   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in
appropriate specifications of the American Society Of Testing Materials, "Water
Pollution Control Federation Manual Of Practice No. 9", and "Standard
Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In Illinois". All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the
prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the village before
installation.
   (L)   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the village
when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public
sewer. The connection shall be made under the supervision of the village
superintendent of public works or his representative.
   (M)   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately
guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard.
Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course
of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the village. (Ord.
1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-4: PROHIBITED DISCHARGES; TESTS AND ANALYSES:
   (A)   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the village. Industrial cooling water or
unpolluted process waters may be discharged on approval of the village, to a
storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
   (C)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the
following described waters or wastes to any public sewers:
      1.   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids,
or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in
the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
      3.   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5 or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures,
equipment, and personnel of the sewage works.
      4.   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc., either whole
or ground by garbage grinders.
   (D)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following
described substances, materials, waters, or wastes if it appears likely in the
opinion of the village that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage
treatment process or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream;
or can otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a
nuisance. In forming its opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the
village will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject
wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, materials of
construction of the sewers, nature of the sewage treatment process, capacity of
the sewage treatment plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage
treatment plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The
substances prohibited are:
      1.   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than one hundred
fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) or sixty five degrees Celsius (65°C).
      2.   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous materials; or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred milligrams per liter
(100 mg/l) or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at
temperatures between thirty two degrees (32°) (0°C) and one hundred fifty
degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) (65°C).
      3.   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/
4) horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to the review and
approval of the village.
      4.   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron pickling wastes,
or concentrated plating solution whether neutralized or not.
      5.   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, or
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials.
      6.   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste or odor
producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be
established by the village as necessary after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal, or other public
agencies of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
      7.   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or
concentration as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
      8.   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
      9.   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg
at any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable
state and federal regulations.
      10.   No cyanide at any time.
      11.   Materials which exert or cause:
         (a)   Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
         (b)   Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions);
         (c)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works;
         (d)   Unusual volume of flow or concentrations of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
      12.   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of agencies having jurisdiction over
discharge to the receiving waters.
   (E)   If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters contain the substances or possess
the characteristics enumerated in subsection (D) of this section and/or which
are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided in 40 CFR 403, June
26, 1978, and any amendments thereto, and which in the judgment of the village
and/or the metropolitan water reclamation district of greater Chicago (MWRDGC)
may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment or
receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a
public nuisance, the village may:
      1.   Reject the wastes;
      2.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge into
the public sewers;
      3.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/or
      4.   Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges, under the provisions
of subsection (K) of this section.
If the village and/or MWRDGC permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the village and/or MWRDGC and subject to the
requirement of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
   (F)   Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the
opinion of the village and/or MWRDGC, they are necessary for the proper
handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any
flammable wastes, sand, or other harmful ingredients; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for private living quarters or dwelling
units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the village
and/or MWRDGC and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection.
   (G)   Where preliminary treatment or flow equalizing facilities are
provided, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the owner at his expense.
   (H)   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village and/or MWRDGC, the owner of any property serviced by a
building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and measurement of the
wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the village. The
manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained
by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   (I)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests, and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the discharge.
The number, type, and frequency of laboratory analyses to be performed by the
owner shall be as stipulated by the village, and/or MWRDGC, but no less than
once per year. The owner must supply a complete analysis of the constituents of
the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state, and
local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses, and reporting required by the village. At such times as
deemed necessary the village reserves the right to take measurements and
samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (J)   All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of waters
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the latest edition of "Standard Methods For The Examination Of
Water And Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association and
shall be determined at the control or inspection manhole provided or upon
suitable samples taken at said control or inspection manhole. In the event that
no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered
to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which
the building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb, and property. (The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24 hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24 hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs are
determined from periodic grab samples.)
   (K)   No statement contained in this section shall be construed as
preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the village and any
industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the village for treatment, subject to payment therefor, in
accordance with section 3-5-8 of this chapter, by the industrial concern;
provided, such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines for
user charge system and industrial cost recovery system. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-5: PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE:
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, wilfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 1191, 6-
27-1990)
3-5-6: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   (A)   The duly authorized employees of the village, the MWRDGC, the Illinois
environmental protection agency, and the United States environmental protection
agency, bearing proper credentials and identification, shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, and testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The
village representative shall have no authority to inquire into any processes,
including metallurgical, chemical oil, refining, ceramic, paper, or other
industries beyond that point having a direct bearing on the kind and source of
discharge to the sewers or waterway or facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in subsection (A) of this section, the duly authorized employees of the
village, the MWRDGC, the Illinois environmental protection agency, and the
United States environmental protection agency shall observe all safety rules
applicable to the premises established by the company.
   (C)   The duly authorized employees of the village bearing proper
credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for the
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portion of the sewage collection
system lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on
said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 1191, 6-
27-1990)
3-5-7: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of section 3-5-1 to 3-
5-6 of this chapter (except section 3-5-5 of this chapter) shall be served by
the village with written notice stating the nature of the violation and
providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period of the time stated in such notice,
permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any permit for sewage
disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of this chapter. (Ord.
1191, 6-27-1990)
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in subsection (A) of this section shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not
exceeding seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010)
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reasons of such violation. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-
1990)
3-5-8: WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGES:
   (A)   Basis For Wastewater Service Charges: The wastewater service charge
for the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater collection system of
the village shall consist of a basic user charge, a debt service charge, a
capital improvement charge and any applicable surcharges.
   (B)   Basic User Charge:
      1.   The basic user charge is levied on all users to recover the
operation, maintenance plus replacement (OM&R) costs and shall be based on
water usage as recorded by water meters or sewage meters for wastes having the
following normal domestic concentrations:
         (a)   A five (5) day, twenty degree centigrade (20°C) biochemical
oxygen demand (BOD) of two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l).
         (b)   A suspended solids content of three hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (350 mg/l).
      2.   The basic user charge shall be computed as follows:
         (a)   Estimate the annual wastewater volume.
         (b)   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater collection system including a replacement fund for the
year, for all works categories.
         (c)   Proportion the estimated OM&R costs to wastewater collection
system categories by volume.
         (d)   Compute costs per one thousand (1,000) gallons for normal
domestic strength sewage.
         (e)   Compute surcharge costs per pound for BOD and SS concentrations
in excess of normal domestic strengths.
   (C)   Debt Service Charge: The debt service charge is computed by
apportioning the annual debt service as a fixed charge per billing period.
(Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
   (D)   Capital Improvement Charge: The capital improvement charge is levied
upon users to provide capital improvements, extensions or reconstruction of the
sewerage collection system. The capital improvement charge shall be a fixed
amount plus a charge per one thousand (1,000) gallons as set forth in
subsection (K) of this section. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010)
   (E)   Surcharge: A surcharge will be levied to all users whose waters exceed
the normal domestic concentrations of BOD two hundred fifty milligrams per
liter (250 mg/l) and SS three hundred fifty milligrams per liter (350 mg/l) if
the board of trustees of the village determines that a surcharge is necessary
to pay any additional cost incurred by the village due to the discharge of
sewage described in this section. A surcharge will be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters or sewage meters for all wastes which exceed the two
hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) and three hundred fifty
milligrams per liter (350 mg/l) concentrations for BOD and SS respectively.
The concentration of sewage used for computing surcharges shall be established
by sewage sampling. Such sewage sampling shall be performed as often as may be
deemed necessary by the village and shall be binding as a basis for surcharges.
   (F)   Annual Review: The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed, not less often than annually, by certified public accountants for the
village in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall be
revised periodically to reflect a change in local capital costs or OM&R costs.
   (G)   Notification Of Rate: The users of the wastewater services will be
notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that
portion of the user charges which are attributable to the wastewater operation,
maintenance and replacement.
   (H)   Measurement Of Flow: The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges and surcharges shall be metered water consumption read to the lowest
even increments of one hundred (100) gallons.
      1.   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures any
part, or all, of his water from sources other than the public waterworks
system, all or part of which is discharged into the public sewers, the person
shall install and maintain, at his expense, water meters of a type approved by
the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water obtained from
these other sources.
      2.   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be required
by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from the metered
water consumption records.
      3.   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned, and maintained by the person. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the village. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
   (I)   Basic User Charge: The village board shall establish a basic user
charge based upon one thousand (1,000) gallons of metered water use and a fixed
charge to cover operating, maintenance plus replacement costs to be applied to
all users. These rates shall be set by the village board from time to time as
deemed necessary by ordinance or resolution. (Ord. 1866, 5-14-2014)
   (J)   Debt Service Charge: There shall be and there is hereby established a
debt service charge to be issued on a monthly basis to each user of the village
sewerage collection system. The debt service charge shall be set by the village
board from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
   (K)   Capital Improvement Charge: There shall be and there is hereby
established a capital improvement charge as stated in subsection (D) of this
section to be issued on a monthly basis to each user of the village sewage
collection system. The capital improvement charge shall be set by the village
board from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
   (L)   Rates: A minimum charge per month shall be applied to all users whose
water consumption does not exceed two thousand (2,000) gallons per month. This
minimum charge shall consist of a charge for OM&R costs (including a fixed OM&R
cost), a debt service charge and a capital improvement charge. Such minimum
charge, consisting of OM&R costs, as well as the debt service charge and
capital improvement charge shall be set by the village board from time to time
by ordinance or resolution.
Usage in excess of two thousand (2,000) gallons per month will be charged at a
rate as set by the village board from time to time by ordinance or resolution.
Bills may be issued every month or every two (2) months or every three (3)
months as determined by the village board. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010)
   (M)   Metered Services: At this time all water services are metered and all
new water services are required to be metered.
   (N)   Surcharge Rates: The rates of surcharges for BOD and SS shall be as
follows:
      Per pound of BOD: None at this time.
      Per pound of SS: None at this time.
   (O)   Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The wastewater service
charge shall be computed by the following formula:
         CW = CC + CD + CM + (Vu-X)CU + CS
Where:  
CW =   Amount of wastewater service charge ($) per billing period
CC =   Capital improvement charge
CD =   Debt service charge
CM =   Minimum charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
Vu =   Wastewater volume for the billing period
X  =   Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
CU =   Basic user charge for operation, maintenance and replacement
CS =   Surcharges, if applicable
 
   (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-9: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Bills: Said rates or charges for service may be payable monthly, every
two (2) months or quarterly depending on the determination of the village
board. The village board may authorize a different billing cycle for
residential use other than for apartments and commercial. The owner of the
premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service shall be jointly and
severally liable to pay for the service to such premises and the service is
furnished to the premises by the village only upon the condition that the owner
of the premises, occupant and user of the services are jointly and severally
liable therefor to the village.
Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the village as determined by the
village board.
Bills shall be computed by adding ten percent (10%) to the total sewer charges,
this total shall equal the gross bill. The net bill shall equal the gross bill
less the aforementioned ten percent (10%). The bills shall be mailed so as to
reach the consumer on the first day of the first month of the next billing
period. If the bill is paid within twenty (20) days of the mailing the net bill
shall be paid. If the bill is not paid within the twenty (20) days then a
"reminder - water bill past due" notice may be mailed. If the reminder bill is
not paid within ten (10) days from the second mailing, then a "final shut off
notice" shall be mailed notifying the consumer that water service will be
turned off if the gross bill is not paid within five (5) days. If the bill is
not paid the service shall then be turned off without additional notice.
The village board of trustees shall have the authority to reduce and/or waive
the charge or penalty for what may be determined to be sufficient and
justifiable reasons for any late payment or nonpayment.
   (B)   Lien; Notice Of Delinquency: Whenever a bill for sewer service remains
unpaid for thirty (30) days or one billing cycle whichever is longer after it
has been rendered, the village may file with the county recorder of deeds a
statement of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of
the premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the
village claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to
the period covered by the bill.
If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises and the
village has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the owner of the premises
if his address be known to the village, whenever such bill remains unpaid for
the period of forty five (45) days for a monthly bill or one hundred five (105)
days for a quarterly bill after it has been rendered.
The failure of the village to record such lien or to mail such notice or the
failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect the right to
foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing subsection.
   (C)   Foreclosure Of Lien: Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be in the name of the
village. The village attorney will be authorized by the village board of
trustees and directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the village
in any court having jurisdiction over such matters against any property.
   (D)   Revenues: All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the
sewerage system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the sewerage
fund. All such revenues and monies shall be held by the village separate and
apart from private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
village and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the village not more than ten (10) days after receipt of same, or
at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the
village president and board of trustees.
The village shall receive all such revenues from the wastewater collection and
all other funds and monies incident to the operation of such system as the same
may be delivered to it and deposit the same in the account of the fund
designated as the "sewerage fund of the village". Said treasurer shall
administer such fund in every respect in the manner provided by statute of the
"revised cities and villages act", effective January 1942.
   (E)   Accounts: The village shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals he shall cause to be made an audit by an
independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the wastewater collection system.
In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit report
shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
collection system, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system do in fact meet these regulations.
In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit report shall
include the following:
      1.   Flow data showing total gallons discharged into the village sanitary
collection system for the current fiscal year.
      2.   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal year.
      3.   Debt service for the next succeeding fiscal year.
      4.   Number of users connected to the system.
      5.   Number of nonmetered users.
      6.   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
   (F)   Penalty: Any person violating any provisions of this section or
section 3-5-8 of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars
($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1728, 6-22-
2010)
   (G)   Access To Records: The IEPA or its authorized representative shall
have access to any books, documents, paper and records of the village which are
applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to ensure compliance
with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state grant. (Ord.
1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-10: SETTING OF RATES:
The rates and service charges established for user charges set forth in section
3-5-8 of this chapter shall be set by the village board, from time to time, and
are effective on the billing period immediately following approval of a change
in service charge and rates by the village board. (Ord. 1728, 6-22-2010)
3-5-11: VALIDITY:
   (A)   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this chapter shall
be held to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith be and are
hereby repealed as of the date this chapter and its rates are in effect. (Ord.
1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-12: RATE INFORMATION:
The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within thirty (30)
days of receipt of a written request for such. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
3-5-13: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used
in this chapter shall be as follows:
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT:
   Administrator: The administrator of the United States environmental
protection agency.
   Federal Act: The federal clean water act (33 USC 466 et seq.) as amended
(Pub. L. 95-217).
   Federal Grant: The United States government participation in the financing
of the construction of treatment works as provided for by title II - grants for
construction of treatment works of the act and implementing regulations.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT:
   Approving Authority: Those certain elected and/or appointed village
officials or employees designated by the president and/or board of trustees of
the village to oversee and/or enforce one or more sections of this chapter.
   Village: The village of Midlothian, Illinois.
NPDES PERMIT: Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by the
administrator, or, where appropriated by the director, after enactment of the
federal clean water act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
section 402 of the federal act.
PERSON: Any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
REGIONAL AGENCIES: "The metropolitan water reclamation district of greater
Chicago (MWRDGC)", an organization established under the laws of the state of
Illinois, generally engaged in receiving and treating wastewater from the city
of Chicago and some nearby suburbs, in the past known as the metropolitan
sanitary district of greater Chicago (MSDGC).
SEWER TYPES, AND APPURTENANCES:
   Building Drain: That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (5') (1.5 m) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   Building Sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   Combined Sewer: A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   Easement: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   Public Sewer: A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary (or combined) sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been
constructed with village funds.
   Sanitary Sewer: A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface, and ground waters or
polluted industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   Sewer: A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and ground water drainage.
   Sewerage: The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   Storm Sewer: A sewer that carries storm, surface and ground water drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial and wastes other than unpolluted cooling
water.
   Stormwater Runoff: That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   Wastewater Collection System: The village sanitary sewer system.
SHALL/MAY: "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissible.
STATE GOVERNMENT:
   Director: The director of the Illinois environmental protection agency.
   State Act: The Illinois anti-pollution bond act of 1970.
   State Grant: The state of Illinois participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided for by the Illinois anti-pollution
bond act and for making such grants as filed with the secretary of state of the
state of Illinois.
TREATMENT:
   Pretreatment: The treatment of wastewaters from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   Wastewater Treatment Works: An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with "waste treatment plant" or "wastewater treatment plant" or
"pollution control plant".
TYPES OF CHARGES:
   Basic User Charge: The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer system.
   Capital Improvement Charge: A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the wastewater collection system.
   Debt Service Charge: The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of loan, bond, etc., outstanding.
   Local Capital Cost Charge: Charges for costs other than the operation,
maintenance and replacement costs, i.e., debt service and capital improvement
costs.
   Replacement: Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
wastewater collection system to maintain the capacity and performance for which
the system was designed and constructed. The term "operation and maintenance"
includes replacement.
   Sewage Fund: The principal accounting designation for all revenues received
in the operation of the sewerage system.
   Surcharge: The assessment in addition to the basic user charge and debt
service charge which is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in
strength than the concentration values established in this chapter.
   Useful Life: The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   User Charge: A charge levied on users of wastewater collection system for
the cost of operation, maintenance and replacement.
   Wastewater Service Charge: The charge per billing period levied on all users
of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as outlined
in section 3-5-8 of this chapter.
USER TYPES:
   Commercial User: Shall include transit lodging, retail and wholesale
establishments or places engaged in selling merchandise, or rendering services.
   Control Manhole: A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a "control manhole" is to provide access for the village or MWRDGC
representative(s) to sample and/or measure and/or monitor discharges.
   Industrial Users: Shall include establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into products.
   Institutional/Governmental User: Shall include schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state, and local governments.
   Residential User: All dwelling units such as houses, mobile homes,
apartments, permanent multi-family dwellings.
   User Class: The type of user: residential, institutional/governmental,
commercial, or industrial as defined herein.
WASTEWATER AND ITS CHARACTERISTICS:
   BOD (Denoting Biochemical Oxygen Demand): The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure
in five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in milligrams
per liter.
   Effluent Criteria: Are defined in any applicable NPDES permit.
   Floatable Oil: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   Garbage: Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking,
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
   Industrial Waste: Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged,
permitted to flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or
business establishment or process or from the development, recovery or
processing of any natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   Major Contributing Industry: An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that: a) has a flow of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons or more
per average workday; or b) has a flow greater than ten percent (10%) of the
flow carried by the municipal system receiving the waste; or c) has in its
waste, a toxic pollutant in toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under
section 307(a) of the federal act; or d) is found by the permit issuant
authority, in connection with the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly
owned treatment works receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either
singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment
works or upon the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
   Milligrams Per Liter: A unit of the concentration of water or wastewater
constituent. It is 0.001 gram of the constituent in one thousand milliliters
(1,000 ml) of water. It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per
million, to which it is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of
water and wastewater analysis.
   ppm: Parts per million by weight.
   pH: The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion
concentration expressed by one of the procedures outlined in the IEPA "Division
Of Laboratories Manual Of Laboratory Methods".
   Population Equivalent: A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is one
hundred (100) gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.20 pounds of BOD and 0.25
pounds of suspended solids.
   Properly Shredded Garbage: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 cm) in any
dimension.
   Sewage: Used interchangeably with "wastewater".
   Slug: Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any
period of duration longer than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times
the average twenty four (24) hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
   Suspended Solids (SS): Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage, or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in "standard methods".
   Unpolluted Water: Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   Wastewater: The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present.
   Water Quality Standards: Defined in the water pollution regulations of
Illinois.
WASTEWATER FACILITIES: The structures, equipment, and process required to
collect, carry away and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
WATERCOURSE AND CONNECTIONS:
   Natural Outlet: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other
body of surface or ground water.
   Watercourse: A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently. (Ord. 1191, 6-27-1990)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
Title; Purpose; Scope   1
Administration And Supervision   2
Permit Requirements   3
Unsafe Buildings; Nuisances, Nonconforming Structures   4
Swimming Pools   5
Classification Of Buildings   6
Definitions   7
Construction Of Buildings For Residential Purposes   8
Minimum Planning Requirements   9
Minimum Construction Requirements   10
Regulations   11
Fences   11A
Signs   11B
Decks And Porches   11C
Tents   11D
Special Provisions And Structures   12
Violations; Penalty   13
Dangerous Buildings   14
Automatic Fire Suppressant Sprinkler Systems; Heat And Smoke Detection And
Interior Fire Alarm Systems   15
Cable TV   16
Satellite Dish Antennas   17
Property Maintenance Code   18
Residential Rental Housing   19
Administrative Adjudication Of Building Code Violations   20
Payment Stamps   21
Appendix A   22
Registration Of Defaulted Mortgage And Vacant Property   23
Regulation Of Vacant Commercial Buildings And Premises   24
CHAPTER 1
TITLE; PURPOSE; SCOPE
SECTION:
4-1-1: Title
4-1-2: Purpose
4-1-3: Scope
4-1-4: Building Code Adopted
4-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known and may be cited as MIDLOTHIAN BUILDING CODE OF 1962
hereinafter referred to as "this code". (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-1-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this code is to provide for public safety, health and welfare
through structural strength and stability, means of egress, adequate light and
ventilation and protection to life and property from fires and hazards incident
to the design, construction, alteration, removal or demolition of buildings and
structures within the corporate limits of the Village of Midlothian. (Ord., 12-
12-1962)
4-1-3: SCOPE:
The provisions of this code are hereby declared to be remedial and shall be
construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, and shall
apply to the construction, alteration, repair and/or maintenance of buildings
and structures and appurtenances thereto or portions thereof, such as vaults,
areaways and street encroachments and to buildings and structures hereafter
moved or demolished in the Village. The provisions of this code based on
occupancy also apply to conversions of existing buildings and structures or
portions thereof from one occupancy classification to another.
The provisions of this code shall be deemed to supplant and otherwise void any
existing building ordinances, as of the effective date of this code.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of other
laws which prescribe more restrictive limitations. Any existing or future State
laws or revisions thereto pertaining to the erection, maintenance or occupancy
of buildings and structures are hereby made a part of this code.
The Zoning Ordinance heretofore enacted by the Village is hereby made a part of
this code. Should any provision in such Zoning Ordinance conflict with any
provisions of this Building Code, the more restrictive one shall govern.
If any chapter or part of a chapter or section of this code is declared invalid
or unconstitutional, it shall not be held to invalidate or impair the validity,
force or effect of any other chapter or chapters or a part of a chapter or
section of this code.
It shall be unlawful to maintain, occupy or use a building or structure, or
part thereof, that has been erected or altered in violation of the provisions
of this code, and no building or structure shall be occupied unless it is in a
safe and habitable condition as prescribed in this code, and for which a
certificate of occupancy has been issued, under the provisions of this code.
Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the use of any material or
method of construction whether or not specifically provided for in this code
if, upon presentation of plans, methods or analysis, test data or other
necessary information, to the building official by the interested person or
persons, the building official is satisfied that the proposed material or
method of construction complies with specific provisions of or conforms to the
intent of this code. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-1-4: BUILDING CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The 2018 International Building Code as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated in full as if
set forth at length herein, and shall apply and control within the Village of
Midlothian, save and except such portions as hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended.
   (B)   Code References: References to International Codes herein shall mean
and apply as follows:
      1.   International Building Code (IBC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      2.   References to the International Existing Building Code are hereby
deleted.
      3.   International Fire Code (IFC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the National Fire Code, 2009 edition published by the National
Fire Protection Association, the National Fire Protection Association Code
(NFPAC) #1, 2009 edition, the National Fire Protection Association Code 101,
Life Safety Code, 2009 edition and their subsequent revisions and the whole
thereof, except such portions pertaining to the organization, administration,
operation, and equipment of the Fire Department and such portions as are
otherwise inapplicable to the Village, or as are hereinafter deleted, modified
or amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      4.   International Plumbing Code (IPC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the Illinois Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the Village
of Midlothian.
      5.   International Residential Code (IRC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      6.   International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the International Fuel Gas
Code (IFGC) as adopted and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      7.   International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) as adopted and
amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      8.   The most recent International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) as
adopted by the Village of Midlothian.
      9.   References to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the provisions of title 3, chapter 5 of the
Village Code.
   (C)   Amendments: The following amendments to the 2018 edition of the
International Building Code, shall apply:
      1.   Section 101.1 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the
jurisdiction and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as
the Building Code of the Village of Midlothian, hereinafter referred as the
"Building Code."
      2.   Section 105.1.1 referencing Annual Permit is hereby deleted.
      3.   Section 105.1.2 referencing Annual Permit Records is hereby deleted.
      4.   Section 105.2 referencing work not requiring a permit shall delete
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9 and 10 and these numbered items shall require
permits in the Village of Midlothian.
      5.   Section 105.2.1 referencing Emergency Repairs shall be amended to
provide the following: Application for a permit must be made for all repair
work requiring permits under this Building Code however, where equipment
replacement and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit
application shall be submitted within the next business day to the Building
Superintendent.
Maintenance items such as painting, sealing, decorating and repair related/home
improvements are not considered to be repairs and do not require that a fee be
paid. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall, partition or
portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or load-bearing
support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress, or
rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
      6.   Section 107.3.3 shall be amended to add the following paragraph:
Requests for phased development permits shall have the phases clearly outlined
in the permit application with expected dates for beginning of construction and
date of completion of construction of each phase. The payment of the fee for
phased construction shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit
from payment of other fees that may be prescribed by statute, resolution or
ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits, erection of
signs or other fees, inspections, certificates of use and occupancy or other
privileges or requirements in the Village of Midlothian.
      7.   Section 113.1 referencing Board of Appeals is hereby amended to
designate the Village Board of the Village of Midlothian as the Board of
Appeals and to provide that the Village board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its appeal functions and issue all decisions and findings in
writing.
      8.   Section 901.6 shall be amended to state that all fire protection
systems shall be monitored by an approved supervising station in accordance
with NFPA-72.
      9.   Section 903.6 referencing Automatic Sprinkler Systems is hereby
deleted and replaced with the provisions of 4-15-4 of the Village of Midlothian
Municipal Code.
      10.   Chapter 11 referencing Accessibility is adopted only to the extent
that it is consistent with the Illinois Accessibility Code as adopted by the
Village of Midlothian.
      11.   Section 1612.3, "Establishment of flood hazard areas" is hereby
amended to insert the Village of Midlothian as the name of the jurisdiction and
to delete August 19, 2008 and insert November 1, 2019 in its place as the date
of issuance of the Flood Insurance Study. Section 1612.3 is further amended to
add the following Flood Insurance Rate Map numbers: 17031C0638J, 17031C0639J,
17031C0726J and 17031C0727J of the countywide FIRM for Cook County dated August
19, 2008 and 17031CIND1H, 17031CIND2H, 17031CIND3H, 17031CIND4H, 17031C0619K
and 170310707K of the countywide FIRM for Cook County dated November 1, 2019 at
the end of the Section.
      12.   Section 1807.1.3 is hereby amended to prohibit the use of Rubble
stone foundation walls in the Village of Midlothian.
      13.   Section 1807.1.4 is hereby amended to prohibit the use of Wood
foundations in the Village of Midlothian.
      14.   Section 1808.8.5 referencing Forming of concrete is amended to
require all concrete foundations shall be mechanically formed in accordance
with ACI 318 and ACI 306.
      15.   Section 1809.12 is hereby amended to prohibit the use of Timber
footings foundations in the Village of Midlothian.
      16.   Section 1810.3.2.4.1 is hereby amended to prohibit the use of
Timber deep foundations in the Village of Midlothian.
      17.   Section 1901 shall be amended to add a Section 1901.7 as follows:
      1901.7 Cold Weather Concrete
      1.   Definitions and requirements: Cold weather is defined as a period
when one of the following conditions exists for more than three consecutive
days:
         a.   Average air temperature is less than forty (40) degrees
Fahrenheit;
         b.   Air temperature is less than forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit for
more than one-half of any twenty-four (24) hour period. Average air temperature
is the average of the highest and lowest temperatures occurring during the
period from midnight to midnight. After the first cold weather condition or
after December 1, whichever comes first, all concrete will be subject to the
cold weather requirements until April 1.
         c.   Footings shall be poured on frost free soil and in compliance
with ACI 306R.88. concrete shall be protected in forms for not less than two
days and covered with insulation blankets.
         d.   Foundations shall be poured and protected in compliance with ACI
306R.88. The length of protection shall be as required in Table 5.3 and shall
be covered with insulation blankets a minimum of three days. The insulation
blankets shall extend from the top of the wall to the base of the footings.
         e.   Interior concrete floors, elevated decks and roofs shall be
poured and protected in compliance with ACI 306R.88. All concrete floors shall
be protected and covered with insulation blankets and temperature maintained at
50 degrees Fahrenheit. If supplemental heat is required to maintain minimum
temperatures, U.L. listed, vented-type heaters are permitted, provided the unit
is vented to the exterior of the building. Vented boilers, radiant heat and
propane units are permitted provided the unit is equipped with a carbon
monoxide cut-off switch. The use of salamanders (torpedo heaters) or other
equipment that expel flue gases into the area above concrete floors are
prohibited to avoid carbonation of fresh concrete.
         f.   Exterior flatwork is not permitted during the period of December
1, until April 1 without approval of the Building Superintendent.
         g.   All concrete that is poured during cold weather conditions shall
require on-site testing and inspections by a third-party testing agency in
accordance with ACI 306R.88. A cold weather concrete plan shall be required
from the general contractor indicating the inspection schedule, testing
procedures and also a list of any admixtures that are proposed to accelerate
curing.
      18.   Section 1907 Referencing Minimum slab provisions is replaced in its
entirety with the following provisions:
         1907.1 General.
         The thickness of concrete floor slabs in crawl spaces supported
directly on the ground shall not be less than two (2) inches. The thickness of
concrete floor slabs of concrete basement floors shall be not less than four
(4) inches. The minimum thickness of all concrete exposed to freezing and
thawing conditions, including garage floors, shall be a minimum of five (5)
inches with 6 x 6 W.W.F. installed at the mid-point of slab thickness. The
minimum thickness of concrete floors in slab on grade construction shall be a
minimum of five (5) inches with 4 x 4 W.W.F. installed at the mid-point of slab
thickness. All exposed concrete shall be a minimum six (6) bag mixture with an
air entrainment of four (4) percent to seven (7) percent and achieve a minimum
compressive strength of 3,500 psi after 28 days. Fibrous concrete reinforcement
shall be permitted in lieu of welded wire fabric reinforcement when installed
in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and field verification. A 6-
mil polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches shall
be placed between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or
other approved equivalent methods or materials shall be used to retard vapor
transmission through the floor slab. A vapor retarder is required for slab on
grade construction. A 15-mil polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not
less than 6 inches and taped shall be placed between the base course or sub
grade and the concrete floor slab.
         Exception: A vapor retarder is not required:
         a.   For detached structures accessory to occupancies in Group R-3,
such as garages, utility buildings or other unheated facilities.
         b.   For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square
feet and carports attached to occupancies in Group R-3 in the IBC.
         c.   For buildings of other occupancies where migration of moisture
through the slab from below will not be detrimental to the intended occupancy
of the building.
         d.   For driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork which will not be
enclosed later.
      19.   Chapter 27 is referencing Electrical is hereby deleted.
      20.   Chapter 29 is referencing Plumbing is hereby deleted.
      21.   Section 3109 referencing Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs is
hereby deleted and the provisions of 4-5-1 of the Village Code shall apply.
      22.   The following Appendices of the IBC are hereby adopted in the
Village of Midlothian:
            Appendix E referencing Supplementary Accessibility Requirements
            Appendix F referencing Rodent Proofing
            Appendix G referencing Flood Resistant Construction
            Appendix I referencing Patio Covers
(Ord. 2019, 3-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-16-2019)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION AND SUPERVISION
SECTION:
4-2-1: Department Of Buildings; Creation
4-2-2: President To Appoint
4-2-3: Compensation Of Superintendent
4-2-4: Compensation Of Inspectors
4-2-5: Deputies Of The Department Of Buildings
4-2-6: Duties And Power Of Superintendent Of Buildings
4-2-7: Right To Enter Premises
4-2-8: Duties And Power Of The Chairman Of The Building Committee
4-2-9: Duties And Power Of Building Committee
4-2-1: DEPARTMENT OF BUILDINGS; CREATION:
There is hereby created and established an executive department of the
municipal government of the village, which shall be known as the department of
buildings, which department shall consist of a superintendent of buildings, and
such assistants as the village board may determine, and a building committee
consisting of the members of the board of trustees. The chairman of the
building committee shall be appointed by the village president. (Ord. 1233, 9-
25-1991)
4-2-2: PRESIDENT TO APPOINT:
The president, with the advice and consent of the village board, shall appoint
the superintendent of buildings and his assistants who may be designated
"inspectors" of various phases of construction for a one year term or until a
successor is appointed. (Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
4-2-3: COMPENSATION OF SUPERINTENDENT:
The superintendent of buildings shall receive an annual salary as determined by
the village board, payable in equal monthly installments. (Ord. 1486, 5-10-
2000)
4-2-4: COMPENSATION OF INSPECTORS:
When an inspector is appointed who is not otherwise in the employ of the
village he shall receive compensation for the inspections by a monthly salary
as determined by the village board. (Ord. 1486, 5-10-2000)
4-2-5: DEPUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF BUILDINGS:
The chiefs of the fire and police departments, village engineer, health
inspector, superintendent of public works and the village attorney are hereby
made ex officio deputies of the department of buildings, and shall aid the
superintendent of buildings in administering and enforcing the provisions of
this code. (Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
4-2-6: DUTIES AND POWER OF SUPERINTENDENT OF BUILDINGS:
The superintendent of buildings shall be the head of the department of
buildings and have general charge of inspection, supervision and enforcement of
all matters pertaining to buildings or structures as set forth in this code. He
shall initiate or when requested by the president of the board of trustees or
the building committee, make investigations in connection with matters referred
to in this code; also make or cause to be made investigations on new materials
and modes of construction intended for use in the construction of buildings not
provided for in this code and make written reports with his recommendations to
the president of the village board and to the building committee. He shall keep
accurate records of all applications, permits and other matters pertaining to
this office and make a report to the chairman of the building committee each
month of any and all business transacted by this department. It is within the
power of said superintendent of buildings to approve or reject the following:
   (A)   Applications for permits to erect or remodel buildings or structures
for any occupancy or type of construction not provided for in this code.
   (B)   The location or width of, or increase in the number of stairs or exit
doors if the location or number shown on plans would create a risk of life in
case of fire.
   (C)   The architectural design of buildings or structures based on
architectural harmony with existing buildings or structures.
   (D)   All applications for building permits, all business license
applications where a building department inspection is required for approval.
(Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
   (E)   Any request for a building code or fire code variation shall be made
to the superintendent of buildings for his approval or rejection. Said request
must be made in writing and said request must explain the basis for the request
and is to be accompanied by cash or certified check in the amount of seventy
five dollars ($75.00) which shall be delivered to the treasurer to the credit
of the general fund of the village to cover the approximate administrative cost
of the procedure and the paperwork involved. Under no circumstances shall this
sum of money or any part thereof be refunded to the applicant. (Ord. 1356, 5-
24-1995)
In case of any violations of the provisions of this code, the superintendent
and/or any authorized inspectors shall immediately notify the owner of the
property in question and/or the contractor or workmen present at the building
site as to what violation exists, and shall instruct that the violation be
corrected forthwith. In the event that the violation is not corrected, the
superintendent and/or any authorized inspectors, shall issue and post a stop
order on all construction work. Any violation which is not corrected or any
continuation of work after the posting of a stop shall be subject to the
penalties as prescribed by village ordinances. (Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
4-2-7: RIGHT TO ENTER PREMISES:
The superintendent of buildings and his authorized inspectors are hereby
empowered, during reasonable hours, to lawfully enter upon any premises or into
any buildings or structure whether occupied, completed or in the process of
construction, when necessary to do so in the performance of any duty imposed
upon them. Any person or persons who, in any way, hinder or prevent any
building officer in the performance of his duty, shall be charged with
resisting an officer and shall be subject to the general penalty provided for
violations of village ordinances. (Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
4-2-8: DUTIES AND POWER OF THE CHAIRMAN OF THE BUILDING COMMITTEE:
It shall be the duty of the chairman of the building committee to review all
applications for building permits. He will be an ex officio member, without
voting rights, of the plan commission, zoning board of appeals and building
code committee. (Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
4-2-9: DUTIES AND POWER OF BUILDING COMMITTEE:
Whenever the superintendent of buildings shall reject or refuse to approve a
variation in the building or fire code or the mode or manner of construction
proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the erection or alteration
of a building or structure, or when it is claimed that the provisions of this
code or any adopted ordinances do not apply, or that an equally good or more
desirable form of construction can be employed in a specific case, the owner of
such building or structure, or his duly authorized agent may appeal from the
decision of the superintendent of buildings to the building committee, who
shall act as the board of appeals and whose decision shall supersede that of
the superintendent of buildings and shall be final. (Ord. 1233, 9-25-1991)
CHAPTER 3
PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
4-3-1: Permit To Be Obtained
4-3-2: Permits Not Required
4-3-3: Duration Of Permit
4-3-4: Reinstatement Of Permit
4-3-5: Permit Does Not Allow Violation
4-3-6: Application For Permit
4-3-7: Issuance Of Building Permit
4-3-8: Permit And Inspection Fees
4-3-9: Demolition Permit
4-3-10: Permit To Move Buildings Or Structures
4-3-11: Street Construction And Openings
4-3-12: Street, Alley, Parkway; Opening Fees And Bonds
4-3-13: General Building Bond
4-3-14: Revoking Of Permits
4-3-15: Certificate Of Occupancy
4-3-16: Permits For Temporary Drop Off/Roll-Off Construction Dumpster
4-3-1: PERMIT TO BE OBTAINED:
It shall be unlawful to commence the erection, construction, any alteration,
repair, removal, demolition of any building or excavation for any building or
structure, or leveling or grading of any land, or to occupy any building or a
portion of a street or alley before the permit for such work or occupancy has
been obtained from the department of buildings. (Ord. 1019, 12-9-1981)
4-3-2: PERMITS NOT REQUIRED:
A permit will not be required for ordinary repairs or maintenance work
incidental to the proper upkeep of a building or structure. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-3-3: DURATION OF PERMIT:
Construction shall start within thirty (30) days after issuance of any permit
and be carried to completion within one year. If construction is not started
within thirty (30) days after issuance of the permit, or if after construction
is started such operations shall cease for a period of thirty (30) days, such
permit shall automatically expire and the permit fee shall be forfeited to the
village. However, if the owner can show good cause for failure to start or
continue construction the building committee may reinstate such permit without
further payments of permit fee. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-3-4: REINSTATEMENT OF PERMIT:
Any permit may be reinstated by the payment of an additional fee of fifty
percent (50%) of the original fee, except if a change has been made in the
building or zoning code between the time of issuance of the original permit and
the request for its reissuance. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-3-5: PERMIT DOES NOT ALLOW VIOLATION:
The issuance of a permit does not allow violations of any of the requirements
or provisions of the building or zoning code, even if shown by plans or other
documents but not corrected by the superintendent of buildings or building
chairman when application was made, nor is the village, its department of
buildings or officers liable for the cost to make such building or structure
comply with the building or zoning code. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-3-6: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
   (A)   Form Provided: Application for a permit shall be made on a form
furnished by the department of buildings and must be accompanied by the
following documents, namely: plans, specifications, survey plot plan, site
grading and drainage plan, certificates and estimates of costs as hereinafter
specified, bonds and insurance as specified in subsections 5-4-14(D) and (E) of
this code. (Ord. 1440, 6-10-1998)
   (B)   Filing And Stamping: Plans and specifications must be in triplicate,
two (2) sets to be left on file with the department of buildings, the other,
after being approved and properly stamped by the superintendent of buildings,
to be kept on the job while the work is in progress.
   (C)   Alteration Of Permit Plans: It shall be unlawful to alter any lines or
figures shown on the stamped permit plans. If during the progress of work, the
owner desires to deviate in any manner from the permit plans, he shall submit
plans in triplicate of such changes and secure written approval from the
chairman of the building committee before proceeding with the work. (Ord., 12-
12-1962)
   (D)   Seal Required By Law: The building department may require plans and
specifications required under this section to be signed by and sealed by a
licensed architect as provided in the Illinois architecture practice act of
1989, as amended, or by a licensed structural engineer as provided in the
structural engineering act of 1989, as amended.
   (E)   Certificate Of Compliance To Codes: A licensed architect or structural
engineer shall certify on the first sheet of plans that the plans and
specifications were prepared by him and comply with all the requirements of the
building or zoning code. If a plan from a licensed architect or structural
engineer is not required, the applicant must set forth on the first page of his
plans that he has reviewed the requirements of the building and zoning code and
that his plans are designed to comply with all of the requirements of the
building or zoning code. (Ord. 1908, 11-11-2015)
   (F)   Plans And Specification Requirements: Architectural plans shall show
all of the floors, at least two (2) elevations, wall sections and necessary
framing plans and shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-eighth inch to
the foot (1/8" = 1') on paper in ink or a nonfading print of same showing in
detail any and all information on construction, ventilation and sanitary
requirements, the sewage and plumbing systems as required in this code, and all
distances and dimensions. The plans shall show the location, character and
connections of plumbing and electrical fixtures, of heating and ventilating
equipment, the location and dimensions of the foundation, basement or cellar,
of all floors and of the roof and also show the elevation. Specifications shall
further illustrate drawings, grade of materials and workmanship. Scale drawing
shall not be required for sheds or private garages, not more than twelve feet
(12') high and of not more than four hundred fifty (450) square feet in area.
   (G)   Structural And Mechanical Plans: Structural and mechanical plans must
be provided in addition to architectural plans for any building or structure of
unusual construction, structural design or mechanical use.
   (H)   Survey Plot Plan: A survey plot plan drawn by a registered or
recognized surveyor, giving the full legal description and showing the
dimensions of the lot to be improved, with the proposed building plotted on the
plan, shall be permanently filed with the department of buildings. A survey
plot plan may be waived for minor alterations not involving structural changes
and for residential accessory buildings not over four hundred fifty (450)
square feet in area, if sufficiently described in the application for permit.
   (I)   Estimated Cost: The estimated cost of the proposed work shall be shown
on the application for permit. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
   (J)   Grading And Drainage Plan:
      1.   The grading plan shall be submitted in duplicate and shall be
prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall contain the following
topographic and proposed plan information: location of existing improvements
including streets, sidewalks, curbs, ditches, storm culverts or sewers and
adjacent buildings.
      2.   Elevations of the property including the existing improvements such
as streets, sidewalks, curbs, ditches, storm culverts or sewers, and top of
foundation and ground adjacent to adjacent buildings and all utilities shall
also be included. This information shall be adequate to determine the existing
drainage pattern.
      3.   Location and elevation of all proposed improvements including
streets, curbs, sidewalks, drives, parking areas, buildings and ditches,
culverts, storm sewers and drainage structures shall also be included. (Ord.
1108, 1985)
   (K)   Public Improvements Deposits: No building permit shall be issued for
any building fronting upon or adjacent to any undeveloped or unimproved street
unless the improvements required by the building department, building
ordinances and the subdivision control ordinance 1  are to be provided thereon
and satisfactory assurance of the completion of the improvements are furnished
to the village by the developer or applicant for the building permit. If the
property fronts on or is adjacent to a street that the village board feels is
not practical or reasonable to complete with appropriate surface improvements
at the time of the permit application, the village board of trustees may
require the applicant to make a minimum cash deposit with the village clerk.
Said deposit is to be applied toward the future completion of the required
surface improvements. No sidewalk or sewers are included in this deposit. The
required deposit is currently set at thirty two dollars ($32.00) per front
foot. Said amount may be amended from time to time by the village board. Said
funds are to be deposited by the village in a separate account. All interest
accrued in this account shall belong to the village and similar deposits from
other applicants may be commingled within this fund. The applicant shall not be
entitled to a refund of any of these funds unless he, at a future time, puts in
all the necessary improvements, or unless the village board feels sufficient
time has passed and it is not practical or reasonable to complete the
appropriate surface improvements. The funds are to be used toward the payment
of the surface improvements in the event the village makes the improvement or
in the event the improvements are made by special assessment or in the event
others put in the improvement. The building department shall have the
responsibility of keeping records of the deposits and what areas of surface
improvements are covered by the deposits. If a special assessment is levied
against the property, the deposit may be applied toward payment of the special
assessment. If the deposit is not sufficient to cover the full cost of the
surface improvement, the village may require additional deposits or may assess
the property for the full improvement cost and use the deposit to pay off part
of the assessment. Any interest earned on the deposits may be used by the
village for any purposes, including, but not limited to, road maintenance,
payment of public benefit for special assessments or other items of maintenance
within the village. (Ord. 1465, 7-28-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 12 of this code.
4-3-7: ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT:
When the application for permit and the required documents have been filed, the
superintendent of buildings shall examine them as to compliance with the
ordinances of the village. Upon compliance with all ordinances he shall report
to the chairman of the building committee who will issue the permit.
The superintendent of buildings shall accept or reject applications for permit
within fifteen (15) days after filing. In the event of refusing to issue a
permit, the superintendent of buildings shall give the applicant the reasons
for such refusal. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-3-8: PERMIT AND INSPECTION FEES:
All permit and inspection fees are to be paid at the time the permits are
issued. The permit fee to be paid shall be the total of charges for building,
plumbing, electrical, heating and other fees set forth in the ordinances of the
village. The fee to be charged for the building permit for the erection or
alteration of a building or structure in addition to the other fees set forth
shall be set by the village board. The village board shall set the amount of
the fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained by the
village clerk and which shall be made available to the public upon request.
(Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
4-3-9: DEMOLITION PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful to move, demolish or wreck any building or structure
without first obtaining a permit from the building department. Demolition
permit fees shall be set by the village board. The village board shall set the
amount of the fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained
by the village clerk and which shall be made available to the public upon
request. (Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
4-3-10: PERMIT TO MOVE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to move any building onto or over a public street
or alley without first obtaining a permit from the department of buildings. The
application shall show the size and height of the building, the route to be
taken, the wiring, posts, etc., that will require moving and replacing along
with an itemized statement of such costs. If, after consideration by the
building committee, the moving of the building appears feasible, and evidence
of proper agreements with all utility companies affected as well as permits
from the agency in control of any state or county highway to be used or
occupied, is submitted, the permit will be issued providing that in addition to
the payment of the proper moving permit fee, a surety bond shall be approved
and filed with the chairman of the building committee. Said bond shall hold
harmless the village from any damage arising out of the moving of the building
and the application shall further show evidence of adequate insurance to cover
any damages incurred in the moving. (Ord. 908, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   The amount of fee to be charged for moving a building on or over a
public street or alley is to be based on the size of the building and the
distance it is moved, and shall be determined by the village board. The village
board shall set the amount of the fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee
schedule to be maintained by the village clerk and which shall be made
available to the public upon request. (Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
   (C)   There shall be a charge made for water used in construction. Water
shall be used from a service installed by the owner. Under no circumstances
shall water be taken from fire hydrants. The charge for water used shall be
forty dollars ($40.00) for a single-family building and twenty dollars ($20.00)
per unit for multi-family construction. A fee shall be set by the
superintendent of buildings for any other type of construction. (Ord. 1232, 9-
11-1991)
4-3-11: STREET CONSTRUCTION AND OPENINGS:
It shall be unlawful to cause an excavation to be made in any street, alley or
parkway unless a street opening permit has been obtained from the department of
buildings.
All openings made in streets, alleys or parkways shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent of public works or his representative. In all
cases, sand and screenings shall be used for backfilling. Sand and screenings
shall be watered and mechanically tamped. Backfilling on improved streets or
alleys shall be two inches (2") above the present level of the street. All
digging and backfilling shall be done by and at the expense of the owner or
contractor. Final surfacing and/or patching of improved streets will be done by
the village and the cost thereof deducted from the street opening bond. The
building committee may forfeit any bonds if the contractor does not comply with
this section and use proceeds of bonds to complete repairs.
It shall be unlawful to mix mortar, concrete or any other materials on the
surface of any street or sidewalk or to store any materials on any street,
alley or sidewalk.
Any person to whom a street opening permit has been issued shall be responsible
for the placement of sufficient barricades, properly lighted with red lights
and properly protected so that there is no danger to the public. The permit
holder shall be responsible to ensure proper lighting between sunset and
sunrise. (Ord. 908, 4-12-1978)
4-3-12: STREET, ALLEY, PARKWAY; OPENING FEES AND BONDS:
   (A)   No surface excavation shall be made on any improved street unless the
superintendent of public works determines other means of excavation are not
feasible. No opening shall exceed four feet (4') in width.
   (B)   No permit shall be issued for street, alley or parkway excavation
until the applicant shall have deposited with the village a cash bond as set by
the village board. Upon approval of the building superintendent, the bond shall
be refunded to the applicant less the cost of final repairs to the street,
alley or parkway, provided said bond has not been forfeited.
   (C)   The fees or the amount of the bonds shall be set by the village board
by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained by the village
clerk and which shall be made available to the public upon request. (Ord. 1651,
10-10-2007)
4-3-13: GENERAL BUILDING BOND:
   (A)   Every person obtaining a permit for construction or alteration of a
building or structure in the village shall deposit a cash bond in the amount
set by the village board for each garage or for the alteration of a single-
family residence. In addition, every person obtaining a permit for construction
or alteration of a new home, apartment building, condominium, townhouse, or
commercial building shall also deposit a cash bond in the amount set by the
village board. The building department may use their discretion in increasing
or lowering the bond for a classification that is not covered by the above
descriptions. Bonds shall be refunded to the person who deposited same when the
building and/or project is completed and the premises are cleaned. The bond
money may be used by the village for the payment of all fees for failed
inspections. If the landowner or village is not satisfied with the work, or if
the cleanup is not satisfactory, or if the project is not complete, a fifteen
(15) days' written notice of the problem shall be given to the person who put
up the bond. If the problem has not been rectified within said fifteen (15)
days or any extension given by the superintendent of buildings, the village may
use the bond or a portion thereof to rectify the problem or turn the
appropriate portion of the bond, as determined by the superintendent of
buildings, over to the landowner if the builder has not rectified the problem
after said fifteen (15) days. The village board shall set the amount of the
fees or cash bonds by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be
maintained by the village clerk and which shall be made available to the public
upon request. (Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
   (B)   Any improvement or construction for which a bond or any escrow deposit
has been made under this code or any ordinance of this village shall be
completed within a two (2) year period from the time of deposit.
The party depositing the bond or other escrow deposit shall apply for a refund
of said deposit within two (2) years of the time of deposit; if an application
is not made for such a refund, the bond or escrow deposit shall automatically
be forfeited and placed in the general corporate fund of the village. (Ord.
1584, 1-14-2004)
4-3-14: REVOKING OF PERMITS:
Any permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter may be revoked at any
time for reasonable cause by the superintendent of buildings. (Ord., 12-12-
1962)
4-3-15: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   Certificate Of Occupancy Required: No building or structure hereafter
erected shall be used in whole or in part until a certificate of occupancy has
been issued therefor. No building hereafter enlarged or altered so as to change
its classification as to use, shall be used in whole or in part until a
certificate of occupancy has been issued.
   (B)   Use Or Occupancy Prohibited: No owner, builder, contractor, seller,
purchaser or any agent of any of the foregoing shall use, or occupy or cause to
be used or occupied, or turn over use or occupancy of a building or structure
to any person or persons until a certificate of occupancy has been issued for
such building or structure.
   (C)   Certificate Of Occupancy; Issue: A certificate of occupancy shall be
issued by the superintendent of buildings on completion of the construction or
alteration of a building or structure, provided said work complies with the
provisions of the village's ordinances. The certificate shall state such
compliance and set forth the purpose for which the building or structure may be
used in its several parts. Copies of said certificate shall be furnished to the
owner or his agent. (Ord. 1169, 6-28-1989)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this
section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than
the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes for each offense, and a separate and distinct offense shall be
regarded as committed every day on which any structure or building is used or
occupied contrary to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1169, 6-28-1989;
amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
4-3-16: PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY DROP OFF/ROLL-OFF CONSTRUCTION DUMPSTER:
For regulations and permit requirements of drop off/roll-off construction
dumpsters, see section 8-2-9 of this code. (Ord. 1372, 12-13-1995)
CHAPTER 4
UNSAFE BUILDINGS; NUISANCES, NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
SECTION:
4-4-1: Unsafe Buildings
4-4-2: Nonconforming Building Or Structure
4-4-1: UNSAFE BUILDINGS:
Whenever, in the judgment of the village board, any walls, roofs or any part or
parts of a building are deemed to be unsafe or shall have been erected,
constructed or repaired contrary to the provisions of these regulations, the
village board may declare said structure or building a nuisance and direct the
village clerk to notify the owner or his agent by registered or certified mail,
specifying wherein such danger exists, or why such building or structure is
unsafe, defective or unlawful. If the owner is unable to be found, the notice
provision of this section may be satisfied by posting said notice on the
building. If, after a reasonable period of time, as set by the village
president and board of trustees and stated in the notice, the owner, or his
agent, neglects to put such building or structure in a safe condition or
forthwith to demolish and remove said building or structure or part thereof, he
shall be subject to such penalties as prescribed for violations of this
chapter. Further, if the owner, or his agent, after notice is given or posted
as hereinafter provided, shall neglect or refuse to remove such building or
structure or part thereof, so that the nuisance shall be abated, the
superintendent of buildings shall, upon the direction of the president and
board of trustees, remove and tear down such building or structure, or part
thereof, as may be necessary to abate said nuisance. All expenses incurred from
such action are hereby declared a lien upon said property and may be recovered
from the owner, or his agents. The village board may direct that said notice of
lien be filed with the recorder of deeds or registrar of titles of Cook County.
The village may further refuse to issue any permit for said property until the
lien is satisfied. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-4-2: NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE:
   (A)   Definition: An existing building or structure or part or appurtenance
thereof not in conformance with the building code or other ordinances of the
village.
   (B)   Repair: Requires a written application and permit. Repairs may be
limited by the building committee unless the building or nonconforming part
thereof is made to conform with the building code.
   (C)   Moving Or Altering: No nonconforming building shall be moved or
altered unless it be made to conform with building code. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
CHAPTER 5
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
Article A. General Requirements
4-5-1: Compliance Required
4-5-2: Swimming Pool Defined
4-5-3: Permits And Permit Fees
4-5-4: Water Supply
4-5-5: Recirculation Pools
4-5-6: Fences
4-5-7: Electrical Requirements
4-5-8: Inspection
Article B. Aboveground Swimming Pools
4-5-9: Location
4-5-10: Drawings And Plans
4-5-11: Miscellaneous
Article C. Inground Swimming Pools
4-5-12: Location
4-5-13: Drawings And Plans
4-5-14: Materials
4-5-15: Structural Design
4-5-16: Walk Areas
4-5-17: Steps Or Ladders
4-5-18: Skimmers
4-5-19: Water Supply
4-5-20: Outlets
4-5-21: Recirculation System And Appurtenances
4-5-22: Safety Precautions
Article D. Penalty
4-5-23: Penalty
ARTICLE A. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
4-5-1: COMPLIANCE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install or enlarge any swimming
pool in the village except in compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-2: SWIMMING POOL DEFINED:
The term "swimming pool" is hereby defined as a receptacle for water, and/or an
artificial pool of water having a depth at any point of more than two feet
(2'), intended for the purpose of immersion or partial immersion therein of
human beings and includes all appurtenant equipment. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-3: PERMITS AND PERMIT FEES:
   (A)   Permits Required: It shall be unlawful to proceed with construction,
installation, enlargement or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances
within the village unless permits therefor shall have first been obtained from
the building commissioner. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
   (B)   Permit Fees: The fee for a permit for the erection or construction of
a swimming pool shall be set by the village board. The fee for the electrical
permit, including installation inspection, shall be set by the village board.
The village board shall set the amount of the fee by resolution or ordinance in
a fee schedule to be maintained by the village clerk and which shall be made
available to the public upon request. (Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
4-5-4: WATER SUPPLY:
No source of water other than that secured from the village waterworks
distribution system shall be used in swimming pools. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-5: RECIRCULATION POOLS:
All swimming pools shall be of the recirculation type in which circulation of
the water is maintained through the pool by pumps; the water drawn from the
pool being clarified and disinfected before being returned to the pool. (Ord.
1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-6: FENCES:
   (A)   All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence.
All fence openings or points of entry into the pool enclosure shall be equipped
with gates. The fence and gates shall be four feet (4') in height and above the
grade level, be constructed of a minimum number 9-gauge woven wire mesh
corrosion resistant material, or similar material, or a fence approved by the
village. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing or self-latching devices
installed as to be inaccessible from the outside to toddlers. Fence posts shall
be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in concrete bases.
   (B)   When provided around elevated pool decks, deck rails shall have the
entire outside perimeter protected by a rail with a minimum height of three
feet (3') above the deck. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-7: ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   All electrical installations provided for, installed and used in
conjunction with swimming pools, shall be in conformance with the ordinances
regulating electrical installations.
   (B)   All electrical equipment, including power supply cords, used with
swimming pools shall be protected by ground fault circuit interrupters at power
sources.
   (C)   No current carrying electrical conductors shall cross private
residential swimming pools, either overhead or underground or within ten feet
(10') of such pools.
   (D)   All metal fences and pool enclosures or railings near or adjacent to
swimming pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact
with broken overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively
grounded. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-8: INSPECTION:
The building commissioner has the right to inspect all swimming pools to
determine whether or not the provisions of the ordinances regarding health,
sanitation and safety applicable thereto are being complied with. (Ord. 1189,
6-13-1990)
ARTICLE B. ABOVEGROUND SWIMMING POOLS
4-5-9: LOCATION:
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance
less than six feet (6') from any side or rear property line or building line.
Pumps, filters and pool's water disinfection equipment installations shall be
located at a distance of less than six feet (6') from any side property line.
(Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-10: DRAWINGS AND PLANS:
All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement or
alteration of any aboveground swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be
presented to the building commissioner for examination and approval as to
proper location and construction. Actual construction shall be in conformity
with the approved plans. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-11: MISCELLANEOUS:
   (A)   Skimmers: At least one skimming device shall be provided for in every
swimming pool.
   (B)   Safety Precautions: Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or
more throwing ring buoys.
   (C)   Miscellaneous: The village may require some of the inground pool
requirements for an aboveground pool installation. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
ARTICLE C. INGROUND SWIMMING POOLS
4-5-12: LOCATION:
No portion of a swimming pool outside a building shall be located at a distance
less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property line or building line.
Pumps, filters and pool's water disinfection equipment installations shall be
located at a distance not less than eight feet (8') from any side property
line. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-13: DRAWINGS AND PLANS:
   (A)   All drawings and plans for the construction, installation, enlargement
or alteration of any swimming pool and appurtenances shall first be presented
to the building commissioner for examination and approval as to proper location
and construction.
   (B)   All plans and drawings shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one-
eighth inch to one foot (1/8" = 1'), on paper or cloth, in ink, or by some
process that will not fade or obliterate. All distances and dimensions shall be
accurately figured and drawings made explicit and complete, showing the lot
line, and including information pertaining to the pool, walk and fence
construction, water supply system, drainage and water disposal systems, and all
appurtenances pertaining to the swimming pool detail plans and vertical
elevations shall also be provided in accordance with the building code.
   (C)   All swimming pools, appurtenances, water supply and drainage systems
shall be constructed in conformity with the approved plans. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-
1990)
4-5-14: MATERIALS:
Swimming pool walls and floors shall be constructed of any impervious material
which will provide a tight tank with white or light colored finish and easily
cleaned surfaces. The floor or bottom of the pool shall have a nonslip finish
as smooth as possible. The side and end walls of a pool shall present a smooth
finish and shall be vertical to a depth of at least six feet (6') or shall have
a slope or curvature meeting one of the following conditions:
   (A)   The pool wall may be vertical for thirty inches (30") from the water
level, below which the wall may be curved to the bottom with a radius at any
point equal to the difference between the depth at the point and thirty inches
(30").
   (B)   To a depth of six feet (6'), except as in subsection (A) of this
section, the wall's slope shall not be less than one foot (1') horizontal in
six feet (6') vertical. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-15: STRUCTURAL DESIGN:
Swimming pools shall be designed to withstand the water pressure from within
and to resist the pressure of the earth when the pool is empty to a pressure of
two thousand two hundred (2,200) pounds per square foot. The slope of the
bottom of any part of a pool in which the water is less than five feet (5') in
depth shall not be more than one foot (1') in each ten feet (10'). The maximum
slope where water is five feet (5') or more in depth shall not exceed one foot
(1') in two feet (2'). (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-16: WALK AREAS:
Unobstructed walk areas not less than forty eight inches (48") wide (indoor)
and eight feet (8') wide (outside) shall be provided to extend entirely around
the pool. The walk area shall be constructed of impervious material, and the
surfaces shall be of such as to be smooth and easily cleaned and of nonslip
construction. The slope of the walks shall have a pitch of at least three
inches (3") in ten feet (10'), designated so as to prevent back drainage from
entering the pool. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-17: STEPS OR LADDERS:
Two (2) or more means of egress in the form of steps or ladders shall be
provided for all swimming pools. At least one such means of egress shall be
located on a side of the pool at both the deep end and the shallow end of the
pool. Treads of steps and ladders shall be constructed of nonslip material and
at least three inches (3") wide for their full length. Steps and ladders shall
have a handrail on both sides. Steps shall be so designed and constructed that
no water is left on them when the pool level is lowered. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-18: SKIMMERS:
In every swimming pool at least one skimming device shall be provided for each
eight hundred (800) square feet of surface area or fraction thereof. Skimmers
shall be located at least thirty feet (30') apart. Handholds shall be provided
and consist of a bull nosed coping not over two and one-half inches (21/2")
thick for the outer two inches (2") or an equivalent approved handhold. The
handhold must be no more than nine inches (9") above the normal water line.
Skimming devices shall be built into the pool wall, shall adequately remove
floated oils and waste and shall meet the following general specifications:
   (A)   Each skimmer shall be designed for a flow through rate of at least
thirty (30) gallons per minute and a total capacity of all skimmers on any pool
shall be at least fifty percent (50%) of the required filter flow of the
recirculation system.
   (B)   They shall be automatically adjustable to variations in water level
over a range of at least three inches (3").
   (C)   An easily removable and cleanable basket or screen through which all
overflow water must pass shall be provided to trap large solids.
   (D)   The skimmer shall be provided with a device to prevent airlock in the
suction line. If an equalizer pipe is used, it shall provide an adequate amount
of makeup water for pump suction should the water of the pool drop below the
weir level. This pipe shall be at least two inches (2") in diameter and shall
be located at least one foot (1') below the lowest overflow level of the
skimmer.
   (E)   An equalized line shall be provided with a valve that will remain
tightly closed under normal operation conditions, but will automatically open
at a differential of not more than four inches (4") between the pool level and
the level of the overflow tank.
   (F)   The overflow weir shall be of sufficient length to maintain a rate of
at least twenty (20) gallons per minute per linear foot of weir lip. (Ord.
1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-19: WATER SUPPLY:
   (A)   Swimming pool water recirculation system inlet shall be located so as
to produce so far as possible uniform circulation of water throughout the pool
without the existence of dead spots and to carry pool bottom deposits to the
outlets, and shall discharge at a minimum depth of ten inches (10") below the
pool overflow level. A minimum of one recirculation system inlet shall be
provided for every six hundred fifteen (615) square feet of surface area of the
pool.
   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with suitable facilities for adding makeup
water as needed. There shall be no physical connection between the water supply
line and the pool system. If the makeup water is added directly to the pool,
the outlet shall be at least six inches (6") above the upper rim of the pool.
If the makeup water line discharges to a surge or balancing tank, the point of
discharge shall be at least six inches (6") above the rim of the tank. If a
hose connection from a sill cock or control valve is used then the maximum size
of the fill pipe shall be two inches (2").
   (C)   The systems supplying recirculated water and makeup water to the pool
shall be constructed in conformance with the ordinances regulating plumbing.
(Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-20: OUTLETS:
   (A)   In swimming pools thirty feet (30') in width or less, water
circulation system outlets shall be located so as to provide at least one
outlet at the deepest point in the pool. If the pool width is more than thirty
feet (30'), multiple outlets shall be provided and spaced not more than thirty
feet (30') apart, nor closer than four feet (4') to any wall. All pool drain
outlets shall be equipped with gratings having an area of openings not less
than four (4) times the cross sectional area of the outlet pipe. The gratings
shall be of such design so they cannot be readily removable by bathers and will
not injure bather's fingers. One outlet shall be provided for each eight
hundred (800) square feet of surface area.
   (B)   Pools shall be equipped with facilities for completely emptying the
pool and the discharge of the pool water to the sewer shall be at a rate not
exceeding two hundred (200) gallons per minute. No direct connection shall be
made to the sewer.
   (C)   Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the sewer
system during periods of rain or storms. At no time shall the rate of drain
water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred (200) gallons per minute. (Ord.
1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-21: RECIRCULATION SYSTEM AND APPURTENANCES:
   (A)   The swimming pool's recirculation systems shall consist of pumping
equipment, hair and lint catcher, filters, together with the necessary pipe
connections to the pool inlets and outlets, facilities and pipe connections
necessary for backwashing filters, and facilities and equipment for
disinfection of the pool water.
   (B)   Every swimming pool shall have a recirculating system with an hourly
capacity equal to the pool volume divided by six (6).
   (C)   The recirculation system pump shall have sufficient capacity to
discharge the volume of water required for a six (6) hour turnover of the pool
against the maximum head in the recirculating system.
   (D)   The pump used for backwashing filters shall have sufficient capacity
to provide a filter backwash rate of at least fifteen (15) gallons per minute
per square foot of filter area.
   (E)   A hair and lint catcher or strainer shall be installed on the suction
side of the circulation pump to prevent hair, lint and other extraneous matter
from reaching the pump and filters. Hair and lint catchers shall be so designed
that they can be easily dismantled for the cleaning and inspection and shall be
so located as to be easily accessible for cleaning. The design features shall
be as follows: water passes through the strainer from the outside; the strainer
is made of noncorrosive material; the width or diameter of strainer openings is
not more than one-eighth inch (1/8"); the area of the strainer openings shall
be at least five (5) times the cross sectional area of the inlet pipe to the
strainer.
   (F)   Recirculation systems shall contain rapid pressure filters. Sufficient
filter area shall be provided to filter the entire contents of the pool in six
(6) hours at the rate of not more than three (3) gallons per square foot of
filter area per minute. The filter backwashing facilities shall be sufficient
to backwash at a rate of fifteen (15) gallons per minute per square foot of the
filter area. All backwashing water and effluents shall be discharged to the
sewer through an indirect connection. Pressure filters shall be equipped with
readily accessible air relief valves, loss of head or pressure gauges on the
inlet and outlet pipes and an access head or hole large enough to permit
inspection, maintenance and repair work. Sight glasses that can be easily
removed for cleaning shall be provided in the effluent line for the filter
units.
   (G)   Equipment shall be provided for the disinfection of all pool water.
Any disinfection method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall be
subject to the approval of the county or state health department. Disinfection
method using materials other than chlorine compounds shall have sufficient
capacity to maintain a minimum free chlorine residual of three (3) parts per
million. The disinfectant shall be introduced into the recirculation system
ahead of the filters.
   (H)   Gaseous chlorination systems shall not be made use of as a
disinfection method for pool water.
   (I)   The system shall include a unit for the addition of a coagulant prior
to filtration at such point that its use will be effective. The coagulant shall
be introduced at a point in the recirculation system ahead of the filter and be
thoroughly mixed with the water so that:
      1.   The floc will be retained on the filter.
      2.   No floc will be formed in the pool.
      3.   The equipment for the addition of the coagulant is convenient to
use. Closed solution pots are not approved. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
4-5-22: SAFETY PRECAUTIONS:
Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring buoys not
more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having sixty feet (60') of
three-sixteenths inch (3/16") line attached and one or more light but strong
poles with blunted ends and not less than twelve feet (12') in length, for
making reach assists or rescues. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990)
ARTICLE D. PENALTY
4-5-23: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense, and a
separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1189, 6-13-1990; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-
1995)
CHAPTER 6
CLASSIFICATION OF BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-6-1: In General
4-6-1: IN GENERAL:
   (A)   Residential Buildings: A residential building is a residence or
dwelling containing not more than two (2) separate living units. The
regulations applicable to residential buildings are set forth in chapter 8 of
this title.
   (B)   Apartment Buildings: An apartment building is a building used for
residential purposes, containing more than two (2) separate living units. The
regulations applicable to apartment buildings are set forth in chapters 8, 9,
10 and 11 of this title.
   (C)   Other Buildings:
      1.   A commercial building is a building used for business purposes. An
industrial building is a building used for manufacturing or research purposes.
A storage building is for the housing of various articles or pieces of
equipment.
      2.   A mixed commercial and apartment building is a building occupied in
part by commercial units and in part by residential units.
      3.   A public building is a building occupied by the village, board of
education or other municipal or governmental agency. Or it is a building in
which persons congregate for civic, political, religious, social or
recreational purposes.
      4.   The regulations applicable to commercial buildings, mixed buildings,
public buildings and all other buildings and theaters are set forth in chapter
11 of this title. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
CHAPTER 7
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
4-7-1: Words And Terms Defined
4-7-1: WORDS AND TERMS DEFINED:
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and terms shall, for the
purpose of this code, have the meanings as defined in this chapter.
Words used in the present tense include the future; words in the masculine
gender include the feminine and neuter; and the singular number includes the
plural and the plural the singular.
The word "shall" is always mandatory and not directory.
ALCOVE: A recess connected with or at the side of a larger room, with an
unobstructed opening into such room equal to or at least twenty percent (20%)
of the entire wall surface of the alcove.
ALTERATION: As applied to a building or structure, means a change or
rearrangement of room or spaces, the structural parts, the exit facilities or
an enlargement by extending on a side or by increasing in height.
APARTMENT: A room or suite of two (2) or more rooms in an apartment building
occupied as a family domicile where provisions are made for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating within the room or suite of two (2) or more rooms.
APARTMENT BUILDING: Any building which contains three (3) or more apartments.
APPROVED: As applied to a material, device or mode of construction, means
approved by the chairman of building committee under the provisions of this
code, or by other authority designated by this code to give approval or to be
used as a standard in the matter in question.
APPROVED MASONRY: Masonry constructed of brick, stone, concrete, hollow block,
solid block or other materials approved after test or combination of these
materials.
AREA: As applied to the dimensions of a building means the maximum horizontal
area of the building at grade.
AREAWAY: An uncovered subsurface space adjacent to a building.
ATTIC: A half story or fractional story directly under the roof.
AUTOMATIC: As applied to a fire door or other opening protective, means
normally held in an open position and automatically closed by a releasing
device that is actuated by abnormally high temperature or by a predetermined
rate of rise in temperature.
BASEMENT: A story, the floor of which is not less than two feet (2') below and
the ceiling of which is not less than four feet (4') above building grade.
BATHROOM: A room containing a tub, shower compartment, swimming or other
facilities for bathing.
BEARING WALL: A wall which supports any load in addition to its own weight.
BOILER ROOM: A room containing the fuel burning equipment and fuel storage for
a heating or power generating system.
BUILDING: A combination of materials to form a construction that is safe and
stable, enclosed with walls and roofs and properly supported on a masonry
foundation extending down below the frost line and adapted to permanent or
continuous occupancy for resident business assembly, factory or storage
purposes; the term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words
"or part thereof".
BUILDING LINE: The line established by deed or law, beyond which a building
shall not extend, except as specifically provided for in zoning code.
BULKHEAD: A raised portion of floor construction and the partition enclosing
it, which provides head room for a stair flight or, when in connection with
store show windows, provides a means for light and ventilation to the basement
space below.
BUSINESS BUILDING: A building occupied for the transaction of business, for the
rendering of professional services, for the display and sale of goods, wares
and merchandise, for the supplying of food, drink or other bodily needs or
comforts, or for the performance of certain work or labor, including, among
others, office buildings, stores, markets, restaurants, but not including
factories, storage or warehouse buildings or gas filling stations and public
garages.
CEILING: The overhead covering of a room.
CEILING HEIGHT: The height from floor surface to ceiling.
CELLAR: A story, the ceiling of which is entirely below or less than four feet
(4') above building grade.
CEMENT FLOOR: A floor not more than four inches (4") in thickness of concrete,
composed of one part Portland cement, three (3) parts of sand and five (5)
parts of crushed stone or gravel, if mechanically mixed by a concrete mixer. If
hand mixed, the concrete shall be composed of one part Portland cement, two (2)
parts of sand and four (4) parts of crushed stone or gravel and a top finish
not less than one-half inch (1/2") in thickness composed of one part Portland
cement and two (2) parts of sand all proportioned by volume.
CEMENT LIME MORTAR: See section 4-10-4 of this title.
CEMENT MORTAR: See section 4-10-4 of this title.
CHIMNEY OR FLUE: A vertical, or approximately vertical, conduit through which
smoke or gases or combustion escape to the outer air.
CLOSET: A nonhabitable room used for storage.
CONCRETE: See section 4-10-4 of this title.
CORRIDOR: When used as a means of exit, is an enclosed hallway or passageway
connecting a required exit to a yard, street or stairway and having fire
protective walls, ceilings and floors as hereinafter provided.
COURT: An open, uncovered and unoccupied space within the lot line of a lot
other than a yard.
CRAWL SPACE: That area within the foundation walls of a building between the
ground and the first floor which is not suitable nor adaptable for finishing
into a living area.
DEAD LOAD: The weight of walls, partitions, floors, roofs and all other
permanent construction of building.
DISPLAY SIGN: A structure that is arranged, intended, designed or used as an
advertisement, an announcement or direction and includes signs, sign screens,
billboards and advertising devices of every kind.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached building occupied by or designed for
occupancy by one family.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A detached building occupied by or designed for occupancy
by two (2) families living independently of each other.
EGRESS: A means or route of exit from a room or building including doorway,
passage, corridor, stairway or fire escape.
ELEVATOR: A device within or in connection with a building used for conveying
persons or objects upward or downward and includes dumbwaiter, escalator and
similar devices.
ENCLOSING WALL: A wall separating the interior of a building from the exterior.
Such walls may act as bearing walls, enclosing walls or curtain walls.
EXIT: A means or route of egress from a room or building, including a doorway,
passage, corridor, stairway or fire escape.
FAMILY: One or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption or not
to exceed five (5) persons not so related, living, sleeping, cooking and eating
on the premises as a single housekeeping unit.
FIRE PARTITION: A wall or partition of noncombustible material which subdivides
a story of a building or encloses stairways, required corridors or shafts to
restrict the spread of fire. Such partitions, except as otherwise provided,
shall be constructed of brick, cement or gypsum block or hollow tile not less
than four inches (4") in thickness, laid up in cement or gypsum mortar and
plastered on both sides with Portland cement or gypsum plaster not less than
one-half inch (1/2") in thickness. Partitions around elevators, vents, stairs
or other shafts shall be continuous from bottom to top of shaft. A fire
partition, which is a bearing wall shall comply with wall thicknesses as
provided for under masonry construction.
FIREWALL: A wall of approved masonry which subdivides a building or separated
buildings to restrict the spread of fire and which starts at the foundation and
extends continuously through all stories to and above the roof and not less
than eight inches (8") in thickness and shall generally comply with wall
thicknesses as provided for under masonry construction.
FLOOR: A horizontal or approximately horizontal system, other than a ceiling,
used to support loads within a building.
FLOOR AREA: A floor space enclosed by exterior walls, firewalls or fire
partitions or by a combination of them.
FLUE (CHIMNEY): A vertical or approximately vertical conduit through which
smoke or gases of combustion escape to the outer air.
FOOTING: A construction supported directly on the ground which supports walls,
piers and columns.
FOUNDATION WALL: A wall or pier below grade or ground serving as support for a
wall, pier, column or other structural part of a building.
FRAME CONSTRUCTION: Buildings having brick, stone or stucco veneering on wood
frame which wholly or in part serves as the structural support of the building
or its load are hereby classified as frame buildings.
FURRING: A construction of wood, metal, masonry or other material, the sole
purpose of which is to obtain a plane or contour for other surface materials.
GARAGE: A building, shed or enclosure, or a part thereof, in which a motor
vehicle containing volatile or inflammable fuel in its storage tank is stored,
housed or kept.
   Private Garage: A garage with capacity for not more than three (3) motor
vehicles in which no business or industry connected directly or indirectly with
motor vehicles is carried on. Maximum floor area shall not exceed eight hundred
sixty four (864) square feet and the height of the peak of the roof shall not
exceed fourteen feet (14').
   Public Garage: A garage not included within the term "private garage".
GRADE: The elevation established by the village for the proper level of the
sidewalk at the street lot line. Where the sidewalk does not adjoin the street
lot line, grade at the street lot line shall be determined by taking the
elevation established by the village for the street or curb and adding thereto
an amount equal to one-third inch (1/3") for each foot of horizontal distance
between said edge of street curb and said street lot line; on an alley, grade
shall be that elevation which is commonly termed "alley grade at the property
line".
GROUNDS: Combustible or noncombustible materials to which final materials are
attached by nails, screws or for the purpose of aligning plaster.
HABITABLE ROOM: Any room in which one or more persons live, eat, sleep or carry
on their usual domestic, social or business vocation or avocation, but does not
include kitchens, pantries, bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries,
corridors, cellars and spaces that are not used frequently or during extended
periods.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING:
   (A)   In feet, the vertical distance from grade as established in this code
to the average finished line of the topmost habitable story; provided, that
penthouses, towers or steeples shall not be counted in measuring the height of
a building and further provided that where a structure is set back from the
street line, the height of the building may be measured either from the
established grade or from an elevation which is one-third inch (1/3") above the
established grade for each foot which the building is set back from the nearest
street line.
   (B)   In stories, the number of habitable stories in a building exclusive of
a basement or cellar story, and also exclusive of certain penthouses.
HEREAFTER: After the time that this code becomes effective.
HERETOFORE: Before the time that this code becomes effective.
HOLLOW BLOCK: A cellular building block of burnt clay or concrete in which the
cellular spaces within the blocks exceed twenty five percent (25%) of the gross
cubic content of the block.
INSTITUTIONAL BUILDING: A building in which persons are harbored to receive
medical, charitable or other care or treatment, or in which persons are held or
detained by reason of public or civic duty or for correctional purposes,
including, among others, hospitals, asylums, sanitariums and jails.
KITCHEN: A space where food is prepared.
LIME MORTAR: A mixture of one part of slacked lime or hydrated lime and not
more than four (4) parts of sand proportioned by volume.
LINTEL: A member placed over an opening in a wall to support the construction
above.
LIVE LOAD: All loads except dead loads.
LOT: A portion or parcel of land as a unit, occupied or to be occupied by a
building or a group of buildings and open spaces belonging to same.
LOT LINE: A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or public
space.
MEANS OF EXIT: A door, corridor, ramp, stair or stairway serving as a means of
egress; an exit from an area within a building to a street, alley, yard or open
court.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE: Any material which will not sustain fire.
OCCUPIED: As applied to a building, shall be construed as though followed by
the words "or intended, arranged or designed to be occupied".
OFFICE: A place where clerical work, writing or drafting is done, where clients
are interviewed, professional services rendered or where business is transacted
without an immediate transfer of goods.
OWNER: Includes his duly authorized agent, architect, contractor or attorney.
PARAPET: A wall of approved masonry projecting above the roof line to prevent
the spread of fire.
PARTY WALL: A wall of approved masonry used or adapted for joint use between
two (2) buildings and shall comply with wall thicknesses as provided for under
masonry construction.
PENTHOUSE: An enclosed structure extending above roof.
PERSON: Includes corporation and copartnership as well as individual.
PRIVATE GARAGE: See definition of Garage.
PUBLIC BUILDING: A building in which persons congregate for civic, political,
educational, religious, social or recreational purposes, including, among
others, courthouses, schools, colleges, libraries, museums, exhibition
building, lecture halls, churches, assembly halls, lodge rooms and dance halls.
PUBLIC GARAGES: See definition of Garage.
REINFORCED CONCRETE: Portland cement concrete in which steel is embodied in
such a manner that the two (2) materials act together in resisting forces.
REPAIR: The replacement of existing work with equivalent material used in
existing work, not including additional work that would affect the structural
safety of the building or that would affect or change required exit facilities
or that would affect a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping,
wiring or heating installation, or that would be in violation of a provision in
the building or zoning codes.
SELF-CLOSING: As applied to a fire door, means equipped with an approved device
which will ensure closing after having been opened for use.
SHAFT: An enclosed shaftway or space extending through one or more stories of a
building.
SOLID BLOCK: A building block of burnt clay or of stone, gravel or cinder
concrete in which cellular spaces within the block do not exceed in the
aggregate twenty five percent (25%) of the gross cubic content of the block.
SPRINKLERED: Equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
STAIRWAY: A stair and its enclosure, unless otherwise provided for. The term
"stairway" includes risers, treads, floor landings, stair platforms, supporting
members and any handrail, newel post, balustrade and the enclosure of the
stairs.
   (A)   Flight: A series of steps between successive landings and platforms.
   (B)   Landings: The floor space immediately adjoining the top or bottom of a
flight. For an enclosed stair, the landing is the floor space within the
enclosure.
   (C)   Open Stair: A stair without a complete enclosure.
   (D)   Step: A rise and an adjoining tread.
   (E)   Tread: The horizontal width of a step not including the nosing.
   (F)   Width: The clear width of a stair between parallel required handrail
and a wall. An unrequired handrail shall not be considered in measuring stair
width.
STORY: That part of a building comprised between a floor or roof next above.
STREET: A highway or thoroughfare dedicated or devoted to public use and
includes avenue, road and boulevard.
STREET LINE: A line dividing a lot from a street.
STRUCTURE: A combination of materials, to form a construction that is safe and
stable, including, among others, stadiums, gospel and circus tents, reviewing
stand, platforms, radio towers, coal bins, fences and display signs. The term
"structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof".
UNPROTECTED METAL CONSTRUCTION: Shall apply to buildings in which the
structural supports are metal and in which the roofing and walls or other
enclosures are sheet metal or other noncombustible materials.
WRITING: Includes printing and typewriting. (Ord., 12-12-1962; amd. Ord. 703,
5-27-1970; Ord. 1051, 8-10-1983)
CHAPTER 8
CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS FOR RESIDENTIAL PURPOSES
SECTION:
4-8-1: Height Regulations; Specifically
4-8-2: Residential Code Adopted
4-8-1: HEIGHT REGULATIONS; SPECIFICALLY:
   (A)   For single-family residences, not over two (2) stories and an attic in
height;
   (B)   For duplex houses (2 units side by side), row houses, and two-, three-
and four-family apartments or flats, not over two (2) stories in height;
   (C)   For buildings customarily accessory to the foregoing; and for any
residential portions of office, store and other business buildings, not higher
than the second floor, subject to such additional requirements as may apply to
such buildings. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-8-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The 2018 Residential Code as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted and incorporated in full as if
set forth at length herein, and shall apply and control within the Village of
Midlothian, save and except such portions as hereinafter deleted, modified or
amended.
   (B)   Other Code References: References to other International Codes herein
shall mean and apply as follows:
      1.   International Building Code (IBC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      2.   References to the International Existing Building Code are hereby
deleted.
      3.   International Fire Code (IFC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the National Fire Code, 2009 edition published by the National
Fire Protection Association, the National Fire Protection Association Code
(NFPA) #1, 2009 edition, the National Fire Protection Association Code 101,
Life Safety Code, 2009 edition and their subsequent revisions and the whole
thereof, except such portions pertaining to the organization, administration,
operation, and equipment of the Fire Department and such portions as are
otherwise inapplicable to the Village, or as are hereinafter deleted, modified
or amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      4.   International Plumbing Code (IPC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the Illinois Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the Village
of Midlothian.
      5.   International Residential Code (IRC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      6.   International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the International Fuel Gas
Code (IFGC) as adopted and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      7.   References to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the provisions of title 3, chapter 5 of the
Village Code.
      8.   International Property Maintenance Code as adopted and amended by
the Village of Midlothian.
      9.   References to NFPA 70 - the National Electrical Code are hereby
deleted and replaced with the provisions of the 2017 Chicago Electrical Code as
adopted and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      10.   References to Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities are
hereby deleted and replaced with the Illinois Accessibility Code as adopted by
the Village of Midlothian.
   (C)   Amendments: The following amendments to the 2018 edition of the
International Residential Code, shall apply:
      1.   Section 101.1 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the
jurisdiction and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as
the Residential Code for One and Two-family Dwellings in the Village of
Midlothian, hereinafter referred as the "Residential Code."
      2.   Section 101.2 referencing Scope Exception is hereby amended to
reference 4-15-4 of the Village of Midlothian Fire Code and to state that
Single Family homes do not require sprinkler systems.
      3.   Section 105.2 referencing work not requiring a permit shall delete
numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 9 and 10 and these numbered items shall require permits
in the Village of Midlothian.
      4.   Section 105.2.1 referencing Emergency Repairs shall be amended to
provide the following: Application for a permit must be made for all repair
work requiring permits under this Building Code however, where equipment
replacement and repairs must be performed in an emergency situation, the permit
application shall be submitted within the next business day to the building
official.
   Maintenance items such as painting, sealing, decorating and repair related/
home improvements are not considered to be repairs and do not require that a
fee be paid. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any wall,
partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural beam or
load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of egress,
or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress requirements; nor
shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas,
soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other
work affecting public health or general safety.
      5.   Section 106.3.3 shall be amended to add the following paragraph:
Requests for phased development permits shall have the phases clearly outlined
in the permit application with expected dates for beginning of construction and
date of completion of construction of each phase. The payment of the fee for
phased construction shall not relieve the applicant or holder of the permit
from payment of other fees that may be prescribed by statute, resolution or
ordinance for water taps, sewer connections, electrical permits, erection of
signs or other fees, inspections, certificates of use and occupancy or other
privileges or requirements in the Village of Midlothian.
      6.   Section 112.1 referencing Board of Appeals is hereby amended to
designate the Village Board of the Village of Midlothian as the Board of
Appeals and to provide that the Village board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its appeal functions and issue all decisions and findings in
writing.
      7.   Section 112.3 referencing Qualifications is hereby deleted.
      8.   Section 301.2(1) referencing Table of "Climatic and Geographic
Design Criteria" is hereby amended to insert the following designations:
         Ground Snow Load: 25
         Wind Design Speed: 90 mph
         Topographic effects: No
         Special wind region: No
         Windborne debris zone: Exposure `B'
         Seismic Design Category: A
         Subject to Damage From Weathering: Severe
         Frostline depth: 42"
         Termite: Moderate to heavy
         Winter Design Temp: Zero
         Ice and water Shield: Yes
         Air Freezing Index: 1433
         Mean annual Temperature: 50.6 degrees
      9.   Section 301.2.2.5 shall be amended to add a Section 301.2.2.5.1 as
follows:
         301.2.2.5.1 Cold weather concrete.
         1.   Definitions and requirements: Cold weather is defined as a period
when one of the following conditions exists for more than three consecutive
days:
            a.   Average air temperature is less than forty (40) degrees
Fahrenheit;
            b.   Air temperature is less than forty (40) degrees Fahrenheit for
more than one-half of any twenty-four (24) hour period. Average air temperature
is the average of the highest and lowest temperatures occurring during the
period from midnight to midnight. After the first cold weather condition or
after December 1, whichever comes first, all concrete will be subject to the
cold weather requirements until April 1.
            c.   Footings shall be poured on frost free soil and in compliance
with ACI 306R.88. concrete shall be protected in forms for not less than two
days and covered with insulation blankets.
            d.   Foundations shall be poured and protected in compliance with
ACI 306R.88. The length of protection shall be as required in Table 5.3 and
shall be covered with insulation blankets a minimum of three days. The
insulation blankets shall extend from the top of the wall to the base of the
footings.
            e.   Interior concrete floors, elevated decks and roofs shall be
poured and protected in compliance with ACI 306R.88. All concrete floors shall
be protected and covered with insulation blankets and temperature maintained at
50 degrees Fahrenheit. If supplemental heat is required to maintain minimum
temperatures, U.L. listed, vented-type heaters are permitted, provided the unit
is vented to the exterior of the building. Vented boilers, radiant heat and
propane units are permitted provided the unit is equipped with a carbon
monoxide cut-off switch. The use of salamanders (torpedo heaters) or other
equipment that expel flue gases into the area above concrete floors are
prohibited to avoid carbonation of fresh concrete.
            f.   Exterior flatwork is not permitted during the period of
December 1, until April 1 without approval of the Village of Midlothian
building Superintendent.
            g.   All concrete that is poured during cold weather conditions
shall require on-site testing and inspections by a third-party testing agency
in accordance with ACI 306R.88. A cold weather concrete plan shall be required
from the general contractor indicating the inspection schedule, testing
procedures and also a list of any admixtures that are proposed to accelerate
curing.
      10.   Section 309.3 referencing Flood hazard areas is hereby deleted.
      11.   Section 313 referencing Automatic Sprinkler Systems is hereby
deleted and replaced with the provisions of 4-15-4 of the Village of Midlothian
Municipal Code.
      12.   Section 326 referencing Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs is hereby
deleted and the provisions of 4-5-1 of the Village Code shall apply.
      13.   Sections 402 and 403 referencing Materials and Footings
respectively is hereby amended to prohibit the use of wood foundations, wood
footings, crushed stone footings, rubble foundations and require all concrete
walls shall be mechanically formed in accordance with ACI 318 and ACI 306 with
the exception of: (a) Monolithic slab on ground with turn down footing; (b)
Thickened slab on ground footing at bearing wall lines.
      14.   Section 404 referencing Rubble stone masonry foundations and Wood
foundation walls is hereby amended to prohibit their use in the Village of
Midlothian.
      15.   Section 504 is hereby deleted to prohibit the use of Pressure
Treated Preservative Wood on ground in the Village of Midlothian.
      16.   Section 506 Referencing Minimum slab provisions is replaced in its
entirety with the following provisions:
         506 General.
         The thickness of concrete floor slabs in crawl spaces supported
directly on the ground shall not be less than two (2) inches. The thickness of
concrete floor slabs of concrete basement floors shall be not less than four
(4) inches. The minimum thickness of all concrete exposed to freezing and
thawing conditions, including garage floors, shall be a minimum of five (5)
inches with 6 x 6 W.W.F. installed at the mid-point of slab thickness. The
minimum thickness of concrete floors in slab on grade construction shall be a
minimum of five (5) inches with 4 x 4 W.W.F. installed at the mid-point of slab
thickness. All exposed concrete shall be a minimum six (6) bag mixture with an
air entrainment of four (4) percent to seven (7) percent and achieve a minimum
compressive strength of 3,500 psi after 28 days. Fibrous concrete reinforcement
shall be permitted in lieu of welded wire fabric reinforcement when installed
in accordance with manufacturer's specifications and field verification. A 6-
mil polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not less than 6 inches shall
be placed between the base course or subgrade and the concrete floor slab, or
other approved equivalent methods or materials shall be used to retard vapor
transmission through the floor slab. A vapor retarder is required for slab on
grade construction. A 15-mil polyethylene vapor retarder with joints lapped not
less than 6 inches and taped shall be placed between the base course or sub
grade and the concrete floor slab.
         Exception: A vapor retarder is not required:
         a.   For detached structures accessory to occupancies in Group R-3,
such as garages, utility buildings or other unheated facilities.
         b.   For unheated storage rooms having an area of less than 70 square
feet and carports attached to occupancies in Group R-3.
         c.   For buildings of other occupancies where migration of moisture
through the slab from below will not be detrimental to the intended occupancy
of the building.
         d.   For driveways, walks, patios and other flatwork which will not be
enclosed later.
      17.   Section 507 referencing Decks is deleted and replaced with the
provisions of the "American Wood Council DCA #6 Prescriptive Residential Wood
Deck Construction Guide" for decks under 6 feet in height from the ground and
the provisions of City of Chicago "Porch Design and Construction Guidelines"
for decks in excess of 6 feet in height from the ground.
      18.   Section 606 referencing Rubble stone masonry walls is deleted to
prohibit their use in the Village of Midlothian.
      19.   Section 905.5 referencing Mineral surfaced roll roofing is deleted
to prohibit its use in the Village of Midlothian.
      20.   Part VII, Chapters 25 through 33 referencing Plumbing are hereby
deleted.
      21.   Part VIII, Chapter 34 through 43 referencing Electrical are hereby
deleted.
      22.   The following Appendices of the IRC are hereby adopted in the
Village of Midlothian:
         Appendix E referencing Manufactured Housing as regulated by 11-9-2 and
11-5-2 of the Village Code.
         Appendix F referencing Rodent Proofing
         Appendix G referencing Flood Resistant Construction
         Appendix H referencing Patio Covers
         Appendix J referencing Existing Buildings and Structures
(Ord. 2020, 3-19-2019)
CHAPTER 9
MINIMUM PLANNING REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
4-9-1: Light And Ventilation
4-9-2: Space Requirements
4-9-3: Habitable Basement Rooms
4-9-4: Porches And Terraces
4-9-5: Privacy And Access
4-9-6: Minimum Ceiling Heights
4-9-7: Doors
4-9-8: Stairways
4-9-9: Screens
4-9-10: Floor Areas And Firewalls
4-9-11: Minimum Width
4-9-1: LIGHT AND VENTILATION:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Install windows in outside walls to provide natural light and
ventilation in all habitable rooms.
      2.   Windows in habitable room, whose areas provide the light and
ventilation necessary to comply with the following requirements are considered
required windows. All windows in addition to these, and also windows in rooms
other than habitable rooms, are considered nonrequired windows.
      3.   The area of glazed portions of doors located in exterior walls may
be included when necessary in determining compliance with the requirements set
out below.
   (B)   Habitable Rooms: Rooms designed to be used for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Required windows in each habitable room:
      1.   Total glass area: Not less than ten percent (10%) of floor area of
room.
      2.   Ventilating area: Not less than five percent (5%) of floor area of
room.
      3.   Under covered porches: Increase glass area to not less than fifteen
percent (15%) and ventilating area to not less than six percent (6%) of floor
area of room.
   (C)   Alcoves:
      1.   Unless separately lighted and ventilated by windows which provide
the required window area, include any alcove adjoining a habitable room as part
of that room in computing required window area.
      2.   The common wall between the alcove and the habitable room shall
contain an opening, the area of the opening between alcove and the room shall
not be less than eighty percent (80%) of the vertical plane separating alcove
and room. The depth of the alcove measured at right angles to the opening shall
not be more than one and one-half (11/2) times the width of the opening. The
floor area of the alcove shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the room.
   (D)   Bathrooms And Water Closet Compartments: Provide ventilation by one of
the following means:
      1.   Window or skylight:
         (a)   Locate window in an exterior wall.
         (b)   Glass area for bathrooms only: Not less than three (3) square
feet.
         (c)   Ventilating area: Minimum one and one-half (11/2) square feet.
      2.   Vent in or near ceiling with continuous duct connections to outside
air, mechanical exhaust, one and one-half (11/2) CFM per square foot of floor
area.
   (E)   Basements: Provide light and ventilation by windows or doors, in
exterior walls with both glazed and ventilating area not less than two percent
(2%) of the floor area.
      Glazed area may be omitted in basements provided sufficient ventilation
is furnished.
   (F)   Laundries And Recreation Rooms: Provide light and ventilation by
windows or doors, in exterior wall:
      1.   When located in a separately enclosed space in the basement, the
glazed and ventilating area shall be not less than five percent (5%) of the
floor area.
      2.   When located above basement level, glazed area shall not be less
than twelve percent (12%) of the floor area, ventilating area not less than
five percent (5%) of the floor area. In laundries a glazed area will not be
required.
   (G)   Utility Rooms: Ventilate utility rooms other than a laundry room by:
      1.   Windows in exterior walls with a ventilating area not less than two
percent (2%) of the floor area. Doors shall not be considered as part of the
ventilating area.
      2.   Duct or ducts, minimum total free area two percent (2%) of floor
area.
      3.   Kitchens containing less than one hundred twenty five (125) square
feet may be ventilated by mechanical means which provide two (2) CFM per square
foot of floor area.
   (H)   Heater Rooms: Provide fixed ventilation to any confined space which
encloses heating equipment, by means of a duct arranged to supply air from
outside. Duct to be screened and to have free area at least equal to free area
of flues or vents to which the equipment is connected.
   (I)   Basementless Spaces:
      1.   Provide a sufficient number of foundation wall vents to assure a
total ventilating area equivalent to one square foot for each thirty (30)
linear feet of exterior wall.
      2.   Number of vents; minimum two (2).
      3.   Locate vents to provide cross ventilation wherever possible.
      4.   No vents required for basementless spaces providing fifty percent
(50%) of one side of which, exclusive of structural supports such as piers,
chimney foundations, etc., is open to a ventilated basement provided the total
area of ventilating openings is two percent (2%) of the basement area plus the
area of the basementless space.
      5.   In each vent opening install corrosive resistant screening, mesh not
less than eight (8) per inch.
   (J)   Attics And Air Space Between Ceiling And Flat Roofs:
      1.   Provide effective fixed ventilation in all spaces between roofs and
top floor ceiling, by replaceable or nonferrous screened louvers, sixteen (16)
mesh.
      2.   Net ventilation area for each separate space to be not less than one
three hundredth (1/300) of area of house of top plate. Where possible, locate
vents to provide effective cross ventilation.
      3.   When finished ceiling follows roof joists, each joist space shall be
ventilated. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-2: SPACE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Living Unit: Provide at least one bedroom and one bathroom and space
for living, dining, cooking, storage, utility and heating, as follows:
   Minimum Area Square Feet
                                          Minimum Area Square Feet
1. Living, dining, cooking                    
       Living, dining and cooking when in
  (a) 1 room (includes area occupied by  220  
       equipment)
  (b) Living, dining, when in 1 room     180  
       Living only in 1 room, when dining
  (c) space is provided in kitchen or    160  
       separate room
  (d) Kitchen, cooking only (including       
       area occupied by equipment)
       Provide at least 30 square feet
     additional area usable for dining  60   
       purposes when dining space is
       included in the kitchen
2. Sleeping, major bedroom                140  
                                          Adequate for water closet, lavatory
3. Bathroom size                          and tub or shower. The water closet
                                          may be located in a separate
                                          compartment adjoining the bathroom
 
   (B)   Additional Habitable Rooms: Minimum floor area one hundred (100)
square feet.
   (C)   Bedroom Closets: Provide each bedroom with at least one closet or
wardrobe having a minimum:
      1.   Depth: Two feet (2').
      2.   Floor area: Six (6) square feet.
      3.   Height: Six feet (6').
   (D)   Storage Space:
      1.   Minimum Volume: Six hundred (600) cubic feet, each living unit, in
addition to minimum bedroom closets.
      2.   Height: Space less than four feet (4') in clear height will not be
considered as providing storage space under these requirements.
      3.   Closets, Utility Room, Attic, Basement Or Attached Garage: Closets
which are in addition to bedroom closets, and the portion of bedroom closets in
excess of five (5) square feet per bedroom, may be included as storage space.
That portion of utility or heater rooms which is necessary for equipment,
passage and work space, may not be included as storage space. Portions of
attached garage, in addition to the area for vehicle storage, may be considered
as storage space.
      4.   Fuel Storage Space: Adequate fuel storage space to be provided in
addition to above.
   (E)   Space For Heating Units:
      1.   Provide space within the building for heating unit or system.
      2.   Provide clearances for maintenance and repair.
      3.   Provide clearances for fire safety, determined by insulation of
heater and combustibility of walls, floor and ceiling. Heat generated shall not
raise the surface temperature of combustible walls, floor or ceiling above one
hundred sixty degrees Fahrenheit (160°F). (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-3: HABITABLE BASEMENT ROOMS:
   (A)   Comply with requirements for main floor rooms with respect to privacy,
light and ventilation, floor area, ceiling height, etc.
   (B)   Finish floor below the adjoining outside finish grade. Maximum, two
feet six inches (2'6") at required windows.
   (C)   Areaways: Minimum width measured perpendicular to face of building
wall, two feet (2'). Increased one inch (1") for every inch of depth over two
feet (2'). Head of window, in all cases, to be at or above top of area wall.
   (D)   Permitted in single-family dwellings only. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-4: PORCHES AND TERRACES:
   (A)   Minimum dimension from face of building where there are more than two
(2) risers between grade and first floor, four feet (4').
   (B)   Guardrails to be provided:
      1.   When more than twenty four inches (24") above grade and centerline
of exterior door is on centerline of steps.
      2.   When more than sixteen inches (16") above grade and centerline of
door is not on centerline of stairs.
   (C)   Provide guardrails on exterior steps of more than four (4) risers to
porches or terraces above grade. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-5: PRIVACY AND ACCESS:
   (A)   Access:
      1.   Living Units: Each living unit shall be provided with two (2) means
of access without passing through any other living unit.
      2.   Attics: Provide access to attics by means of cuttles, disappearing
or built-in stairways.
      3.   Basementless Spaces: Provide access not less than eighteen inches by
twenty four inches (18" x 24").
   (B)   Privacy:
      1.   General:
         (a)   Locate exterior openings in relation to exterior conditions
including existing or possible future adjacent buildings or other living units.
         (b)   Give consideration to the interior arrangement of rooms,
particularly with respect to bedrooms, bathrooms and toilet compartments.
      2.   Bedroom Privacy:
         (a)   At least two (2) bedrooms to have access to a bathroom without
passing through another habitable room.
         (b)   Each bedroom to have access to a bathroom without passing
through another bedroom.
         (c)   Each habitable room to have access to each other habitable room
without passing through a bedroom.
      3.   Nonacceptable Bathroom Arrangements:
         (a)   Sole bathroom opening directly into a kitchen.
         (b)   Bathroom providing sole access to any other room.
         (c)   Bathroom in the basement as the only one serving a living unit.
(Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-6: MINIMUM CEILING HEIGHTS:
   (A)   Basements: Seven feet (7') clear under joists. See subsection 4-9-3(A)
of this chapter.
   (B)   Main Floor Of Any Living Unit: Seven feet six inches (7'6") clear for
at least seventy five percent (75%) of the floor area.
   (C)   Second Story Of Any Living Unit: Seven feet six inches (7'6") clear;
under sloping roofs, for not less than fifty percent (50%) of floor area having
five feet (5') or more headroom. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-7: DOORS:
   (A)   Exterior Doors:
      1.   Main entrance doors: Three feet (3') wide.
      2.   Service entrance doors: Two feet eight inches (2'8") wide.
      3.   Height: Six feet eight inches (6'8").
   (B)   Interior Doors:
      1.   Provide a door for each opening to a bedroom, bathroom and toilet
compartment.
      2.   Minimum sizes:
         (a)   All habitable rooms: Two feet six inches (2'6") wide by six feet
six inches (6'6") high.
         (b)   Bathrooms: Two feet (2') wide. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-8: STAIRWAYS:
See subsection 4-10-8(K) of this title.
   (A)   Design And Location: Provide for safety of ascent and descent; install
proper artificial light in addition to any natural light; and provide an easy
run by proper proportioning of tread width to riser height.
      1.   Headroom: Continuous clear headroom measured vertically from front
edge of tread to a line parallel with stair run, minimum six feet six inches
(6'6").
      2.   Width:
         (a)   Main stairs: Minimum, two feet nine inches (2'9") clear of
handrail.
         (b)   Basement stairs: Minimum, two feet six inches (2'6") clear of
handrail.
      3.   Treads: Minimum width, nine inches (9"), with nosing ten and one-
fourth inches (101/4").
      4.   Rise: Eight inches (8") maximum. All riser heights to be same in any
one story.
      5.   Winders: Tread width eighteen inches (18") from converging and shall
at least equal tread width on straight run unless width of tread at converging
end is six inches (6") or more.
      6.   Landings: Width equal to that of stair.
      7.   Handrail: Install continuous handrail on at least one side of each
run on each stair and on stairwell.
      8.   Fire Protection: In all buildings or structures to be occupied by
more than a single family all interior stairways shall have walls with a one
hour fire protection rating; two inch by four inch (2" x 4") studs with
perforated lath plaster. The exit door shall be one and three-fourths inches
(13/4") thick and shall have a self-closing device. Door shall have one and
three-fourths inch (13/4") rabbeted jambs. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-9: SCREENS:
Install on all exterior doors and windows used for ventilation, including
basement windows, at least sixteen (16) mesh. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-9-10: FLOOR AREAS AND FIREWALLS:
Provide eight inch (8") masonry wall or equal without an opening between living
units of duplexes and row houses and between tiers of living units of other
multiple-family dwellings. See also subsection 4-10-1(E) of this title. (Ord.,
12-12-1962)
4-9-11: MINIMUM WIDTH:
The width of any row of duplex dwellings measured between the interior finished
surfaces of party walls or end walls shall be not less than fifteen feet (15').
(Ord., 12-12-1962)
CHAPTER 10
MINIMUM CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
4-10-1: General
4-10-2: Excavation
4-10-3: Grading
4-10-4: Masonry Materials
4-10-5: Concrete Work
4-10-6: Masonry Work
4-10-7: Structural Steel And Iron
4-10-8: Wood Construction
4-10-9: Exterior Wall Finish
4-10-10: Roof Coverings
4-10-11: Flashing
4-10-12: Gutters And Downspouts
4-10-13: Interior Wall And Ceiling Finish
4-10-14: Finish Floors
4-10-15: Garages
4-10-16: Sidewalks
4-10-17: Fire Resistance
4-10-18: Energy Code Adopted
4-10-19: Reserved
4-10-20: Americans With Disabilities Act Adopted
4-10-21: Illinois Accessibility Code Adopted
4-10-1: GENERAL:
   (A)   Construction Materials And Methods: These requirements specify minimum
acceptable construction materials and methods. Other materials and methods not
specified herein may be approved for use by the Building Chairman upon the
submission of evidence satisfactory to him that their performance in use will
be at least equivalent to that of the materials and the methods specified
herein. It may be required that such evidence include adequate reports and test
data from a recognized testing laboratory, or proven and authoritative service
records, or analysis of performance made in accordance with well established
principles of mechanics. Compliance with the standard specifications and test
methods listed in chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title will be required.
   (B)   Loads:
      1.   All parts of dwellings and accessory buildings and structures shall
be designed, constructed and maintained to support safely their own weight and
all other loads and forces to which they may be subjected.
      2.   Assumed minimum live loads (uniformly distributed) for design
purposes:
         (a)   Ceiling or attic floors joists, no storage, none. Attic floors,
limited storage only, twenty (20) pounds per square foot. All residential
floors forty (40) pounds per square foot live loads plus any dead load thereon.
         (b)   Girders. Dead loads of floor, partition and ceiling construction
plus assumed live loads of floors plus combined dead and live loads of roof,
supported by such girder.
         (c)   Roofs, either pitched or flat; twenty five (25) pounds per
square foot normal to the roof surface.
      3.   Wind loads:
         (a)   On vertical faces: Twenty (20) pounds per square foot
horizontally, in any direction.
         (b)   Roofs or parts thereof with slopes greater than thirty degrees
(30°): Twenty (20) pounds per square foot acting inward normal to surface, on
windward slope only.
         (c)   Lifting force: Twenty (20) pounds per square foot. To prevent
sliding or overturning, anchor roofs to walls and columns and walls and columns
to foundations.
   (C)   Special Conditions And Tests: When special conditions exist or arise
during construction, which necessitate additional precautions, the Chairman of
Building Committee may require work in excess of these requirements. The
Chairman of Building may require tests in accordance with chapter 22, "Appendix
A", of this title at the expense of the owner.
   (D)   Vapor Barriers:
      1.   Top floor ceiling: Install independent vapor barrier or one integral
with insulating material immediately above ceiling interior finish.
      2.   Exterior wall: When coefficient of heat transmission is not more
than 0.20 BTU per hour per square foot per degree temperature difference and
when material of high vapor resistance is used on outside, install vapor
barrier immediately back of interior wall finish or one integral with
insulating material on the warm side (inside) thereof.
      3.   Barrier permeability to be not more than 2.5 grains per hour per
square foot per pound per square inch vapor pressure difference. Any sheet with
fairly continuous coating of water resistant material, such continuity being
indicated by a glossy surface, is likely to meet this requirement.
      4.   Vapor barrier to be applied tightly against any electrical outlets,
registers or framed openings. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
      5.   Crawl spaces shall be covered with a plastic like substance designed
to prevent the passage of moisture and said plastic like substance to be
covered with three inches (3") of concrete. (Ord. 703, 5-27-1970)
   (E)   Sound Transmission: Provide reduction on sound transmission in walls
and floors separating apartments or living units to limit sound level to forty
two (42) decibels. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-2: EXCAVATION:
   (A)   Foundation And Piers:
      1.   Extend To Solid Ground: Do not place footing on filled ground, loam
or topsoil.
      2.   Bottom Of Footings: Not less than three feet six inches (3'6") below
finished grade, except where placed on solid rock.
      3.   Protect Against Freezing: No concrete shall be placed on frozen
ground. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
      4.   Flood Level: The tops of foundations or foundation openings shall
not be set less than eighteen inches (18") above highest flood level as
indicated on the maps and report entitled "Floods In Harvey Quadrangle And
Floods In Blue Island Quadrangle", as published by the U.S. geological survey.
(Ord. 622, 4-13-1966)
   (B)   Basementless Spaces:
      1.   Ground level at least eighteen inches (18") below bottom of floor
joists and girders. Ground under dwelling approximately level.
      2.   Where ground level is below outside finish grade and poor drainage
exists, the superintendent of buildings may require additional drainage.
      3.   Remove all debris, sod, tree stumps and other organic material from
within area occupied by dwelling. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-3: GRADING:
   (A)   Backfill: Do not use debris for backfilling. See subsection 4-10-5(D)5
of this chapter.
   (B)   Grading:
      1.   Grade to levels shown on drawings; smooth lawn area to an even
grade.
      2.   Slope to drain surface water away from buildings.
      3.   In locations where natural surface drainage is not possible, such as
in depressed driveways, install drains connected to dry well.
      4.   Slope of driveways, not to exceed one foot (1') in eight feet (8').
(Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-4: MASONRY MATERIALS:
Masonry materials described below apply to all masonry and concrete work.
   (A)   Cement:
      1.   Portland cement. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Prepared masonry cement for mortar. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of
this title.
   (B)   Aggregate:
      1.   Sand. Clean, hard and sharp, free from harmful materials, graded
according to intended use.
      2.   Coarse aggregate:
         (a)   Crushed stone or gravel: Hard, strong crystalline rock, properly
graded, clean and free from shale or other soft material.
         (b)   Lightweight aggregate: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this
title.
   (C)   Water: Clean and free from harmful material.
   (D)   Lime:
      1.   Hydrated lime. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Quick lime, slake thoroughly. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this
title.
   (E)   Brick:
      1.   Face brick. Hardburned, quality at least equal to grade B.
      2.   Common brick. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
         (a)   Selected hardburned common brick may be used for facing of
exterior and interior walls.
         (b)   Salmon or soft brick may be used in interior walls when not
exposed, and for backup work.
      3.   Fire brick. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      4.   Concrete brick. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
   (F)   Structural Hollow Clay Tile:
      1.   Sound, kiln burned units, free from defects.
      2.   Load bearing tile. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      3.   Nonload bearing tile. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
   (G)   Concrete Masonry Unit: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
Sound and thoroughly cured.
   (H)   Stone:
      1.   Rubble land cut stone. Good quality building stone.
      2.   Cast stone. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
   (I)   Flue Lining: Glazed fire clay and vitrified tile, free from cracks and
other defects.
   (J)   Glass Block: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title. (Ord., 12-
12-1962)
4-10-5: CONCRETE WORK:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Materials: See section 4-10-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Water not to exceed seven and one-half (71/2) gallons of water per
bag of cement, including moisture in the aggregate.
      3.   Retempering of concrete not permitted.
   (B)   Plain Concrete: Minimum mix:
      1.   One part Portland cement, two and one-half (21/2) parts sand, four
(4) parts coarse aggregate; or
      2.   One part Portland cement, five (5) parts pit run aggregate; or
      3.   Controlled mix having minimum compressive strength at twenty eight
(28) days of two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch.
   (C)   Reinforced Concrete:
      1.   Design: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Minimum mix:
         (a)   One part Portland cement, two and one-half (21/2) parts sand,
four (4) parts coarse aggregate; or
         (b)   Controlled mix having minimum compressive strength at twenty
eight (28) days of two thousand (2,000) pounds per square inch.
      3.   Reinforcing: New billet steel bars, rail steel bars, welded wire
fabric or cold drawn wire. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
   (D)   Forms:
      1.   Double forms required for all concrete foundation walls.
      2.   Side forms required for footings.
      3.   Build tight, straight, plumb, and brace rigidly.
      4.   Do not remove until concrete has thoroughly set.
      5.   Remove all forms, spreaders and stakes before backfilling.
   (E)   Placing:
      1.   Place continuously unless otherwise allowed by superintendent of
buildings.
      2.   When not placed continuously, clean, score and wet the top surface
of the concrete before continuing. Key all vertical joints.
      3.   Spade and rod concrete thoroughly in form work. Place in horizontal
layers not more than twelve inches (12") thick.
   (F)   Protection:
      1.   In hot weather, protect concrete to prevent too rapid drying.
      2.   In freezing weather, maintain the temperature of the concrete above
freezing until thoroughly set.
   (G)   Loading: Allow sufficient time for strength of concrete to develop
before subjecting to loads or traffic.
   (H)   Footings:
      1.   General:
         (a)   Design for proper distribution of superimposed loads.
         (b)   Material: Cast in place concrete.
         (c)   Bear on solid, unfilled ground.
         (d)   Reinforced with steel bars where footings cross or bear on
filled trenches or other unstable soil.
         (e)   Footing dimensions listed below are based upon soils of average
bearing capacity (3,500 pounds per square foot). For soils of lesser bearing
capacity or where unusual loading conditions exist, larger footings will be
required.
      2.   Wall Footings:
         (a)   Minimum dimensions for spread footing shall be ten inches (10")
deep by twenty inches (20") wide, except that masonry veneer on frame and solid
masonry walls shall be twelve inches (12") deep by twenty four inches (24")
wide.
      3.   Pier, Post And Column Footings:
         (a)   One-story dwellings: Minimum area, four (4) square feet;
thickness, one and one-half (11/2) times the projection, minimum, twelve inches
(12").
         (b)   Dwelling over one story: Minimum area, six (6) square feet,
thickness, one and one-half (11/2) times the projection, minimum twelve inches
(12").
      4.   Chimney Footings:
         (a)   One-story dwellings: Minimum thickness, twelve inches (12");
minimum projection each side, four inches (4").
         (b)   Dwellings over one story: Minimum thickness, twelve inches
(12"), minimum projection each side, six inches (6").
         (c)   Pour integral with wall footing when chimney occurs in outside
wall or inside bearing wall.
   (I)   Footings; Drain Tile: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
   (J)   Concrete Foundation Walls Cast In Place:
      1.   General:
         (a)   Materials: See section 4-10-4 of this chapter.
         (b)   Walls supporting frame construction: Extend concrete not less
than six inches (6") above adjoining outside finished grade.
         (c)   Walls supporting masonry veneered wood frame: Extend foundation
so that wood portion of wall is not less than six inches (6") above outside
finished grade. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
      2.   Minimum Thickness:
         (a)   Not less than that of wall supported.
         (b)   Supporting porch slabs, steps and one-story accessory wood frame
structures without basement, minimum eight inches (8").
         (c)   Interior walls not subject to lateral pressure, nine inches (9")
minimum.
         (d)   All other walls, nine inches (9") minimum. (Ord. 1228, 7-24-
1991)
      3.   Girder Pockets: Provide four inch (4") end bearing on main wall for
girder. Form pocket for wood girder one inch (1") wider than girder.
      4.   Sill Anchor Bolts: Sill anchor bolts to be installed:
         (a)   Diameter, one-half inch (1/2") minimum.
         (b)   Minimum length, ten inches (10").
         (c)   Provide washer under nuts on bolts.
         (d)   Spacing, not more than eight feet (8') on center, minimum, two
(2) bolts in each piece.
      5.   Anchorage For Intersecting Walls And Slabs: Provide dowel bar
anchorage for porch and terrace slabs, concrete or masonry steps and area
walls, which adjoin foundation walls. For basementless portions and attached
garages, embed four (4) 1/2-inch round hooked bars four feet (4') long in main
wall, two (2) near top and two (2) near bottom of attached wall.
      6.   Chimney Foundations: Start at level of lowest adjacent foundation
wall footings.
      7.   Special Conditions: If special or unforeseen soil conditions
warrant, the superintendent of buildings may require either reinforcement or
increased thickness.
      8.   Dampproofing And Waterproofing: See subsection 4-10-6(C) of this
chapter.
   (K)   Concrete Floor Slabs On Ground:
      1.   Construction:
         (a)   Fill under slabs: Gravel and screenings, or crushed rock,
minimum thickness four inches (4"). Earth underfill thoroughly leveled and free
from vegetable matter, thoroughly tamped.
         (b)   Wire mesh reinforcing: When required, minimum weight forty (40)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet.
         (c)   Bottom of slab: Not lower than top of footing. Provide at least
four inch (4") bearing on footing.
      2.   Cement floor finish:
         (a)   Finish basement slab with steel trowel.
         (b)   Integral finish on concrete slab.
      3.   Slabs on ground used as base for floors or as a finish floor in
habitable rooms:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
         (b)   Provide membrane waterproofing directly under slab, at least
thirty (30) pound felt, lapped four inches (4").
      4.   Basement floor slabs: Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
      5.   Garage floor slabs: Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
      6.   Terrace and porch floor slabs:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
         (b)   If reinforced, fill may be omitted.
         (c)   Install metal flashing between slabs and all wood construction.
See subsection 4-10-11(F) of this chapter.
      7.   Slabs on ground used to support interior bearing walls or
partitions: Thicken to at least ten inches (10") for a width of twenty inches
(20"), add two (2) reinforcing bars, no. 5.
   (L)   Exterior Wood Stairs: Wood construction shall be at least two inches
(2") above walk or finished grade.
   (M)   Reinforced Concrete Floor On Precast Joist:
      1.   Minimum bearing of joints, three inches (3").
      2.   When span exceeds fifteen feet (15'), shore at midspan until slab is
set.
      3.   Structural design based on T-beam action not acceptable when metal
lath or paper backed mesh is used for slab forms.
   (N)   Footing Drain Tile: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      1.   Required on outside of basement footings: Minimum diameter four
inches (4").
      2.   Cover tile with twelve inches (12") gravel or crushed stone.
      3.   Connect with tight joint glazed tile to sewer, dry well or other
outlet. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
      4.   In all new buildings constructed under a metropolitan sanitary
district permit dated prior to January 1, 1971, footing drains when required by
building code shall be connected to sump pumps and discharged into a storm
sewer or drainage ditch if available. If a storm sewer or a drainage ditch is
not available, the footing drains shall be discharged in a manner to be
determined by the village of Midlothian to be the most effective for removing
the discharge from the immediate area of the building.
In all new buildings constructed under a metropolitan sanitary district permit
dated after January 1, 1971, footing drains, when required by the building code
shall be connected to a sump pump and discharged into a storm sewer or drainage
ditch. In no case shall any footing drains or drain tile be connected to any
sanitary sewer line. (Ord. 749)
4-10-6: MASONRY WORK:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Materials: See section 4-10-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Mortar:
         (a)   Masonry below grade not permitted.
         (b)   All other masonry:
            (1)   Portland cement mortar: One part Portland cement, three (3)
parts sand by volume. Lime, not more than twenty five percent (25%) of the
cement by volume, may be added.
            (2)   Cement-lime mortar: One part Portland cement, one part lime
putty, six (6) parts of sand by volume.
            (3)   Prepared masonry cement mortars: One part masonry cement.
Three (3) parts sand by volume; add no materials other than sand and water.
            (4)   Retempering of mortar not permitted.
      3.   Joists:
         (a)   Maximum thickness one-half inch (1/2"). All joints to be uniform
in thickness.
         (b)   Solid masonry units: Fill joints solid.
         (c)   Hollow masonry units: No through mortar joints.
         (d)   Point all joints solid both sides of wall. Weather or tool
outside and exposed inside joints.
      4.   Bonding:
         (a)   Brick masonry: Header course consisting of alternate through
header and stretcher every seventh course, or one through header in every two
hundred forty (240) square inches, uniformly placed throughout the wall.
         (b)   Rubble stone masonry: Bond stones at least four inches (4")
thicker than other stones, minimum twenty percent (20%) of wall area. Stagger
vertical joints.
         (c)   Intersecting concrete and masonry walls: Bond together.
      5.   Closed Cell Hollow Units: Use for rough openings, corners and wall
intersections. Filling exposed ends of cells not permitted.
      6.   Protection: Provide frost protection acceptable to superintendent of
buildings when temperature falls below freezing, except that no masonry work
shall be done in temperature below twenty degrees Fahrenheit (20°F).
      7.   Loading: Allow sufficient time for strength of masonry to develop
before subjecting to loads.
   (B)   Masonry Unit Foundation Walls: Not permitted for foundations, below
grade.
      1.   General:
         (a)   Materials: See section 4-10-4 of this chapter.
         (b)   Walls supporting wood frame construction: Extend not less than
six inches (6") above adjoining outside finish grade.
         (c)   Walls supporting masonry veneered wood frame: Extend foundation
so that wood portion of wall is not less than six inches (6") above outside
finish grade.
         (d)   Walls of hollow masonry units: Not permitted below grade; where
used, cap with minimum of four inches (4") of solid masonry or concrete, or
fill top course with concrete.
         (e)   Concentrated loads under ends of girders bearing on hollow
masonry unit foundation walls: Support on minimum of four inches (4") solid
masonry or concrete, or fill top course of hollow units with concrete.
      2.   Minimum Thickness:
         (a)   Not less than that of the wall supported.
         (b)   Masonry unit walls, minimum thickness twelve inches (12").
         (c)   Flatbed square edge stone: Twelve inches (12").
         (d)   Rubble stone: Sixteen inches (16").
      3.   Girder Pockets: Provide four inch (4") end bearing for girder. For
wood girder leave one-half inch (1/2") space each side.
      4.   Sill Anchor Bolts: Sill anchor bolts to be installed.
         (a)   Diameter: One-half inch (1/2") minimum.
         (b)   Minimum length in masonry unit walls: Fifteen inches (15").
         (c)   Provide washer under nuts on bolts.
         (d)   Spacing: Not more than eight feet (8') on center, minimum two
(2) bolts in each piece.
      5.   Anchorage For Intersecting Walls And Slabs: Provide anchorage for
porch and terrace slabs, concrete or masonry steps and area walls which adjoin
foundation walls.
      6.   Chimney Foundation: Start at level of lowest adjacent foundation
wall footings.
      7.   Special Conditions: If special or unseen soil conditions warrant,
the superintendent of buildings may require either reinforcement of wall or
increased thickness.
   (C)   Dampproofing And Waterproofing: Dampproof basement or cellar walls on
exterior from finish grade to outside edge of footing. Concrete wall cast in
place. Apply at least one heavy coat of undiluted hot tar, asphalt or compound
acceptable to the superintendent of buildings.
   (D)   Piers:
      1.   Piers Supporting Exterior Walls: Acceptable for only one-story
accessory buildings and open porches.
      2.   Materials: Masonry units or cast in place concrete. See section 4-
10-4 of this chapter.
      3.   Minimum Sizes In Inches:
         (a)   Masonry: Twelve inches by twelve inches (12" x 12").
         (b)   Plain concrete: Ten inches by ten inches (10" x 10") or twelve
inches (12") round.
      4.   Maximum Spacing:
         (a)   Exterior wall piers supporting floor joists: Eight feet (8') on
center.
         (b)   Exterior wall piers in line parallel to joists and interior
piers: Twelve feet (12') on center.
      5.   Minimum Height Above Grade: Six inches (6").
      6.   Hollow Masonry Units: When of hollow masonry units, cap with at
least four inches (4") solid masonry or concrete. See subsection (E)1 of this
section.
      7.   Anchor Bolts Or Dowels: Sill anchor bolts or dowels to be installed.
   (E)   Exterior Masonry Walls Above Grade:
      1.   Materials: Masonry or cast in place concrete. See section 4-10-4 of
this chapter.
      2.   Minimum thickness, eight inches (8").
      3.   Maximum height for eight inch (8") thickness, twenty two feet (22')
from grade to eaves or thirty feet (30') from grade to ridge in gable ends. For
greater heights, minimum thickness twelve inches (12") except top twenty two
feet (22').
      4.   Backing, when used, solid or hollow masonry units, minimum
thickness:
         (a)   Bonded to facing, four inches (4").
         (b)   Tied to facing with sheet metal ties, four inches (4").
      5.   Furring when interior finish is applied: Not less than one inch (1")
wood strips. Spacing as permitted for interior finish. See section 4-10-13 of
this chapter. Bituminous waterproofing materials on masonry not acceptable for
plaster base. Install horizontal furring strips at ceiling and floor to form
firestops and prevent convection.
      6.   Lintels: Size to be determined by span in each case. No concentrated
loads over reinforced lintels.
         (a)   Lintels may be:
            (1)   Precast concrete, and brick reinforced, or hollow tile
reinforced.
            (2)   Stone.
            (3)   Masonry arch.
            (4)   Steel. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
         (b)   Support on four inches (4") of solid masonry.
      7.   Rafter plate anchor bolts to be installed:
         (a)   Diameter, one-half inch (1/2") minimum.
         (b)   Minimum length in masonry unit walls, fifteen inches (15");
poured concrete walls, ten inches (10").
         (c)   In masonry walls, washer and three inch (3") square plate on
bolts.
         (d)   Spacing, not more than eight feet (8') on center.
      8.   Radiator recesses:
         (a)   Construct at time wall is built.
         (b)   Maximum recess depth, four inches (4") in eight inch (8") walls,
eight inches (8") in twelve inch (12") walls.
         (c)   Back and sides of recess to be waterproofed and insulated.
         (d)   Width under windows not greater than rough opening.
      9.   Vertical chases:
         (a)   Construct at time wall is built.
         (b)   Maximum length for chases where net wall thickness is eight
inches (8") or less, four feet (4').
         (c)   Maximum chase depth, four inches (4").
      10.   Horizontal chases:
         (a)   Not acceptable unless wall thickness is at least four inches
(4") greater than thickness required under subsection (E)2 of this section.
         (b)   Maximum depth, four inches (4").
   (F)   Masonry Veneer:
      1.   Minimum Thickness:
         (a)   Brick, three and three-fourths inches (33/4").
         (b)   Ashlar stone masonry, four inches (4").
         (c)   Rubble-stone masonry, uncoursed (field stone), twelve inches
(12"); mosaic or random, twelve inches (12"), coursed, one story, eight inches
(8"); one story, twelve inches (12").
      2.   Masonry Veneered Wood Frame Construction: Veneer applied over
sheathing with air space between.
         (a)   Air Space: Three-fourths inch (3/4") between masonry veneer and
sheathing.
         (b)   Building Paper; Asphalt Felt: Apply water resistant building
paper or saturated asphalt felt over wood sheathing. Lap base flashing at least
four inches (4").
         (c)   Bonding: Corrosion resisting metal ties spaced not more than
fifteen inches (15") vertically and thirty two inches (32") on center
horizontally. When other than wood board sheathing is used, secure ties through
to studs with corrosion resisting nails of length sufficient to penetrate wood
at least one inch (1").
         (d)   Lintels: Size to be determined by materials and span in each
case. Bearing, at least four inches (4"). Arches permitted.
   (G)   Cavity Walls:
      1.   Minimum thickness: Facing (outer leaf) three and three-fourths
inches (33/4"); back (inner leaf) three and three-fourths inches (33/4"); total
with cavity, ten inches (10").
      2.   Maximum height above grade for minimum thickness, twenty two feet
(22') to eaves, thirty feet (30') to ridge at gable ends.
      3.   Lay units with full flat bed and vertical joints.
      4.   Tie each three (3) square foot of facing to backing with approved
rigid, noncorrodible tie bar, at least one-fourth inch (1/4") in diameter.
Embed ties in horizontal joints. Also locate ties not more than three feet (3')
apart within twelve inches (12") of perimeter of all openings. Z bars shall
have six inch (6") shank length and three inch (3") legs bent to ninety degree
(90°) angles. Ties used with hollow units with cells vertical shall be
rectangular in shape.
      5.   Flash with a noncorrodible metal sheet over tops of all openings, at
windowsills and at bottom of cavity wall.
      6.   Provide weep holes along flashing. Keep cavity clear of mortar
droppings.
   (H)   Interior Masonry Walls:
      1.   Materials: Masonry or cast in place concrete.
      2.   Pipe recesses: Construct at time walls are built.
      3.   Party and firewalls:
         (a)   Minimum thickness: Cast in place concrete, six inch (6") masonry
units eight inches (8") or equal. Chases or recesses not permitted. See
subsection (H)4(d) of this section.
         (b)   Under flat and pitched roofs: Build masonry solid to underside
of roof sheathing unless carried above roof.
         (c)   Sound transmission: See subsection 4-10-1(E) of this chapter.
      4.   Bearing partitions:
         (a)   Minimum thickness: Plain concrete, six inches (6"); masonry
units, eight inches (8").
         (b)   Sections of walls with distance between openings two feet (2')
or less: Solid masonry units or hollow units filled with concrete.
         (c)   Lintels: Steel, reinforced concrete or masonry arches. Minimum,
four inch (4") bearing upon solid masonry at least four inches (4") thick.
         (d)   Joist bearings: Solid masonry at least four inches (4") thick.
         (e)   Girder bearing: Solid masonry at least eight inches (8") thick.
      5.   Nonbearing partitions:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, three inches (3").
         (b)   Lintels: Steel, reinforced concrete or masonry, or masonry
arches.
   (I)   Chimneys:
      1.   Provide Masonry Chimney:
         (a)   Separate flue required for each fireplace.
         (b)   Separate flue required for each appliance fired with natural
draft oil burner. Separate flues required for all other equipment, depending
upon sustained chimney draft for proper operation, unless combined flue is
specifically approved by the superintendent of buildings.
      2.   Materials: Solid masonry, footing concrete cast in place.
      3.   Effective Flue Area: At least as recommended by the manufacturer of
equipment connected to chimney and at least equal to area of outlet (smoke and
vent) of equipment connected to it; minimum diameter for house heating flue,
eight inches (8"). For fireplaces, effective area not less than one-tenth (1/
10) of fireplace opening.
      4.   Chimney Linings, Withes And Walls:
         (a)   Glazed fire clay flue lining required in all chimneys for liquid
and solid fuels. When gas is used as fuel, provide flue lining of metal or
composition acceptable to the superintendent of buildings, or glazed fire clay
lining or vitrified tile lining, bell and spigot type, bell end up, all with
joints made with acid resisting mortar. Provide drain to dispose of
condensation.
         (b)   Two (2) flues may be grouped without withes, provided joints of
linings are staggered.
         (c)   Withes separating flues or of flues with linings not staggered,
three and three-fourths inches (33/4") minimum thickness.
         (d)   Walls, minimum thickness, three and three-fourths inches (33/4")
in addition to lining.
      5.   Height Of Chimney: As recommended by equipment manufacturer, and not
less than two feet (2') above the ridge of the roof that the chimney penetrates
and not less than two feet (2') above the highest ridge within fifteen feet
(15') of the chimney.
      6.   Cap Chimney: Cap chimney to form wash from flue to outside edge,
minimum thickness, two inches (2").
      7.   Metal Thimbles And Cleanout Doors: Metal thimbles and cleanout doors
to be built in at the time chimney is constructed.
      8.   Prefabricated Flues: Prefabricated flues with underwriter's label
permitted.
      9.   Concrete Or Cinder Block Chimneys: Concrete or cinder block chimneys
are permitted.
   (J)   Fireplaces:
      1.   Smoke chamber and damper required in all fireplaces.
      2.   Minimum wall thickness; eight inches (8") in addition to the lining.
      3.   Ash dump: When provided, empty into concrete or masonry chamber
provided with metal cleanout door.
      4.   Lining: Two inch (2") fire brick or other material acceptable to
building official.
      5.   Hearth:
         (a)   Support independently on masonry or concrete.
         (b)   Projection from chimney breast, at least sixteen inches (16").
         (c)   Width: At least eight inches (8") wider than fireplace opening
on each side.
         (d)   Material, incombustible.
         (e)   Combined thickness of hearth and support, six inches (6").
      6.   Fireplace opening lintel: Use brick arch, concrete, stone or steel.
      7.   Facing: Masonry, no combustible material closer than three and one-
half inches (31/2") to fireplace opening.
      8.   Prefabricated units with underwriter's label permitted.
   (K)   Glass Block:
      1.   May not use as load bearing units.
      2.   Maximum size of unsubdivided panel: Area, one hundred forty four
(144) square feet; length, twenty five feet (25'); height, twenty feet (20').
      3.   Provide for expansion.
      4.   Blocks must carry underwriter's label. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-7: STRUCTURAL STEEL AND IRON:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Structural steel: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Design, fabrication and erection: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of
this title.
   (B)   Beams And Girders:
      1.   Connections:
         (a)   Design to carry superimposed loads.
         (b)   Rivet, bolt or weld.
      2.   Bearing: On walls, minimum four inches (4").
      3.   Bearing plates:
         (a)   Design to distribute load, minimum thickness, five-sixteenths
inch (5/16").
         (b)   Bed in Portland cement mortar.
         (c)   Plates may be omitted under wide flange type steel beams if
width of flange provides sufficient bearing area so that allowable
comprehensive stress of supporting material is not exceeded.
   (C)   Columns:
      1.   Material:
         (a)   Standard shape, steel or cast iron.
         (b)   Concrete filled steel pipe, new material, standard weight or
heavier.
         (c)   Boiler tubing not acceptable.
      2.   Bases And Caps: Steel or cast iron.
         (a)   Caps: Rivet or bolt to steel girders; spike or lagscrew to wood
girders.
         (b)   Bases: Anchor by bolts or embed in concrete.
      3.   Shims, Metal: Loose shims not acceptable. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-8: WOOD CONSTRUCTION:
   (A)   Lumber:
      1.   Structural Stress Graded Lumber: Spans for structural stress graded
and marked lumber shall be determined from National Lumber Manufacturers
Association publications. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Lumber Dimensions:
         (a)   Nominal sizes are given in these requirements unless otherwise
noted.
         (b)   Minimum finish dimensions, width and thickness, as follows
(dimensions in inches):
Nominal Actual
Nominal Actual
1       25/32
2       15/8
3       25/8
4       35/8
5       45/8
6       55/8
8       71/2
10      91/2
12      111/2
 
   (B)   Framing, General:
      1.   Structural Framing Members:
         (a)   Splicing between bearing points not permitted.
         (b)   When structural strength is impaired by cutting, drilling or by
inherent defects, replace or reinforce members in manner acceptable to
superintendent of buildings.
      2.   Framing At Chimneys:
         (a)   Bearing of framing members on chimney masonry not acceptable.
Piers built integral with chimney may be used for girder bearing provided end
of girder is at least two inches (2") away from chimney masonry.
         (b)   Framing members: Not closer than two inches (2") to chimney
masonry. Fill two inch (2") space with fire resistive insulating material.
      3.   Firestopping:
         (a)   Firestop all furring partitions and outside stud walls at level
of each floor or ceiling, and at juncture of roof rafters and wall.
         (b)   Wood or masonry, tightly fitted, or other methods acceptable to
superintendent of buildings, may be used.
   (C)   Floor Framing:
      1.   Columns And Posts:
         (a)   Structural steel or iron: See section 4-10-7 of this chapter.
         (b)   Wood posts: Not acceptable.
      2.   Girders:
         (a)   Material: Structural steel, reinforced concrete, solid wood or
built up wood.
         (b)   Spans for wood girders: Determine in accordance with sound
engineering practice and subject to approval.
         (c)   Joints of solid and built up wood girders to be made over pier
or column supports only.
         (d)   Air space each side of wood girders framing into masonry, one-
half inch (1/2").
      3.   Sills: Level, and grout with Portland cement mortar or other
approved material. Wood shingles, chips or similar material are not acceptable
for permanent shims.
      4.   Joists:
         (a)   Maximum Spans: Maximum spans for wood are as follows:
            MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR FLOOR JOISTS
            (Of Other Than Structural Stress Graded And Marked Lumber)
                                     Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) For
                                     Living Room Floors Other Floors And
Lumber Size Actual Spacing Center To Finished Ceiling   Conditions Assumed
Nominal            Center            Below Assumed Live Live Load 30 Pounds
                                     Load 40 Pounds Per Per Sq. Ft.
                                     Sq. Ft.
                                          Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) For
                                          Living Room       Other Floors And
Lumber Size                Spacing Center Floors Finished   Conditions
Nominal     Actual         To Center      Ceiling Below     Assumed Live Load
                                          Assumed Live Load 30 Pounds Per Sq.
                                          40 Pounds Per Sq. Ft.
                                          Ft.
2" x 6"     1 5/8" x 55/8" 24"            6' 9"             7' 7"
                         20"            7' 5"             8' 4"
                         16"            8' 4"             9' 3"
                         12"            9' 7"             10' 9"
2" x 8"     15/8" x 71/2"  24"            9' 2"             10' 1"
                         20"            10' 0"            11' 1"
                         16"            11' 2"            12' 5"
                         12"            12' 11"           14' 3"
2" x 10"    15/8" x 91/2"  24"            11' 6"            12' 10"
                         20"            12' 7"            14' 0"
                         16"            14' 2"            15' 8"
                         12"            16' 3"            18' 1"
2" x 12"    15/8" x 111/2" 24"            14' 0"            15' 6"
                         20"            15' 4"            16' 11"
                         16"            17' 1"            18' 11"
                         12"            19' 9"            21' 11"
3" x 8"     25/8" x 71/2"  24"            11' 7"            12' 10"
                         20"            12' 9"            14' 1"
                         16"            14' 2"            15' 4"
                         12"            16' 5"            16' 11"
3" x 10"    25/8" x 91/2"  24"            14' 8"            16' 3"
                         20"            16' 0"            17' 10"
                         16"            18' 11"           19' 4"
                         12"            20' 9"            21' 4"
 
         (b)   Framing Into Headers Or Side Of Wood Girders: Use steel joist
hangers or wood bearing strip at least two inches by three inches (2" x 3").
Notch joists not more than one-fourth (1/4) of joist depth.
         (c)   Framing Into Side Of Steel Girders: Allow one-half inch (1/2")
clearance over top of top flange. Secure to girders or to opposite joists, or
bridge joist firmly at girder ends if other ends are fixed. Notch for bearing
not more than one-fourth (1/4) of joist depth.
         (d)   Framing Into Masonry:
            (1)   Minimum bearing, three inches (3").
            (2)   Fire cut or bevel, two inches (2").
            (3)   Second story floor joists parallel with masonry: Tie to
masonry with metal straps extending over and secured to at least one joist and
not more than eight feet (8') on center.
         (e)   Butt Or Lap Joists Over Girders And Bearing Partitions:
            (1)   Butting: Center and tie with metal straps or one inch (1")
thick wood ties at least two feet (2') long.
            (2)   Lapping: At least four inches (4"); spike together; maximum
projection beyond bearing, one foot (1').
         (f)   Double Joists:
            (1)   Under all bearing partitions and under plaster finished
nonbearing partitions, when parallel to floor joists.
            (2)   Where piping or duct work occurs, block joists apart at four
foot (4') intervals.
            (3)   Under heading partitions, more than two (2) joists may be
required by the building official, depending upon loading conditions.
         (g)   Headers And Trimmers:
            (1)   Headers four feet (4') or less in length may be single;
headers receiving three (3) or more tail beams, support in steel hangers, or on
ledger boards not less than two inches by three inches (2" x 3"). If header is
over seven feet (7') in length, secure ledger to trimmer with lag screws.
Headers shall be same depth as joists supported.
            (2)   For openings at end of joist span with headers four feet (4')
or less, trimmers may be single.
            (3)   Use double framing under all other conditions.
         (h)   Cutting Of Floor Joists:
            (1)   Notching top or bottom for piping and duct work is permitted
to not more than one-sixth (1/6) minimum required joist depth, except no
notching in middle third of span; otherwise install header.
            (2)   Holes may be bored through joists, maximum diameter two and
one-half inches (21/2"); edges not nearer than two inches (2") to top and
bottom of joists.
         (i)   Cross Bridging:
            (1)   Maximum spacing, eight feet (8'); minimum size one inch by
three inches (1" x 3") double nail at each end; bridging split in nailing not
acceptable.
            (2)   Rigid metal bridging may be used when acceptable to building
official.
         (j)   Cantilevered Construction: Submit detail drawing.
      5.   Subflooring Required:
         (a)   Wood Boards:
            (1)   Thickness, one inch (1"); maximum width, six inches (6"),
unless triple nailed.
            (2)   If end matched (tongue and groove boards), no two (2)
adjoining boards to break joints over same joist space; each board to bear on
at least two (2) joists.
            (3)   Maximum joists spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         (b)   Plywood: All plywood used structurally must be stamped.
            (1)   Minimum thickness, five-eighths inch (5/8") 5-ply.
            (2)   Maximum joist spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         (c)   At Chimneys: Lay one-half inch (1/2") clear of masonry.
         (d)   Clearance: Provide one-half inch (1/2") clearance between
subfloor and any masonry wall as partition parallel to the boards.
   (D)   Ceiling Framing: See subsection 4-10-1(D) of this chapter.
      1.   Joists:
         (a)   Maximum Spans: Maximum spans for ceiling or attic floor joists
are as follows:
            (1)   For no attic storage, maximum access opening is six hundred
(600) square inches.
            (2)   With larger access opening, design for limited attic storage.
            (3)   With permanent or disappearing stair, design according to
floor joist table in subsection (C)4(a) of this section.
            MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPANS FOR CEILING
            OR ATTIC FLOOR JOISTS
            (Of Other Than Structural Stress Graded And Marked Lumber)
                                     Minimum Allowable Spans (Clear) For
Lumber Size        Spacing Center To No Attic Storage    Limited Attic
Nominal     Actual Center            Assumed Live Load - Storage Assumed
                                     None                Live Load - 20
                                                         Pounds Per Sq. Ft.
                                          Minimum Allowable Spans (Clear) For
                                                            Limited Attic
Lumber Size Actual         Spacing Center No Attic Storage  Storage Assumed
Nominal                    To Center      Assumed Live Load Live Load - 20
                                          - None            Pounds Per Sq.
                                                            Ft.
2" x 4"     1 5/8" x 35/8" 24"            8' 8"             6' 0"
                         20"            9' 3"             6' 7"
                         16"            10' 0"            7' 4"
                         12"            11' 0"            8' 5"
2" x 6"     15/8" x 55/8"  24"            13' 7"            9' 3"
                         20"            14' 4"            10' 2"
                         16"            15' 8"            11' 4"
                         12"            17' 1"            13' 1"
2" x 8"     15/8" x 71/2"  24"            18' 1"            12' 5"
                         20"            19' 1"            13' 7"
                         16"            20'11"            15' 2"
                         12"            22'10"            17' 6"
2" x 10"    15/8" x 91/2"  24"                              15' 8"
                         20"                              17' 2"
                         16"                              19' 3"
                         12"                              22' 1"
 
         (b)   Ties For Rafters: Use ceilings joists as ties for rafters
whenever possible.
         (c)   Bridging: Solid, two inches (2") thick full depth and over, one
inch by three inches (1" x 3") cross bridging or rigid metal bridging may be
used; maximum spacing, eight feet (8') on center.
         (d)   Framing Of Ceiling Joists Over Girders And Bearing Partitions:
As required for joists. See subsection (C)4(e) of this section.
      2.   Hung Ceilings, Flat Roof Construction:
         (a)   Minimum size, two inches by four inches (2" x 4") on edge
separated by wood or metal hangers, not more than ten feet (10') on center.
         (b)   Ceiling joists bridging not required.
   (E)   Roof Framing:
      1.   General:
         (a)   Headers And Trimmers:
            (1)   Headers four feet (4') or less in length may be single.
            (2)   When chimney is at ridge or eaves and header is four feet
(4') or less, trimmers may be single; use double framing under all other
conditions.
            (3)   Dormer windows not supported on partitions. Double headers
and rafters.
         (b)   Anchor Wall Plates For Rafters And Roof Joists On Masonry Wall:
See subsection 4-10-6(E)7 of this chapter.
      2.   Pitched Roofs:
         (a)   Minimum Pitch: See subsection 4-10-10(A)1 of this chapter.
         (b)   Maximum Rafter Spans: Maximum rafter spans are as follows:
            MAXIMUM ALLOWABLE SPANS OF RAFTERS AND
            FLAT ROOF JOISTS
            Of Other Than Structural Stress Graded And Marked
            Lumber Between Plate And Ridge Or Intermediate Support For
            Asphalt Shingles Or Built-Up Roofing (Collar
            Beams Designed As Compression Members May Be Accepted
            As Intermediate Supports)
                                  Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) For Roof
                                  Slope
                                  Greater Than 3  3 In 12 Or Less Measured
Lumber Size        Spacing Center In 12 Measured  Horizontally
Nominal     Actual To Center      On Slope
                                  Roofing         Supporting
                                  Material Weight Finished   Not Supporting
                                  5 Pounds Per    Ceiling    Finished Ceiling
                                  Sq. Ft. Or Less
                                    Maximum Allowable Spans (Clear) For Roof
                                    Slope
                                    Greater Than 3 3 In 12 Or Less Measured
                          Spacing   In 12 Measured Horizontally
Lumber Size Actual        Center To On Slope
Nominal                   Center    Roofing
                                    Material       Supporting Not Supporting
                                    Weight 5       Finished   Finished
                                    Pounds Per Sq. Ceiling    Ceiling
                                    Ft. Or Less
2" x 4"     1 5/8" x 35/  24"       7' 6"                     
            8"
                        20"       8' 3"                     
                        16"       9' 2"                     
                        12"       10' 7"                    
2" x 6"     15/8" x 55/8" 24"       11' 8"         8' 7"      10' 2"
                        20"       12' 9"         9' 5"      11' 1"
                        16"       14' 3"         10' 6"     12' 6"
                        12"       16' 5"         12' 1"     14' 4"
2" x 8"     15/8" x 71/2" 24"       15' 6"         11' 5"     13' 6"
                        20"       17' 0"         12' 6"     14' 0"
                        16"       19' 0"         14' 0"     16' 7"
                        12"       22' 0"         16' 2"     19' 2"
2" x 10"    15/8" x 91/2" 24"       19' 8"         14' 6"     17' 1"
                        20"       21' 6"         15'10"     18' 9"
                        16"       24' 1"         17' 9"     21' 0"
                        12"       27'10"         20' 6"     24' 2"
 
         (c)   Rafters Cut For Level Bearing And Spike To Wall Plate: No
portion of cut end of rafters to project beyond inside edge of wall plate.
Frame rafters opposite at ridge; provide tie for rafters to prevent thrust.
         (d)   Collar Beams:
            (1)   Minimum size, one inch by six inches (1" x 6") or two inches
by four inches (2" x 4"); maximum spacing four feet (4') on center.
            (2)   When ceiling joists do not serve as tie at plate line or are
not below lower third of rafters, install ceiling joists (collar beams) same
size as rafters on each pair of rafters, and make special provisions for tying
the lower end of rafters to the floor or wall construction.
         (e)   Ridge Boards: Use one inch (1") member with depth not less than
cut end of rafter.
         (f)   Hip And Valley Rafters:
            (1)   Minimum thickness, two inches (2"); minimum depth, not less
than cut end of jack rafters.
            (2)   Maximum unsupported length of single valley rafters, eight
feet (8'); double rafters, twelve feet (12'). For unsupported lengths in excess
of twelve feet (12') provide intermediate support or design to carry
superimposed live and dead loads.
            (3)   May be omitted when jack rafters of one roof frames on two
inch (2") sole plate on top or roof sheathing of adjoining roof. Width of sole
plate not less than cut end of jack rafters.
         (g)   Crickets Or Chimney Saddles: Crickets or chimney saddles at
upper side of all chimneys not in contact with ridge.
      3.   Flat Roofs:
         (a)   Roof joist spans: See subsection (E)2(b) of this section.
         (b)   Cross bridging: Minimum size, one inch by three inches (1" x 3")
maximum spacing, eight feet (8') on center.
         (c)   Joists supporting hung ceilings: See subsection (D)2 of this
section.
         (d)   Framing of roof joists over girders and bearing partitions: As
required for floor joists. See subsection (C)4(e) of this section.
   (F)   Exterior Wall And Bearing Partition Framing:
      1.   Studs:
         (a)   Continuous lengths without splicing between floors.
         (b)   Minimum size, two inches by four inches (2" x 4").
         (c)   Maximum spacing for all construction, sixteen inches (16") on
center; one-story detached accessory buildings, twenty four inches (24").
         (d)   Maximum length for balloon frame, twenty feet (20'); notch studs
at second floor to receive one inch by four inch (1" x 4") ribbon. Nail joists
to studs.
      2.   Corner Posts: Not less than three (3) two inch by four inch (2" x
4") set to receive interior finish.
      3.   Corner Bracing:
         (a)   Braces at external corners: One inch by four inch (1" x 4"), let
into face of studs and plates, set approximately at forty five degrees (45°),
extend from sill to plate. Attaching ends of braces to blocks nailed to studs
or plates not acceptable. May be omitted only when wood sheathing boards are
laid diagonally.
         (b)   Openings near corner: Use one inch by four inch (1" x 4") knee
braces, extending from corner post to sill and to top plate. Extend over at not
less than three (3) stud spaces.
         (c)   Openings at corner: Brace as in subsection (F)3(a) of this
section, set as near openings as possible.
      4.   Sill Construction:
         (a)   Sill anchorage: See subsections 4-10-5(J)4 and 4-10-6(B)4 of
this chapter.
         (b)   Sills and girders on top of foundation walls and piers: Level
and grout with Portland cement mortar; wood not to be used for permanent shims.
         (c)   Other methods may be used if detailed on drawings submitted with
application and acceptable to building official.
      5.   Window And Door Openings:
         (a)   Inner stud on jambs: Extend in one piece from header to bearings
and nail to outer stud.
         (b)   Headers for usual loading conditions:
 
Size                Maximum Span
Two 2 x 4s on edge  3' 6"
Two 2 x 6s on edge  4' 6"
Two 2 x 8s on edge  6' 0"
Two 2 x 10s on edge 7' 6"
 
         (c)   Where headers support concentrated loads or are subjected to
other unusual loading conditions, the header shall be specially designed.
         (d)   If desired, truss construction may be used.
      6.   Plates:
         (a)   Top plates, two (2) two by fours (2 x 4). Lap at corners and
intersecting partitions. When plates are cut for piping or duct work, cut
plates with solid full depth two inch (2") header and metal tie one-half inch
(1/2") by 12-gauge with three (3) heavy nails or screws at each end.
         (b)   Where headers support concentrated loads or are subjected to
other unusual loading conditions, header shall be specially designed.
         (c)   Sole plates, minimum thickness, two inches (2"); exterior wall
studs may bear on the sill or on a sole plate on top of subfloor.
      7.   End Studs Or Bearing Partitions Connecting To Masonry Walls: Anchor
with bolts or spikes.
      8.   Wood Bearing Partitions: Wood bearing partitions in cellars or
basements are not acceptable.
      9.   Studs To Be Continuous (Balloon Frame): When exterior is to have
continuous stucco finish.
   (G)   Nonbearing Partition Framing:
      1.   Studs:
         (a)   Use continuous lengths without splicing.
         (b)   Partitions exceeding six feet (6') of unsupported length
containing openings. Size and spacing same as bearing partitions.
         (c)   Partitions less than six feet (6') unsupported length with
openings:
 
Minimum Size             Maximum Spacing
   2 x 4s (2" thicknes16" on center
   2 x 3s (3" thicknes16" on center
   2 x 4s (4" thicknes16" on center
 
         (d)   Partitions six feet (6') or over in length without openings:
 
Minimum Size             Maximum Spacing
   2 x 4s (2" thicknes16" on center
   2 x 3s (3" thicknes16" on center
   2 x 4s (4" thicknes16" on center
 
      2.   Openings:
         (a)   In two inch (2") thick partitions: Inner stud on jambs size two
inches by two inches (2" x 2") extend in one piece from header to bearing and
nail to outer stud; or single frame with two inch by six inch (2" x 6") jambs
continuous from top plate to sole plate with header notched two inches (2")
into each jamb.
         (b)   In three inch (3") and four inch (4") thick partitions: Single
framing not permitted.
         (c)   Headers:
Opening width, 3 feet or less:  
2" thick partitions            2" x 4" on edge
3" thick partitions            2" x 3" flat
4" thick partitions            2" x 4" on edge
Opening width, over 3 feet:     
2" thick partitions            2" x 4" on edge
3" thick partitions            Two 2" x 3" flat
4" thick partitions            Two 2" x 4" on edge
 
      3.   Top and sole plates: Minimum thickness, two inches (2"); lap top
plate at outside walls and at bearing partitions.
      4.   Wardrobes, cabinets and casework are acceptable as nonbearing
partitions.
      5.   Solid plaster partitions:
         (a)   Length: Maximum unsupported length sixteen feet (16').
         (b)   Core: Three-eighths inch (3/8") or one-half inch (1/2") gypsum
lath continuous from floor to ceiling and full width of door frames. Set in
grooves of wood sill and plate members and of jambs and heads of door frames.
Grooved member not required at intersections, tie or lace cornerite through
lath core with wire. Butting units may be fastened as recommended by
manufacturer and as approved by the superintendent of buildings.
         (c)   Sill And Plate Members: Finish thickness, one and one-fourth
inches (11/4") minimum. Securely nail to floor and structural framing.
         (d)   Door Frames: Mill built as finished frame. Thickness one and
five-eighths inches (15/8") minimum. Prime coat all sides. Secure to floor
framing and sill members. Provide anchor for plaster by driving 8d nails on
each side of lath, three-eighths inch (3/8") out from groove, at thirty degree
(30°) angle with plane of lath, on twelve inch (12") centers staggered, then
bend back against lath.
         (e)   Pipes And Conduits: Plumbing pipes, not permitted. Moisture
resistant electric conduit, tie securely to face of lath. Use shallow outlet
box.
         (f)   Coating: Coat core both sides with gypsum plaster to overall
thickness of two inches (2"), three (3) coat or two (2) coat double-up work.
   (H)   Wall Sheathing: See subsection (F) of this section. Sheathing may be
omitted on detached accessory buildings not containing habitable rooms.
      1.   Wood boards:
         (a)   Use: May be used under any exterior finish material.
         (b)   Dimensions: Minimum thickness, one and twenty five thirty
seconds inches (125/32"); maximum width, six inches (6") unless triple nailed;
maximum stud spacing sixteen inches (16") on center.
         (c)   Joints: Break joints over center of studs unless end matched
(T&G) boards are used; no two (2) adjoining end matched boards to break joints
over same stud space and each board to bear on at least two (2) studs.
         (d)   Application: When laid diagonally extend at forty five degrees
(45°) in opposite directions from each corner; apply horizontally under stucco
finish.
      2.   Plywood:
         (a)   May be used under any exterior finish material.
         (b)   Minimum thickness, three-eighths inch (3/8"); maximum stud
spacing, sixteen inches (16").
         (c)   All plywood used structurally must be stamped.
      3.   Fiber board; structural: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this
title.
         (a)   Under wood shingle siding: Apply one inch by two inches (1" x
2") nailing strips over sheathing, spaced according to shingle exposure.
         (b)   Asbestos-cement siding or asbestos-cement shingles shall be
attached with special metal fastening devices.
         (c)   Minimum thickness, three-fourths inch (3/4"); maximum stud
spacing, sixteen inches (16").
      4.   Gypsum board: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
         (a)   Asbestos-cement siding or asbestos-cement shingles shall be
attached with special metal fastening devices.
         (b)   Minimum thickness, one-half inch (1/2"); maximum stud spacing,
sixteen inches (16").
         (c)   Under wood shingle siding: Apply one inch by two inch (1" x 2")
nailing strips over sheathing, spaced according to shingle exposure.
   (I)   Sheathing Paper:
      1.   Material:
         (a)   Water resistant building paper.
         (b)   Asphalt saturated felt.
         (c)   Vapor resistance shall be less than that of vapor barrier
provided on inside of wall.
      2.   Application:
         (a)   Use over all types of sheathing except as noted in subsection
(I)3 of this section.
         (b)   Apply shingle fashion, four inch (4") lap. Lap four inches (4")
over paper strips around openings.
         (c)   Use six inch (6") wide strips behind exterior trim of all
exterior openings.
      3.   Not Required When: Paper not required over gypsum or fiber board,
factory treated to be moisture resistant and each piece marked "Water-
Repellant", (except when used behind masonry veneer and stucco) provided:
         (a)   Necessary corner and opening cuts are caulked with elastic
waterproof caulking material. Corner joints may be protected with eighteen inch
(18") widths of sheathing paper applied shingle fashion.
         (b)   At heads of openings, bottom edge of board is located to permit
head flashing to be extended under and turned up behind sheathing, and joint
between head flashing and board is caulked.
   (J)   Roof Sheathing:
      1.   Wood boards:
         (a)   Dimensions: Minimum thickness, one and twenty five thirty
seconds inches (125/32"); maximum width, six inches (6") unless triple nailed,
maximum rafter spacing sixteen inches (16") on center.
         (b)   Joints: Break joints over center of rafters unless end matched
(tongue and groove) boards are used. No two (2) adjoining end matched boards to
break joints over same rafter space and each board to bear on at least two (2)
rafters.
         (c)   Application: Lay closed under all roof material.
      2.   Plywood:
         (a)   May be used under any roofing material.
         (b)   Minimum thickness:
 
Roofing Material          Rafters Maximum Spacing  Plywood Minimum Thickness
                          (Inches)                 (Inch)
Asphalt shingles          16                       1/2
Slate, tile and asbestos- 16                       5/8
cement
Flat roofs                16                       5/8
 
         (c)   Protect exposed edges of sheathing along eaves and rake of roof
with moldings or sheet metal flashing. Flashing along eaves may be integral
with gutters. If gutters are not installed, form the flashing to provide a
drip.
         (d)   (Mathieu material).
      3.   Fiber board is not acceptable for roof sheathing.
   (K)   Stair Stringers:
      1.   Provide solid bearing at top and bottom.
      2.   Effective depth of wooden stringers, minimum, three and one- half
inches (31/2") when supported on stands; six inches (6") when run exceeds six
feet (6').
      3.   Open basement stairs: Minimum stringer thickness, two inches (2").
      4.   Third stringer: Install if treads are less than one and one- eighth
inches (11/8") thick or stair is more than two feet six inches (2'6") wide.
   (L)   Caulking:
      1.   Caulk around exterior openings in masonry or masonry veneer walls.
      2.   Caulk at intersections of wood and masonry except when flashed. This
does not apply to tops of foundations.
      3.   Building official may require additional caulking where necessary.
(Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-9: EXTERIOR WALL FINISH:
See subsection 4-10-8(H) of this chapter.
   (A)   Wood Siding:
      1.   Use well seasoned material. Moisture content not to exceed fifteen
percent (15%).
      2.   Nail at each bearing with hot dipped galvanized aluminum or cement
coated nails.
      3.   Bevel siding:
         (a)   Finish dimensions to comply with the following limitations as to
minimum top and butt thickness:
 
Nominal Width Thickness At Top Thickness At Butt
4" to 6"      3/16"            7/16"
8"            3/16"            9/16"
10" to 12"    3/16"            11/16"
 
         (b)   Minimum headlap, one inch (1") for four inch (4") width; one and
one-fourth inches (11/4") for widths over four inches (4").
         (c)   Nail near butt only. Do not nail through board underneath.
      4.   Rustic and drop siding: Minimum thickness, three-fourths inch (3/4")
(finished); maximum width, eight inches (8") (nominal).
      5.   Shiplap or matched siding:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, twenty five thirty seconds inch (25/32")
(finished); maximum width, twelve inches (12") (nominal).
         (b)   Triple nail all boards over eight inches (8") in width.
   (B)   Wood Shingle Siding:
      1.   Shingle grades:
         (a)   Single course siding, no. 1 or no. 2.
         (b)   Double course siding, no. 1 for exposed shingles; under course
may be no. 1 or no. 2.
      2.   Minimum size:
 
Length    Thickness
16 inches 5 butts in 2 inches
18 inches 5 butts in 21/4 inches
24 inches 4 butts in 2 inches
 
      3.   Maximum exposure:
 
Single Length Single Course Exposure Double Course Exposure
16 inches     71/2 inches            12 inches
18 inches     81/2 inches            14 inches
24 inches     11 inches              16 inches
 
      4.   Nailing:
         (a)   Nails: Copper, aluminum or hot dipped galvanized.
         (b)   Butt nail double coursing; exposed nails may be small headed.
   (C)   Asbestos-Cement Siding And Shingles: See subsection 4-10-8(H)3(b) of
this chapter.
      1.   Material: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Apply clapboards and shingles in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations.
      3.   Nails, noncorrodible.
   (D)   Plywood: All plywood shall be of Douglas fir plywood standard types,
in accordance with U.S. commercial standards. Each piece shall carry the grade
mark of the Douglas Fir Plywood Association. Nailing shall be as recommended by
the Douglas Fir Plywood Association.
      1.   Material, sound.
      2.   Grade mark, for exterior use, on each sheet of plywood.
      3.   Plywood, three-eighths inch (3/8") thick, may be used on sheathed
walls. If sheathing other than wood is used, install solid blocking between
studding as provided in subsection (D)4 of this section.
      4.   Installation:
         (a)   Protect edge prior to erection with paint, mixed one hundred
(100) pounds white lead paste, one and three-fourths (13/4) gallons raw linseed
oil and one pint dryer, applied without thinning.
         (b)   Vertical joints: To occur over studs.
         (c)   Horizontal joints: Install solid blocking between studding for
nailing.
         (d)   Butt joints of square edge material, whether exposed or covered
by battens, fill with mastic.
         (e)   Corner boards: Apply over plywood or butt plywood against boards
at all corners.
         (f)   Nails: Cement coated, aluminum or hot dipped galvanized, flat
head. Minimum spacing, on edge, six inches (6"); on center at intermediate
bearings, twelve inches (12") on center.
   (E)   Stucco: See subsections 4-10-8(F)9 and (H)1(d) of this chapter.
      1.   Lath For Stucco: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title. Wood
lath not acceptable.
         (a)   Expanded metal lath, painted; with large openings, one and
eight-tenths (1.8) pounds per square yard.
         (b)   Nails: Electrolytic zinc coated furring nails.
         (c)   Metal lath, held at least one-fourth inch (1/4") away from
sheathing by furring nails. Furring strips and self-furring lath not permitted.
      2.   Stucco:
         (a)   Materials: See section 4-10-4 of this chapter and chapter 22,
"Appendix A", of this title.
         (b)   Mixture: One part Portland cement, three (3) parts sand and
hydrated lime equal to ten percent (10%) by volume; or prepared Portland cement
stucco used in accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations.
         (c)   Thickness: Three (3) coat work, one inch (1") total; two (2)
coat work, five-eighths inch (5/8") total.
         (d)   Application:
            (1)   Three (3) coat work, over wood frame.
            (2)   Two (2) coat work, over masonry surface.
            (3)   Finish coat may be trowel coat of prepared exterior Portland
cement stucco.
            (4)   Thoroughly cover and embed lath in stucco.
            (5)   Keep wet two (2) days after application of each coat.
            (6)   Drying time before application of finished coat, seven (7)
days.
            (7)   Stucco not to be applied when temperature is lower than forty
degrees Fahrenheit (40°F).
            (8)   Bond in amount of cost of work to be filed with village good
for two (2) years.
   (F)   Aluminum Siding: All siding must be of type approved by superintendent
of buildings. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-10: ROOF COVERINGS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Roof slope:
         (a)   Shingle and tile roof (except porches) five (5) in twelve (12)
minimum.
         (b)   Shingle and tile roof of a porch or attached garage, three (3)
in twelve (12) minimum.
         (c)   Built up roofs (gravel or slag surface), three (3) in twelve
(12) maximum.
         (d)   Built up roofs with mineral surface cap sheet, three (3) in
twelve (12) maximum.
         (e)   When materials and methods of application provide precautions in
excess of these four (4) minimum requirements to assure a weathertight roof,
above roof slopes may be reduced subject to acceptance by the superintendent of
buildings.
      2.   Double starting row on all shingle applications.
      3.   Nails for attaching roof covering, copper, aluminum, or hot dipped
galvanized nails.
   (B)   Asphalt Shingles:
      1.   Fire Underwriters' class C label on each bundle.
      2.   Approximate shipping weight per square:
         (a)   Square butt strip, one hundred sixty five (165) pounds.
         (b)   Hexagonal strip, two hundred fifteen (215) pounds.
         (c)   Individual shingles, two hundred fifty (250) pounds.
      3.   Exposure as required for Fire Underwriters' class C label.
      4.   Headlap as recommended by manufacturers, minimum two inches (2").
      5.   Double thickness at all points. Cutouts and vertical spacing three-
fourths inch (3/4") or less may be disregarded.
      6.   Underlay:
         (a)   Asphalt saturated felt: Weight approximately fifteen (15) pounds
per one hundred (100) square feet.
         (b)   No underlay required on roof slopes of seven (7) in twelve
inches (12") or more when package containers are stamped by manufacturer
showing approximate shipping weight of two hundred ten (210) pounds per square;
or when triple thickness is obtained at all points. (Ord. 874, 2-23-1977)
   (C)   Wood Shingles: Not permitted unless authorized by the code adopted in
section 7-2-1 of this code and any subsequent amendments. (Ord. 1092, 3-27-
1985; amd. Ord. 1864, 3-12-2014)
   (D)   Asbestos Cement Shingles:
      1.   Quality: Dense, hard structure and thoroughly seasoned. See chapter
22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Label: Fire Underwriters' class A or B label on each bundle.
      3.   Underlay: One layer asphalt saturated felt, approximately thirty
(30) pounds per one hundred (100) square feet.
      4.   American Method:
         (a)   Standard shingle: Minimum weight per square, four hundred
seventy (470) pounds.
 
Length Of Shingle Maximum Exposure
16 inches         7 inches
15 inches         6 1/2 inches
12 inches         5 inches
 
         (b)   Strip shingle: Minimum weight per square, two hundred fifty
(250) pounds.
      5.   Dutch Method:
         (a)   Minimum weight per square, two hundred sixty five (265) pounds.
         (b)   Minimum headlap, three inches (3").
         (c)   Minimum sidelap, four inches (4").
      6.   French Or Hexagonal Method:
         (a)   Minimum weight per square, two hundred fifty (250) pounds.
         (b)   Minimum overlap two (2) edges, three inches (3").
   (E)   Tile Roofing:
      1.   Quality: Hard burned roofing tile.
      2.   Underlay: One layer asphalt saturated felt approximately thirty (30)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   Shingle tile, American method:
 
Length Of Shingle Maximum Exposure
16 inches         7 inches
15 inches         6 1/2 inches
14 inches         6 inches
12 inches         5 inches
 
      4.   Interlocking Tile And Curved Tile: Lay in accordance with
manufacturer's recommendations.
   (F)   Slate Shingles:
      1.   Quality: Free from knots or knurls and of reasonably smooth
cleavage. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Underlay: Asphalt saturated felt approximately thirty (30) pounds
per one hundred (100) square feet.
      3.   Laid American method:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, three-sixteenths inch (3/16").
         (b)   
 
Length Of Shingle Maximum Exposure
18 inches         7 1/2 inches
16 inches         61/2 inches
14 inches         51/2 inches
12 inches         41/2 inches
10 inches         31/2 inches
 
   (G)   Built Up Roofs:
      1.   Asphalt or tar and gravel coverings, including flashings: Comply
with requirements of Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Built up roof coverings
minimum 3-ply.
      2.   Apply according to manufacturer's directions.
      3.   Each ply of felt: Minimum weight, fourteen (14) pounds per one
hundred (100) square feet.
      4.   Surface with:
         (a)   Roofing gravel or crushed stone, approximately four hundred
(400) pounds per one hundred (100) square feet; or
         (b)   Crushed slag, approximately three hundred (300) pounds per one
hundred (100) square feet.
         (c)   Other material approved as to quality and weight by building
official.
      5.   Top ply of felt and crushed stone or slag surfacing may be replaced
with one layer of mineral surfaced cap sheet, minimum weight eighty five (85)
pounds per square. No exposed nails on finished roof.
   (H)   Metal Roofs:
      1.   Materials: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
         (a)   Galvanized sheet metal, 26-gauge sheets, one and twenty five-
hundredths (1.25) ounce (total weight both sides) zinc coating per square foot.
         (b)   Copper, sixteen (16) ounce soft (roofing temper).
         (c)   Roofing tin, forty (40) pound coating.
         (d)   Lead: Sheet lead, two and one-half (21/2) pounds per square
foot.
      2.   Nails:
         (a)   Hard copper or copper alloy, for copper roofs.
         (b)   Hot dipped galvanized, for galvanized, sheet metal roofs.
      3.   Seams: Flat or standing; flat seams locked and soldered.
      4.   Provide for expansion.
   (I)   Other Types Of Roof Coverings: Roof coverings such as metal shingles,
canvas or roll roofing, may be used when the type and weight of material, and
method of application are acceptable to the building official. (Ord., 12-12-
1962)
4-10-11: FLASHING:
   (A)   Material: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      1.   Copper, sixteen (16) ounce soft (roofing temper).
      2.   Galvanized sheet metal, 26-gauge, one and twenty five hundredths
(1.25) ounce (total weight both sides) zinc coating per square foot.
      3.   Lead. Hard lead, two (2) pounds; soft lead, four (4) pounds.
      4.   Tin, forty (40) pound coating, painted both sides.
      5.   Aluminum.
      6.   Other materials as provided for in section 4-10-12 of this chapter.
      7.   Copper and zinc flashings, gutters and downspounts not to be used in
conjunction with each other.
   (B)   Openings Not Protected By Overhang:
      1.   Heads Of Openings, Wood Frame Walls:
         (a)   Sheet metal extended behind finish siding material and turned
down over outside edge of head trim unless drip cap extends behind and above
bottom of finished material; or
         (b)   Three (3) ounce copper coated building paper may be used
provided flashing is not exposed to weather more than two inches (2"). Extend
behind siding. Blind tack at outside edge of drip cap, one inch (1") on center.
      2.   Heads Of Openings, Stuccoed Wood Frame Walls:
         (a)   Materials: Sheet metal.
         (b)   Drip: Form drip on front edge of drip cap and extend flashing up
behind building paper underneath stucco.
   (C)   Intersections:
      1.   Provide sheet metal flashing for all horizontal and vertical
intersections of stucco with other materials.
      2.   All flashing in connection with masonry walls shall have flashing or
counter flashing built into masonry not less than one inch (1").
   (D)   Valleys:
      1.   Rigid shingle roof covering:
         (a)   Flash with sheet metal.
         (b)   Flashing on:
            (1)   Roof slopes less than seven (7) in twelve (12), width
eighteen inches (18").
            (2)   Roof slopes seven (7) in twelve (12) or more, width twelve
inches (12").
      2.   Asphalt shingle roof covering:
         (a)   Flash with sheet metal; or
         (b)   Two (2) thicknesses of mineral surfaced roll roofing material
cut from rolls weighing not less than eighty five (85) pounds per square.
Bottom strip eighteen inches (18") wide, top strip at least twelve inches (12")
wide.
   (E)   Roof And Wall Intersections:
      1.   Sloping roof: Sheet metal flashings.
      2.   Flat roof: Sheet metal or same material as roof covering. When sheet
metal is not used, install forty five degree (45°) cant strip at roof and wall
intersection.
   (F)   Terrace Or Porch Slabs: Suspended (reinforced) type or bearing on the
ground which abut wood construction at exterior wall.
      1.   Flashing material: Sheet metal.
      2.   Extend flashing at finish floors or terrace or porch from one-
fourth inch (1/4") outside exterior face of finish, turn up four inches (4")
behind exterior finish.
   (G)   Chimneys:
      1.   All chimney and roof intersections, sheet metal flashing.
      2.   Cricket or saddle coverings, sheet metal. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-12: GUTTERS AND DOWNSPOUTS:
When dwelling is provided with basement install gutters and downspouts unless
omission is specifically permitted by building official.
   (A)   Materials: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      1.   Copper, sixteen (16) ounce, hard (cornice temper).
      2.   Galvanized sheet metal: 26-gauge sheets, one and twenty five
hundredths (1.25) ounce (total weight both sides) zinc coating per square foot.
      3.   Solid wood gutters: Paint inside with two (2) coats pitch or three
(3) coats lead and oil after installation.
      4.   Aluminum.
   (B)   Basket Strainers:
      1.   Material: Copper wire for copper gutters, heavily galvanized wire
for all other gutters.
      2.   Install strainers in all gutter outlets to downspouts.
   (C)   Roof Water Disposal: Provide outlet acceptable to building officials.
Connections of downspouts to sanitary sewers not permitted. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-13: INTERIOR WALL AND CEILING FINISH:
   (A)   Lath And Plaster: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      1.   Wood Lath: Not permitted.
      2.   Expanded Metal Lath:
         (a)   Painted or galvanized lath.
         (b)   Minimum Weights, Maximum Spacing Of Supports:
Use Pounds Per Yard Stud Spacing
Use               Pounds Per Yard Stud Spacing
Walls:                            
All dwellings     2.5             16 inches
1-story dwellings 3.4 a           16 inches
                 4.0a            16 inches
                 3.0b            16 inches
Ceilings          2.75a           16 inches
                 3.4             16 inches
                 3.4b            16 inches
 
Notes:
   a.   Flat rib.
   b.   High rib.
      3.   Insulating fiber board lath not permitted.
      4.   Gypsum Lath:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, three-eighths inch (3/8").
         (b)   Size, sixteen inches by forty eight inches (16" x 48").
         (c)   Maximum stud or joist spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         (d)   Apply in accordance with manufacturer's directions.
      5.   Lathing:
         (a)   Heads of openings: Install lath so vertical joints of first
course of lath above head will not occur or jamb studs.
         (b)   Corner beads: Galvanized metal, for all external corners.
         (c)   Corner and joint reinforcing: Metal lath two and one-half inch
(21/2") lap on each surface.
         (d)   Over solid wood surfaces: Install metal lath or strips or use
furring nails. Lap metal lath on adjoining surfaces.
      6.   Plaster:
         (a)   Mix all plaster (lime and prepared) according to manufacturer's
recommendations.
         (b)   Quick lime, slake thoroughly.
         (c)   Minimum thickness, three-fourths inch (3/4") over lath base.
Finish all ceilings level and walls and corners, plumb and straight.
      7.   Drying Period: Allow sufficient time for plaster to dry thoroughly
before application of trim.
   (B)   Ceramic Tile:
      1.   Materials: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Grade: To be at least standard grade.
      3.   Installation:
         (a)   Stud covering: Fifteen (15) pound asphalt saturated felt applied
shingle style (unless metal lath is paper backed).
         (b)   Metal lath: See subsection (A)2 of this section, for types and
weights.
         (c)   Scratch coat: Portland cement plaster, minimum five-eighths inch
(5/8") thick, integrally waterproofed. Scratch thoroughly. Allow to dry before
installing tile.
   (C)   Plastic Tile: In accordance with manufacturer's recommendation.
   (D)   Aluminum Tile: In accordance with manufacturer's recommendation.
   (E)   Shower Walls:
      1.   Materials: Dense and water repellant. Plaster not acceptable.
      2.   Installation:
         (a)   Install in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
         (b)   Minimum height: Not below showerhead.
         (c)   Caulk and protect joints at corners, bathtub, top edges of
wainscot and at intersections of wainscot and other materials. Use moldings
designed for the purpose or other materials satisfactory to the superintendent
of buildings.
   (F)   Dry Wall Finish:
      1.   Minimum thickness, actual inches:
 
Type Of Wall Finish        Stud Spacing
Wood boards                161/2
Plywood                    163/8 1/4" on solid
Gypsum board               161/2 backing on 16'
Fiber board, ceilings only 161/2 cross furring
 
   (G)   Heater Room Interior Finish:
      1.   Material: One hour fire resistive construction; see chapter 22,
"Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Installation: Apply over all combustible materials, including
ceiling area, within four feet (4') of heating unit and flue pipe. (Ord., 12-
12-1962)
4-10-14: FINISH FLOORS:
   (A)   Cement Floors:
      1.   Mix: See subsections 4-10-5(B) and (K)2 of this chapter.
      2.   Heater room floors on wood construction where heating equipment
raises temperatures of floor to above one hundred sixty degrees (160°), comply
with the following:
         (a)   Minimum thickness, four inches (4").
         (b)   Use sheet metal over tops of joists for concrete forms or out of
one inch (1") boards flush with top of joists. If wood boards are used, remove
after slab has set.
         (c)   Reinforce slab with wire mesh weighing not less than thirty (30)
pounds per one hundred (100) square feet, or with one-fourth inch (1/4") bars
spaced one foot (1') on center each way.
   (B)   Wood Floors: See subsection 4-10-8(C)5 of this chapter.
      1.   Materials:
         (a)   Flooring. Kiln dried material.
         (b)   Strip flooring, hardwood or softwood minimum thickness twenty
five thirty seconds inch (25/32"), maximum width two and one- fourth inches
(21/4") for hardwood, three and one-fourth inches (31/4") for softwood. Three-
eighths inch (3/8") thickness may be used when laid directly on a subfloor.
Wider widths (plank flooring) and parquet flooring may be used when precautions
are taken to prevent warping or cupping.
         (c)   Nails. Maximum spacing, sixteen inches (16") on center.
         (d)   Building paper or deadening felt. Apply under all finish
flooring unless floor is insulated.
      2.   Installation:
         (a)   Finish flooring over subflooring: Apply at right angles to
subflooring except when subflooring is laid diagonally.
         (b)   Finish flooring on strips: Wood strips, minimum size, three-
eighths inch by one and one-half inch (3/8" x 11/2"). Maximum spacing, sixteen
inches (16") on center. Apply strips over building paper or deadening felt on
top of subflooring.
         (c)   Strip flooring on concrete: Apply on not less than two inch by
two inch (2" x 2") sleepers embedded in concrete.
         (d)   Wood block floorings on concrete: Set blocks in mastic and
install in accordance with flooring manufacturer's directions.
   (C)   Ceramic Tile:
      1.   Materials: See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
      2.   Grade: Not less than standard grade.
      3.   Setting bed:
         (a)   Mix one part Portland cement, four (4) parts sand; one part
Portland cement, two (2) parts sand and four (4) parts pea size aggregate.
         (b)   Minimum thickness: One and one-fourth inches (11/4"), if
reinforced with wire mesh; three inches (3") when installed below top of
chamfered joists, with finish tile surface at least one and one-half inches
(11/2") above tops of joists.
      4.   When applied over wood subfloor: Install asphalt saturated felt over
subfloor underneath the wire mesh.
   (D)   Resilient Floor Covering: Install according to manufacturer's
instructions. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-15: GARAGES:
   (A)   Attached And Built In Garages:
      1.   Construction same as required for dwelling.
      2.   If door opening occurs between garage and dwelling, provide six inch
(6") curb at the door or construct garage floor six inches (6") lower than
adjoining floor.
      3.   Installation of house heating unit or other fuel burning appliance
in garage space not permitted. Install one hour fire resistant partition
between space containing house heating unit and garage space.
      4.   Wood frame walls and doors common to dwelling and garage: Finish on
garage side to be one hour fire resistive construction. Where rooms occur over
garage ceiling and all walls shall be one hour fire resistive construction.
Sheet metal on door acceptable. See chapter 22, "Appendix A", of this title.
   (B)   One-Story Detached Garages:
      1.   Comply with construction requirement for one-story dwellings with
the following exceptions:
         (a)   Bottom of concrete footings of frame garages, unless supported
on not less than four inch (4") slab, not less than eighteen inches (18") below
natural grade.
         (b)   Studs, maximum spacing twenty four inches (24") on center.
Doubling of studs not required on jambs of openings less than three feet five
inches (3'5") wide.
         (c)   Sheathing and building paper may be omitted.
         (d)   Corner post may be two (2) two inch by four inch (2" x 4") or a
four inch by four inch (4" x 4").
         (e)   Rafter ties at eaves not less than two inches by four inches (2"
x 4"), maximum spacing, six feet (6') on center.
         (f)   Corner bracing is required, except where sheathing is used, and
may be applied on the outside surface of studs.
         (g)   Flooring may be gravel. If concrete, see subsection 4-10-5(K)5
of this chapter.
      2.   Garages with masonry wall shall have a concrete footing at least
three feet six inches (3'6") below grade. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-10-16: SIDEWALKS:
Sidewalks will be required to be installed on all new construction of homes,
apartments, businesses, industrial or recreational use. Sidewalks shall also be
required where they do not exist on any remodeling projects where, in the
determination of the Building Superintendent, the interest of the Village would
require installation of the sidewalk. The construction of the cement sidewalk
would be on the full street frontage of the lot or lots to be improved and on
the side lot frontage on corner lots. Sidewalks shall be built and located in
accordance with the regulations and ordinances of title 9, chapter 1 of this
Code. (Ord. 874, 2-23-1977)
4-10-17: FIRE RESISTANCE:
The provisions of this section shall apply to all multi-family structures
containing three (3) or more living units; or one or more living units in a
structure containing any other type of use such as business or industrial. The
fire resistance rating of structural elements (including walls, floors and
roof) and tenant separation or party walls shall be a minimum of two (2) hours
and be constructed of noncombustible materials.
Exterior and load bearing wall construction shall be of masonry. All floors
shall be of the precast concrete type, poured concrete type or other type
having at least a two (2) hour fire resistance rating. (Ord. 1132, 5-27-1987)
4-10-18: ENERGY CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   Code Adopted: The 2018 International Energy Conservation Code as
published and triennially amended by the State of Illinois, is hereby adopted
and incorporated in full as if set forth at length herein, and shall apply and
control within the Village of Midlothian, save and except such portions as
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
   (B)   Other Code References: References to other International Codes herein
shall mean and apply as follows:
      1.   International Building Code (IBC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      2.   References to the International Existing Building Code are hereby
deleted.
      3.   International Fire Code (IFC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the National Fire Code, 2009 edition published by the National
Fire Protection Association, the National Fire Protection Association Code #1,
2009 edition, the National Fire Protection Association Code 101, Life Safety
Code, 2009 edition and their subsequent revisions and the whole thereof, except
such portions pertaining to the organization, administration, operation, and
equipment of the Fire Department and such portions as are otherwise
inapplicable to the Village, or as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended
by the Village of Midlothian.
      4.   International Plumbing Code (IPC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the Illinois Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the Village
of Midlothian.
      5.   International Residential Code (IRC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      6.   International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the International Fuel Gas
Code (IFGC) as adopted and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      7.   References to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code are
hereby deleted and replaced with the provisions of title 3, chapter 5 of the
Village Code.
      8.   International Property Maintenance Code as adopted and amended by
the Village of Midlothian.
   (C)   Amendments: The following amendments to the 2018 edition of the
International Energy Conservation Code (hereinafter IECC), shall apply:
      1.   Section C101.1 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the
jurisdiction and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as
the Energy Conservation Code of the Village of Midlothian, hereinafter referred
as the "Energy Code."
      2.   Section C109.1 referencing Board of Appeals is hereby amended to
designate the Village Board of the Village of Midlothian as the Board of
Appeals and to provide that the Village board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its appeal functions and issue all decisions and findings in
writing.
      3.   Section C109.3 referencing Qualifications is hereby deleted.
      4.   Section R101.1 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the
jurisdiction and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as
the Energy Conservation Code of the Village of Midlothian, hereinafter referred
as the "Energy Code."
      5.   Section R109.1 referencing Board of Appeals is hereby amended to
designate the Village Board of the Village of Midlothian as the Board of
Appeals and to provide that the Village board shall adopt rules of procedure
for conducting its appeal functions and issue all decisions and findings in
writing.
      6.   Section R109.3 referencing Qualifications is hereby deleted.
(Ord. 2032, 7-10-2019)
4-10-19: RESERVED:
(Ord. 2008, 12-12-2018)
4-10-20: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT ADOPTED:
The Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) is hereby adopted by
reference and the requirements set forth therein including the 2010 Americans
With Disabilities Act Standards for Accessible Design and any future
enforceable updates to title II of the ADA shall be enforceable within the
Village of Midlothian under this section. (Ord. 2008, 12-12-2018)
4-10-21: ILLINOIS ACCESSIBILITY CODE ADOPTED:
The Village of Midlothian pursuant to 410 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1,
hereby adopts by reference the Illinois Accessibility Code (71 Ill. Adm. Code
400) and any subsequent amendments shall be enforceable within the Village of
Midlothian under this section. (Ord. 2009, 12-12-2018)
CHAPTER 11
REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-11-1: Other Buildings
4-11-2: Illinois Plumbing Code Adopted
4-11-3: Mechanical And Fuel Gas Codes Adopted
4-11-4: Electrical Code Adopted
4-11-1: OTHER BUILDINGS:
Whenever this Code does not specifically cover the construction of any building
or structure or part of building for which plans have been submitted or
application is made, the provisions of the National Building Code of 1967, as
amended, will apply. The National Building Code of 1967, as amended, referred
to herein and made a part of this Code, as recommended and distributed by the
American Insurance Association, Midwestern Department, 120 South La Salle
Street, Chicago, Illinois. (Ord. 701, 5-13-1970)
4-11-2: ILLINOIS PLUMBING CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by the Village of Midlothian for
the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction,
alteration, removal, demolition, use of equipment, use, occupancy, location,
and maintenance of building structures, including permits and penalties, a
Plumbing Code known as the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) as
required by the State of Illinois, Department of Public Health. The Illinois
Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) is adopted with local amendments and
incorporated by this reference as though fully set forth herein. From the date
on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall control
the construction of buildings and other structures therein contained within the
corporate limits of the Village.
   (B)   Amendments: The Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) is
amended with the following local amendments:
      1.   Pursuant to 17 Ill. Admin. Code 3730.307(c)(4) and subject to the
Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 890) and the Lawn Irrigation
Contractor and Sprinkler Registration Code (77 Ill. Admin. Code 892), all new
plumbing fixtures and irrigation controllers installed after November 15, 2015
shall bear the WaterSense label (as designated by the U.S. environmental
Protection Agency WaterSense Program), when such labeled fixtures are
available.
      2.   The first sentence of Section 890.1190-b) shall be deleted in its
entirety and replaced with the following: "The utility meter (water meter)
shall be located within the building. Meter vaults are prohibited unless
approved by the Superintendent of Public Works or Building Superintendent"
(Amends Section 890.1190-b).
      3.   Water Service Pipe Sizing. For all new construction, water service
piping from the street main into the building shall be a minimum size of one
and a half inches in diameter, type K copper. Existing residential water
service piping from the street into the building shall be a minimum size of one
inch in diameter. (Amends Section 890.1200-a)
      4.   Building drainage/vent pipes shall consist of the following approved
materials:
         (a)   Brass pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #2)
         (b)   Cast iron pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #3)
         (c)   Chlorinated polyvinyl chloride (CPVC) only for chemical waste
drainage systems (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #4)
         (d)   Copper/copper alloy. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #5)
         (e)   Copper/copper alloy tubing - Type K, L or M. (77 Ill. Adm. Code
890, Appendix A, #6)
         (f)   Galvanized steel pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #7)
         (g)   Glass fiber borosilicate. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A,
#8)
         (h)   High silicone content cast iron pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890,
Appendix A, #9)
         (i)   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe and fittings. (77 Ill. Adm. Code
890, Appendix A, #11)
         (j)   Solder. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #14)
         (k)   Stainless steel - types 304 and 316L. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890,
Appendix A, #15)
         (l)   Stainless steel buttweld fittings. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890,
Appendix A, #16)
         (m)   Stainless steel flanges. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A,
#17)
         (n)   Identification of piping systems per ASME A13.1-2007. (77 Ill.
Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #18)
(Amends Section 890 by deleting items 1, 10, 12 and 13 of Appendix A)
      5.   Building sewer pipes shall consist of the following approved
materials:
         (a)   Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe-white and
         (b)   SDR - 26 green (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A)
         (c)   Piping systems as provided by ASME A13.1-2007. (77 Ill. Adm.
Code 890, Appendix A, #12);
(Amends Section 890 by deleting items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, 10, and 11 of
Appendix)
      6.   Water service piping shall consist of the following approved
materials:
         (a)   Cast iron (ductile iron) water pipe 2 inches and larger for
commercial use. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #3)
         (b)   Copper/copper alloy pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A,
#5)
         (c)   Copper/copper alloy tubing. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A,
#6)
(Amends Section 890 by deleting items 1, 2, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and
15 of Appendix A)
      7.   Water distribution pipes shall consist of the following approved
materials:
         (a)   Brass pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #1)
         (b)   Copper/copper alloy pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A,
#3)
         (c)   Copper/copper alloy tubing - Type K, L or M (77 Ill. Adm. Code
890, Appendix A, #4)
         (d)   Galvanized steel pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #7)
         (e)   Stainless Steel pipe. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #10)
         (f)   Welded copper water tube. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A,
#11)
         (g)   Lead free solder. (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890, Appendix A, #12)
(Amends Section 890, by deleting items 2, 5, 6, 8, and 9 of Appendix A)
      8.   Gravity Sewer: Only overhead sewers shall be allowed for new
construction in the Village as required by 3-5-3(I) of the Village Code.
   (C)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of the Village Code or the maximum allowed by State
Statutes for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2034, 7-24-
2019)
4-11-3: MECHANICAL AND FUEL GAS CODES ADOPTED:
   (A)   Codes Adopted: The 2018 International Mechanical Code and the 2018
International Fuel Gas Code as published by the International Code Council, are
hereby adopted and incorporated in full as if set forth at length herein, and
shall apply and control within the Village of Midlothian, save and except such
portions as hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
   (B)   Other Code References: References to other International Codes herein
shall mean and apply as follows:
      1.   International Building Code (IBC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      2.   Energy Conservation Code (IECC) as adopted and amended by the State
of Illinois and the Village of Midlothian.
      3.   International Fire Code (IFC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the National Fire Code, 2009 edition published by the National
Fire Protection Association, the National Fire Protection Association Code #1,
2009 edition, the National Fire Protection Association Code 101, Life Safety
Code, 2009 edition and their subsequent revisions and the whole thereof, except
such portions pertaining to the organization, administration, operation, and
equipment of the Fire Department and such portions as are otherwise
inapplicable to the Village, or as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended
by the Village of Midlothian.
      4.   International Plumbing Code (IPC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the Illinois Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the Village
of Midlothian.
      5.   International Residential Code as adopted and amended by the Village
of Midlothian.
      6.   International Mechanical Code and the International Fuel Gas Code as
adopted and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
   (C)   Mechanical Code Amendments: The following amendments to the 2018
edition of the International Mechanical Code (hereinafter IMC), shall apply:
      1.   Section 101 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the jurisdiction
and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as the
Mechanical Code of the Village of Midlothian, hereinafter referred as the
"Mechanical Code."
      2.   Section 102.2.1 referencing Existing Buildings is hereby deleted.
      3.   Section 106.5.2 (Fee Schedule) shall be amended as follows: The fees
for work shall be as provided in 4-3-8 of the Village of Midlothian Municipal
Code.
      4.   Section 106.5.3 No. 1 is amended as follows: The full or lesser
amount of any fee paid hereunder erroneously paid or collected. Section
106.5.3, No. 2 and 3 specifying percentage of refunds are hereby deleted.
      5.   Section 108.4 is amended to reference penalties as provided for in
1-4-1 of the Village of Midlothian Municipal Code.
      6.   Section 108.5 referencing stop work orders is amended in the last
sentence to reference fines not less or more than as provided for in 1-4-1 of
the Village of Midlothian Municipal Code.
      7.   Section 109 referencing Means of Appeal is hereby deleted.
      8.   Section 603.6.1.1 referencing duct length is amended as follows:
Flexible air ducts shall not exceed five (5) feet in length.
      9.   The appendices to the IMC are hereby deleted and not adopted in this
Mechanical Code.
   (D)   Fuel Gas Code Amendments: The following amendments to the 2018
International Fuel Gas Code (hereinafter IFGC):
      1.   Section 101 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the jurisdiction
and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as the Fuel Gas
Code of the Village of Midlothian, hereinafter referred as the "Fuel Gas Code."
      2.   Section 102.2.1 referencing Existing Buildings is hereby deleted.
      3.   Section 106.6.2 (Fee Schedule) shall be amended as follows: The fees
for work shall be as provided in 4-3-8 of the Village of Midlothian Municipal
Code.
      4.   Section 106.6.3 No. 1 is amended as follows: The full or lesser
amount of any fee paid hereunder erroneously paid or collected. Section
106.5.3, No. 2 and 3 specifying percentage of refunds are hereby deleted.
      5.   Section 108.4 is amended to reference penalties as provided for in
1-4-1 of the Village of Midlothian Municipal Code.
      6.   Section 108.5 referencing stop work orders is amended in the last
sentence to reference fines not less or more than as provided for in 1-4-1 of
the Village of Midlothian Municipal Code.
      7.   Section 109 referencing Means of Appeal is hereby deleted.
      8.   Appendices A, B and C are hereby adopted in this Fuel Gas Code.
(Ord. 2013, 2-27-2019)
4-11-4: ELECTRICAL CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   The last amended Electrical Code of the City of Chicago with the
following changes and additions thereto is hereby adopted by the Village of
Midlothian:
      1.   The Building Superintendent of the Village of Midlothian shall have
primary authority to enforce this code.
      2.   Article 210.8(A)(5) regarding Branch Circuits is amended to allow a
single receptacle to be installed for sump pumps and ejector pumps.
      3.   Article 210.8(A)(2) regarding Garages, and 210.8(A)(5) regarding
Unfinished Basements is amended to allow a single receptacle that is not
readily accessible for appliances located within a dedicated space for each
appliance that, in normal use, is not easily moved from one place to another
and that is cord and plug connected in accordance with Section 400.10(A)(6),
(A)(7) or (A)(8).
      4.   Article 210.12(A) is amended to allow the omission of AFCI
protection for a single receptacle located in hallways.
      5.   Article 230.42(B)(1) regarding service size is amended to add
minimum electrical service size for a single-family residence shall be a 100-
amp service for a single-family home of up to 1500 square feet of habitable
space and minimum electrical service size for a single-family residence over
1500 square feet of habitable space is a 200-amp service.
      6.   Electrical Contractor Defined: The term "electrical contractor"
means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of installing or
altering by contract, electrical equipment for the utilization of electricity
supplied for light, heat or power not including radio apparatus or equipment
for wireless reception of sounds and signals, and not including apparatus,
conductors and other equipment installed for or by public utilities (including
common carriers) which are under the jurisdiction of the Illinois commerce
commission for use in their operation as public utilities, but the term
"electrical contractor" does not include employees of such contractor to do or
supervise such work.
(Ord. 2011, 1-9-2019)
CHAPTER 11A
FENCES
SECTION:
4-11A-1: Permits And Fees
4-11A-2: Definition
4-11A-3: Height Of Fences
4-11A-4: Location Of Fence
4-11A-5: Visional Clearance
4-11A-1: PERMITS AND FEES:
It shall be unlawful to construct or cause to be constructed a fence or fences
unless a permit is obtained from the department of buildings. The fee for the
permit shall be established by the village board. The village board shall set
the amount of the fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be
maintained by the village clerk and which shall be made available to the public
upon request. (Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
4-11A-2: DEFINITION:
For the purpose of this code, a "fence" shall be defined as any manmade
structure which is constructed for the purpose of or has the effect of
enclosing or screening the area it is constructed upon. The provisions of this
code shall not apply to shrubbery or trees except in relation to the provisions
relating to corner visional clearance. (Ord. 606, 6-9-1965)
4-11A-3: HEIGHT OF FENCES:
Fences shall be constructed so as not to exceed the following heights:
   (A)   On the side or front of a lot which is adjacent to a street and on
other side lot lines on the street side of the building line, the height of the
fence shall not exceed three and one-half feet (31/2') except where the fence
is on or behind the building setback line, in that area the fence may be up to
six feet (6'). These provisions shall not apply to fences built on property
zoned E, F and G if the property is used for commercial or industrial purposes.
(Ord. 737, 4-26-1972)
   (B)   On all other lot lines or portions of lot lines the height of the
fence shall not exceed six feet (6'). (Ord. 606, 6-9-1965)
4-11A-4: LOCATION OF FENCE:
The fence may be constructed on the lot line or inside the lot line. (Ord. 606,
6-9-1965)
4-11A-5: VISIONAL CLEARANCE:
Notwithstanding any provisions relating to height hereinbefore stated, the
"visional clearance area" which shall be defined as a triangular area measured
twenty five feet (25') on the front lot line and fifty feet (50') on the side
lot line of a corner lot shall not be obstructed by any wall, fence, hedge or
shrubbery which exceeds three and one-half feet (31/2') in height. In the event
that the grade of a lot is higher than the street grade, the height of the
wall, fence, hedge or shrubbery shall be reduced so that the visional clearance
is not obstructed three and one-half feet (31/2') over the grade of the street.
(Ord. 606, 6-9-1965)
These provisions do not apply to fences built on property zoned E, F and G if
the property is used for commercial or industrial purposes. (Ord. 737, 4-26-
1972)
CHAPTER 11B
SIGNS
SECTION:
4-11B-1: Requirements; Fees And Bonds
4-11B-1: REQUIREMENTS; FEES AND BONDS:
The requirements, standards, landscape requirements, maintenance and all other
regulations concerning signs are contained in title 11, chapter 14 of this
code. All permit fees, bonds and other fees with regard to signs shall be
established by the village board. The village board shall set the amount of the
fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be maintained by the
village clerk and which shall be made available to the public upon request.
(Ord. 1651, 10-10-2007)
CHAPTER 11C
DECKS AND PORCHES
SECTION:
4-11C-1: Permits And Fees
4-11C-2: Definitions
4-11C-3: Adoption Of Guidelines
4-11C-1: PERMITS AND FEES:
It shall be unlawful to construct or cause to be constructed a deck or porch
unless a permit is obtained from the Department of Buildings. The fee for the
permit shall be established by the Village Board. The Village Board shall set
the amount of the fee by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be
maintained by the Village Clerk and which shall be made available to the public
upon request. (Ord. 2021, 3-19-2019)
4-11C-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, a deck shall be defined as a one or multi-
level platform constructed near grade, the highest floor of which is not in
excess of six feet (6') in height from the ground. A porch shall be an open-air
structure typically attached to the exterior of a building, the floor of which
is in excess of six feet (6') in height from the ground. (Ord. 2021, 3-19-2019)
4-11C-3: ADOPTION OF GUIDELINES:
The most current American Wood Council's DCA #6 "Prescriptive Residential Wood
Deck Construction Guide" is hereby adopted and incorporated in full as if set
forth at length herein, and shall apply and control for decks under six feet
(6') in height from the ground and the provisions of City of Chicago Building
Department's most current "Porch Design and Construction Guidelines" shall
apply and control for decks or porches in excess of six feet (6') in height
from the ground in the Village of Midlothian. (Ord. 2021, 3-19-2019)
CHAPTER 11D
TENTS
SECTION:
4-11D-1: Permits And Fees
4-11D-2: Definitions
4-11D-3: Regulations, Permit Requirements
4-11D-1: PERMITS AND FEES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to erect, construct, or cause to be erected or
constructed, a tent within the Village, unless a permit is obtained from the
Building Department, as follows:
      1.   Any tent that is larger than two hundred (200) square feet (i.e.:
10x20 measurement) and is located in any zone.
   (B)   Smaller temporary tents or other structures located in a residential
zone do not require a building permit if they meet the following:
      1.   Residential-use pop-up canopies that measure two hundred (200)
square feet or less.
      2.   Camping tents in a residential zone.
   (C)   Camping tents shall not be permitted in any business or office/
industrial zone.
   (D)   The fee for the permit shall be established by the Village Board. The
Village Board shall set the amount of the fee by resolution or ordinance in a
fee schedule to be maintained by the Village Clerk and which shall be made
available to the public upon request. (Ord. 2101, 7-13-2022)
4-11D-2: DEFINITIONS:
Except as otherwise provided herein, for the purposes of this chapter, the term
"tent" shall be defined as any tent, canopy, or portable structure, including
sunscreens, with or without walls of canvas or other like material, covered
with similar materials and supported by poles, stakes, and/or ropes. (Ord.
2101, 7-13-2022)
4-11D-3: REGULATIONS, PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   No tent requiring a permit in any zoning district shall be erected for
more than seven (7) consecutive days, and no tent shall be erected on any given
property more than three (3) times per year.
   (B)   All tents in office/industrial or business districts shall be
regulated through an event permit.
   (C)   No tents in office/industrial or business districts shall be erected
on any property between November 1 and March 30 of any year.
   (D)   All erected tents must be located behind the building lot line or
located in such an area that is approved by the Building Department and Fire
Department and at a minimum, at least fifteen feet (15') behind the front lot
line of the property where the tent is erected.
   (E)   All tents requiring a permit shall be subject to inspection by the
Building Department, Fire Department, and/or Police Department prior to their
intended use.
   (F)   All tents intended to be part of an outdoor café and/or accessory to a
restaurant or bar, shall be a permitted for special use, pursuant to Title 11-
9 of the Village Code.
   (G)   Permit requirements include, but may not be limited to, the following:
      1.   Permission letter from property owner is required if installing a
tent on property owned by others.
      2.   If the tent is to be installed by a commercial tent installer,
regardless of size, a contractor license and a twenty thousand dollar
($20,000.00) surety bond made out to the Village of Midlothian are required,
      3.   If the tent occupancy is forty (40) or more, a detailed site/floor
plan is required, detailing exits, seating arrangements, lighting requirements,
fire extinguisher location, and electrical equipment.
      4.   All tents must be made of Fire-Resistant Material, with certificate.
   (H)   All tents or other temporary structures must otherwise comply with all
requirements of the Village of Midlothian. (Ord. 2101, 7-13-2022)
CHAPTER 12
SPECIAL PROVISIONS AND STRUCTURES
SECTION:
4-12-1: Fallout Shelters
4-12-2: Permits; Fees
4-12-3: Location
4-12-1: FALLOUT SHELTERS:
Family shelters shall be constructed in accordance with instructions issued by
the department of defense, office of civil defense, Washington, D.C., in a
pamphlet known as PSD F-61-1.
Shelters constructed for use of more than one family or for use of the general
public shall be constructed in accordance with the recommendations of the civil
defense director of the village who shall obtain the necessary plans and
specifications from the department of defense. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-12-2: PERMITS; FEES:
No fallout shelter shall be constructed unless a permit for same has been
obtained from the chairman of the building committee.
No permit fee shall be charged for such permit. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-12-3: LOCATION:
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a fallout shelter to be constructed
aboveground, the building committee shall inspect the proposed site of the
shelter and shall ascertain the effect said construction may have on
surrounding buildings and structures. The building committee shall deny such
permit if said construction will violate the rights of surrounding property
owners and/or residents. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
CHAPTER 13
VIOLATIONS; PENALTY
SECTION:
4-13-1: Enforcement
4-13-2: Liability
4-13-3: Violations; Penalty
4-13-1: ENFORCEMENT:
It shall be the duty of all officers of the village to enforce the provisions
of this code.
For the purpose of enforcement of this code, the superintendent of buildings
and inspectors shall be considered officers of the village and shall have the
power to arrest or cause to be arrested any firm or person who shall violate
the provisions of this code. (Ord., 12-12-1962)
4-13-2: LIABILITY:
The superintendent of buildings, the building committee, or any assistant or
deputy carrying out the instructions of the superintendent of buildings or
building committee is not personally liable for actions taken by him or them
for carrying out their duties in good faith and without malice. (Ord., 12-12-
1962)
4-13-3: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall be fined not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense. Each
day that said violation shall continue shall be a separate offense. Any person
who shall construct any building or structure, or who shall alter any building
or structure in violation of the provisions of this code, or any architect
having supervision over such building or construction, who shall wilfully
permit such violations, and/or the owner of any building or structure who shall
wilfully permit such violation, shall also be subject to such penalties as are
provided herein. Whoever shall perform any construction in violation of this
code shall be required to remove such construction at his or their expense.
(Ord. 823, 10-9-1974; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 14
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
SECTION:
4-14-1: Definition
4-14-2: Prohibition
4-14-3: Abatement
4-14-4: Fire Limits
4-14-5: Lien
4-14-6: Repeal Of Ordinances
4-14-7: Penalty
4-14-1: DEFINITION:
The term "dangerous building", as used in this chapter, is hereby defined to
mean and include:
   (A)   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which is
dangerous to the public health because of its condition, and which may cause or
aid in the spread of disease, or injury to the health of the occupants of it or
neighboring structures.
   (B)   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure which, because of
faulty construction, age, lack of proper repair or any other cause, is
especially liable to fire and constitutes or creates a fire hazard.
   (C)   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure, which, by reason
of faulty construction or any other cause, is liable to cause injury or damage
by collapsing or by a collapse or fall of any part of such structure.
   (D)   Any building, shed, fence or other manmade structure, which, because
of its condition or because of lack of doors or windows is available to and
frequented by malefactors or disorderly persons or children who are not lawful
occupants of such structure.
Any such dangerous building in the village is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 568, 3-11-1964)
4-14-2: PROHIBITION:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or permit the existence of any dangerous
building in the village, and it shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant or
person in custody of any dangerous building to permit the same to remain in a
dangerous condition, or to occupy such building or permit it to be occupied
while it is or remains in a dangerous condition. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1964)
4-14-3: ABATEMENT:
Whenever the building inspector, the fire chief or the health officer shall be
of the opinion that any building or structure in the village is a dangerous
building, he shall file a written statement to this effect with the chairman of
the building committee. The village board may then instruct the village clerk
to thereof cause written notice to be served upon the owner of record thereof,
and upon the occupant thereof, if any, by registered or certified mail or by
personal service. Such notice shall state that the building has been declared
to be in a dangerous condition, and that such dangerous condition must be
removed or remedied by repairing or altering the building or by demolishing it,
and that the condition must be remedied at once. Such notice may be in the
following terms:
To                           (owner-occupant of premises) of the premises known
and described as                          .
You are hereby notified that (describe building) on the premises above
mentioned has been condemned as a nuisance and a dangerous building after
inspection by                          .
The causes of this decision are (here insert the facts as to the dangerous
condition).
You must remedy this condition or demolish the building immediately, or the
Village will proceed to do so, or contract to have same done pursuant to the
provision of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1 and 5/11-31-2.
If the person receiving the notice has not complied therefor or taken an appeal
from the determination of the officer or employee finding that a dangerous
building exists, within twenty (20) days from the time when this notice is
mailed or served upon such person by personal service or mail, the building
inspector may, upon orders of the village, proceed to remedy the condition or
demolish the dangerous building, or cause said building to be demolished and a
lien filed as provided in aforementioned statute. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1964)
4-14-4: FIRE LIMITS 1 :
Any frame building or structure within the fire limits of the city as
prescribed by ordinance, which has or may be damaged by fire, decay or other
causes to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value, shall be torn down
and removed, or rebuilt with nonflammable walls. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1964)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 7-1-1 of this code.
4-14-5: LIEN:
If the said building is demolished by the village, the village board shall
instruct the village attorney to file a lien against said property pursuant to
the provision of 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31-1. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1964)
4-14-6: REPEAL OF ORDINANCES:
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
and specifically ordinance 294, inserted as chapter 2, "Dangerous Buildings",
sections 4-2-1 to 4-2-4 of this code, are hereby repealed. (Ord. 568, 3-11-
1964)
4-14-7: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or permitting any dangerous
building, or any building or structure to remain in a dangerous condition, or
to remain in the fire limits, without remodeling, as above provided for, after
it has been damaged to the extent of fifty percent (50%) of its value shall be
fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than the penalty as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 568, 3-11-1964; amd. Ord. 1362,
9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 15
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSANT SPRINKLER SYSTEMS; HEAT AND SMOKE DETECTION AND
INTERIOR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
SECTION:
4-15-1: Conflict With Fire Code
4-15-2: Definitions
4-15-3: Enforcement Of Provisions Of This Chapter
4-15-4: Automatic Fire Suppression Systems
4-15-5: Heat And Smoke Detection And Interior Fire Alarm Systems
4-15-6: Request For Waiver
4-15-7: Application
4-15-8: Penalty
4-15-1: CONFLICT WITH FIRE CODE:
Should any provision of this chapter conflict with the provisions of the
Midlothian fire prevention code, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
(Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
4-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
APPROVED:
   (A)   As applied to automatic fire suppressant sprinkler installations,
means approved by the official or other authority charged with the enforcement
of this chapter.
   (B)   As applied to automatic fire suppressant sprinklers and devices, means
approved by a nationally recognized testing laboratory.
AREA: As applied to a building or structure, shall mean the maximum horizontal
projected area of the building or structure at or above grade, including all
enclosed extensions; within the exterior walls and/or approved firewalls.
AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSANT SPRINKLER SYSTEM: An arrangement of piping,
sprinklers and devices designated to operate automatically, by the heat of
fire, to discharge water upon the fire.
BASEMENT: Any story of a building or structure, the ceiling of which is located
less than six feet (6') above the finish grade.
CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT: The chief of the Midlothian fire department or
his duly authorized representative.
COMBUSTIBLE: Any material which will ignite when subjected to any temperature
up to one thousand three hundred eighty-two degrees Fahrenheit (1,382°F) for
five (5) minutes.
DAYCARE FACILITY (CHILD/ADULT): Any licensed or unlicensed operation providing
non- residential care to 4 or more individuals for fewer than 24 hours/day.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed or used as living
quarters for a family or an individual.
EDUCATIONAL FACILITY: Includes any building serving more than 6 people for
educational purposes through grade 12, exceeding 4 hours/day or 12 hours/week.
FIREWALL: A wall having adequate fire resistance and structural stability under
fire conditions to accomplish the purpose of completely separating adjoining
buildings or structures to resist the passage of fire. Refer to Midlothian
building code, fire resistance ratings 1 .
GARAGE: A building or structure, or a portion thereof, arranged, designed or
used for the storage, sale, repair, rental, greasing, washing, servicing,
adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other motor vehicles.
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY: Buildings where occupants require supervision or
assistance to evacuate (includes group homes, memory care, rehab centers and
inpatient medical facilities.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate floor between the floor and the ceiling of any story
and covering less than thirty-three and one-third percent (331/3%) of the floor
area immediately below.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING: A building or structure containing three (3) or more
dwelling units.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE: Any material, no part of which will ignite when subjected to
any temperature up to one thousand three hundred eighty-two degrees Fahrenheit
(1,382°F) for five (5) minutes.
NURSING / CONVALESCENT HOME: Any facility providing 24-hour care to individuals
unable to self-evacuate due to age or medical condition.
PARKING AREA: Any area designed, arranged or used for the storage or parking of
automobiles or other motor vehicles.
RESIDENTIAL HOME OPERATING AS A CARE FACILITY: Any home used to provide 24-
hour care, regardless of zoning, shall meet Institutional (I) requirements.
STORY: That part of a building or structure comprised between a floor and the
floor or roof next above (not including a mezzanine). (Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993;
amd. Ord. 2178, 10-8-2025)
 
Notes
1 See section
  4-7-1 of this title.
4-15-3: ENFORCEMENT OF PROVISIONS OF THIS CHAPTER:
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the chief of the Midlothian fire
department or his duly authorized representative to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Approval of devices shall be based on reports of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory. (Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
4-15-4: AUTOMATIC FIRE SUPPRESSION SYSTEMS:
   (A)   General Requirements. Except for single-family homes, all new
construction, commercial use change of occupancy, and qualifying remodeling
projects within the Village of Midlothian shall include the installation and
maintenance of an approved automatic fire suppression system as provided in
paragraph B of this section. All systems shall comply with the latest adopted
editions of:
      1.   NFPA 13 (Standard for Installation of Sprinkler Systems).
      2.   NFPA 33 (Standard for Spray Application Using Flammable or
Combustible Materials)
      3.   NFPA 72 (National Fire Alarm and Signaling Code)
      4.   International Building Code (IBC)
      5.   International Fire Code (IFC)
      6.   All new fire department connections shall be equipped with a 4-inch
Storz connection with a 30-degree downward elbow.
   (B)   Sprinkler System Thresholds by Occupancy Type. The following occupancy
types shall trigger sprinkler system requirements under this chapter:
Occupancy Type Sprinkler Trigger
Occupancy Type           Sprinkler Trigger
Business (B)             Five thousand (5,000) sq ft or more total floor area
Educational (E)          Required regardless of size
Factory/Industrial (F)   Twelve thousand (12,000) sq ft or more or more than 1
                         story
Mercantile/Retail/Office Twelve thousand (12,000) sq ft or more or high fire
                         load
Assembly (A)             Five thousand (5,000) sq ft or more
Institutional (I)        Required regardless of size
New Construction         Required for all new buildings as provided in this
                         chapter
Remodeling               Required when fifty percent (50%) of floor area
                         altered
 
   (C)   Additional Conditions. The following conditions shall require an
automatic fire suppressant sprinkler system.
      1.   A change in occupancy type when a hazard classification is created
by the use of the property regardless of square footage.
      2.   Basements used for storage, manufacturing, or sale of combustible
materials require sprinklers if the area exceeds two thousand (2,500) sq ft.
      3.   Businesses or commercial uses operating with residences above them.
      4.   Specialty Auto repair facilities and spray booth operations shall
comply with NFPA 33.
      5.   Sprinklers are required for additions that are enclosed,
conditioned, or occupied.
      6.   Enclosed tenant spaces without sufficient egress may require
sprinklers even if under threshold.
   (D)   Waiver Request, Requirements. A property owner may request a waiver
from sprinkler requirements in writing under the following conditions:
      1.   Remodeling affects less than fifty percent (50%) of total floor area
as determined by the Building Superintendent or his/her designee.
      2.   There is no increase in hazard classification or change in
occupancy.
      3.   A fully functional NFPA 72-compliant fire alarm system is installed.
      4.   Sufficient egress routes are identified, unobstructed and clearly
marked.
      5.   All grease-producing equipment has a UL 300-compliant Ansul system.
   (E)   Waiver Process:
      1.   An application shall be submitted in accordance with Section
4-15-6 or
4-15-7 as applicable of this chapter.
      2.   An evaluation shall be conducted per Section
4-15-7 by the Building Superintendent and Fire Chief or his/her designee.
      3.   A written finding shall be made recommending the grant or denial of
the waiver application by the Fire Chief or his/her designee stating the
reasons for the grant or denial.
      4.   The Village Board shall approve or reject any recommendation to
grant a waiver under this section. (Ord. 2178, 10-8-2025)
4-15-5: HEAT AND SMOKE DETECTION AND INTERIOR FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS:
   (A)   Where Both Systems Are Required: An approved heat and smoke detection
and interior fire alarm system shall be installed in the following buildings
and establishments:
      1.   Residential Buildings: All multi-family dwellings including
townhouses, condominiums, apartment complexes, hotels and motels.
      2.   Institutional Buildings: Institutional buildings.
      3.   Churches And Public Buildings: All churches and public buildings.
(Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
      4.   Restaurants: All restaurant buildings.
      5.   Assembly Halls: All assembly halls. (Ord. 1873, 6-25-2014)
      6.   Office, Business And Professional Buildings: All buildings of this
class.
      7.   Air Plenum Areas: All buildings and areas of buildings which are
permitted to use hollow spaces as an air plenum will require submittal of plans
to the bureau of fire prevention for approval.
      8.   Doors: Doors opening into corridors or exits shall be equipped with
an approved automatic door closure and shall be tightfitting. Fire doors shall
be provided with a magnetic door holder and shall close upon fire alarm.
   (B)   Single Station Smoke Detection: All residential type buildings shall
have single station smoke detection installed on all levels and wired in
series.
   (C)   Maintenance Of Heat And Smoke Detection And Interior Fire Alarm
Systems:
      1.   All heat and smoke detection and interior fire alarm systems shall
be installed and maintained in accordance with the NFPA pamphlet no. 72A
"Standard For The Installation, Maintenance And Use Of Local Protective
Signaling Systems For Watchman, Fire Alarms And Supervisory Service" (current
edition). It shall be the responsibility of the owners of all buildings having
interior fire alarm systems, both existing and those which are to be
constructed, to provide for the continuous maintenance of such systems through
no less than an annual inspection and testing of the system, and through a
maintenance agreement with a reliable firm actively engaged in the servicing of
fire alarm systems. Proof of such a maintenance agreement, and each subsequent
agreement for continuous service will be provided to the Midlothian fire
department/bureau of fire prevention.
         (a)   For new construction, such proof will initially be provided at
the time the fire alarm system plans are submitted for approval to the fire
department/bureau of fire prevention and then on an annual basis.
         (b)   For existing construction, proof of such a maintenance agreement
will be provided within ninety (90) days of the effective date hereof.
         (c)   Proof of each annual inspection and testing of the fire alarm
system will be provided to the Midlothian fire department/bureau of fire
prevention upon completion of the test. A valid maintenance agreement and
report of the most recent inspection and testing of the fire alarm system will
be provided by the owners of the system to any fire inspection officer upon
request. (Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
         (d)   All occupancies required to have a fire alarm system under this
section shall notify the authority having jurisdiction of any interruption in
service of the fire alarm, including, but not limited to, interruption due to
malfunction, cancellation of service by either the business owner or the alarm
company, or other reasons. The authority having jurisdiction may require the
business to have the fire alarm repaired, reactivated or in proper working
condition before permitting the building or structure to be reoccupied. (Ord.
1873, 6-25-2014)
      2.   The heat and smoke detection and interior fire alarm system shall be
zoned as required by floor and/or area. (Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
      3.   The indicating systems of any alarm system installed in or for any
building or structure shall be located in such a fashion to permit access to
the indicating system by fire personnel without the need for said fire
personnel to pass through or enter into the building or structure any farther
than the main entrance in order to view or operate the alarm panel. (Ord. 1873,
6-25-2014)
      4.   All heat and smoke detection devices shall be of the combination
type unless otherwise authorized by the Midlothian fire department/bureau of
fire prevention.
      5.   All heat and smoke detection and interior fire alarm systems shall
have a direct connection to the Midlothian fire department communications
center. This connection shall be made and be in working order before occupancy
of the building can be approved by the Midlothian fire department/bureau of
fire prevention.
   (D)   Approval Of Plans For Heat And Smoke Detection And Interior Fire Alarm
Systems: One set of plans showing the location of the heat and smoke detection
and interior fire alarm system must be submitted to each organization (fire
department/bureau of fire prevention and building department) for their
approval. Such approval shall be granted if the plans meet the requirements of
this chapter and otherwise conform with applicable ordinances and regulations
of the village and sound fire prevention standards. One set of plans will be
retained by the building department and one set of plans will be retained by
the fire department/bureau of fire prevention. (Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
4-15-6: REQUEST FOR WAIVER:
When buildings are constructed and require both a heat and smoke detection and
interior fire alarm system and a sprinkler system, the contractor may forward a
letter to the fire department/bureau of fire prevention requesting a waiver of
one or the other. The fire department/bureau of fire prevention shall review
such waiver request and recommend which system shall be required. Said waiver
shall be granted only upon the recommendation by the chief of the Midlothian
fire department and approval by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1286, 2-24-1993)
4-15-7: APPLICATION:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect as provided in section 4-15-
4 and may only be waived or relaxed upon a written recommendation of the Fire
Chief or his/her designee and the Building Superintendent after the submission
of a written request with supporting documents stating the reasons for the
waiver request. (Ord. 2178, 10-8-2025)
4-15-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not more
than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes for each offense. Each day's continued violation of
any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 1286,
2-24-1993; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 16
CABLE TV
SECTION:
4-16-1: Permit Required
4-16-2: Contractors
4-16-3: Occupation Of Streets
4-16-4: Fees
4-16-5: Applicability
4-16-6: Penalty
4-16-1: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to construct or erect any portion of a cable TV system
prior to obtaining a permit from the village. An application shall be filed
with the village clerk upon such forms as he shall deem necessary. Said
application shall be accompanied by a complete set of plans showing the
location of all work to be performed and certified to as required by law. (Ord.
994, 1-28-1981)
4-16-2: CONTRACTORS:
Any and all persons constructing or erecting any portion of a cable TV system
shall obtain a license and be bonded as all other contractors in the village.
Any person who installs wire or cable through which an electric charge is
carried shall be licensed as an electrical contractor. All other contractors
shall be licensed as general contractors. (Ord. 994, 1-28-1981)
4-16-3: OCCUPATION OF STREETS:
No street shall be blocked or occupied by any person constructing or erecting
any portion of a cable TV system without obtaining prior village approval. For
the purposes of cable TV, the locations to be blocked or occupied shall be
given to the public works department and the director of public works at least
two (2) business days prior to their blockage or occupation. Adequate warning
devices, including barricades, shall be supplied to direct traffic to other
areas by the contractor. (Ord. 994, 1-28-1981)
4-16-4: FEES:
The permit fee for the construction and erection of a cable TV system shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00) per mile of cable installed or mile of strand
installed. The distance of cable to and from any residence or building from the
main line shall not be calculated for the per mile cost. In addition, an
inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per building to which a connection is
made from the main line shall be paid, except in the case of buildings wherein
more than one dwelling unit or more than one commercial unit is being serviced,
in which case the inspection fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per building
plus five dollars ($5.00) for each additional unit serviced therein.
The one hundred dollars ($100.00) per mile fee shall be paid in advance of work
performed, but may be paid in installments if work is to be performed in
installments or by sections. The ten dollar ($10.00) inspection fee shall be
paid in advance of any connection to a building. (Ord. 994, 1-28-1981)
4-16-5: APPLICABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction of any and all
cable TV systems from and after the date of its passage, regardless of whether
or not a portion of that cable TV system may have already been erected. (Ord.
994, 1-28-1981)
4-16-6: PENALTY:
Any person guilty of violating any of the provisions of this chapter or the
village building code shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00)
nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense and each separate day upon
which a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 994, 1-28-
1981; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 17
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNAS
SECTION:
4-17-1: Definition
4-17-2: Building Permits Required
4-17-3: Construction Of Structure
4-17-4: Existing Satellite Antennas
4-17-5: Variation
4-17-6: Severability
4-17-7: Penalty
4-17-1: DEFINITION:
"Satellite dish type signal receiving antennas (also referred to as earth
stations or ground stations)" shall be defined as a device commonly parabolic
in shape, mounted at a fixed point for the purpose of capturing television
signals transmitted via satellite communications facilities and serving the
same or similar function as the common television antenna. Said devices are
hereinafter defined as accessory structures and may be referred to as
"structures". (Ord. 1106, 1985)
4-17-2: BUILDING PERMITS REQUIRED:
No satellite dish antenna shall be erected on any parcel of land or building
unless a building permit for such antenna has been approved and issued by the
village using the following guidelines:
   (A)   Applicant submits a written application upon forms provided and
approved by the village building department. The applicant shall specify, among
other things, the name and address of the owner of the real estate, the
engineer or contractor who prepared the construction plans and specifications
and the person to be permitted to construct the proposed structure. Attached to
the application must be plans and specifications showing proper mounting
instructions, structural analysis and showing elevations, wiring layout from
receiver to earth station. Also, structure shall be built and secured for wind
resistance and shall be properly grounded.
   (B)   Applicant demonstrates that the intended use is private and for use of
that property only, and is in compliance with all federal codes and permits and
presents proof of possession of any federal permits which may be needed.
   (C)   Applicant must submit three (3) sets of plot plans of the lot showing:
      1.   Exact location and dimensions of the proposed structure;
      2.   Exact location and dimensions of all existing buildings or
structures;
      3.   Exact location and description of existing screening foliage and
additional landscaping foliage needed to reasonably conceal the structure from
view.
   (D)   Applicant shall submit with the application the sum of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) which represents the permit fee. The permit fee shall cover
the costs of processing the application, reviewing the construction plans and
specifications and inspecting the final construction. (Ord. 1106, 1985)
4-17-3: CONSTRUCTION OF STRUCTURE:
Construction shall be governed as follows:
   (A)   Order Of Construction: Construction will not be allowed on any lot
prior to construction of the principal structure to which it is an accessory.
   (B)   Mounting Of Satellite:
      1.   In residential areas, construction shall be ground mounted, in all
cases, with a maximum allowable height of fifteen feet (15'), including base
from grade. Dish portion of antenna shall be no greater than twelve feet (12')
in its maximum dimension.
      2.   In nonresidential areas, construction of satellite may be roof
mounted. Installation shall be located on the rear portion of the structure,
and such installation shall not be mounted upon such roof appurtenances as
chimneys, towers, poles or spires. No installation shall exceed the height of
any existing structure on the building, provided further that in no event the
overall height of the satellite antenna does not exceed thirty five feet (35')
from the ground to the top of the antenna. All roof mounted installations shall
have a certification from a licensed structural engineer regarding the
location, stating that the structure is capable of handling the antenna and
said antenna does not provide any additional stress which the structure cannot
bear. All installations shall be screened if possible.
   (C)   Placement: The structure shall be constructed to the rear of the
residence or main structure. It shall not be constructed in any front or side
yard. Rear lot status of corner lots shall be determined by the village
building inspector.
   (D)   Property Line; Easement: No structure, including its concrete base
slab or other substructure, shall be constructed less than eight feet (8') from
any property line or easement.
   (E)   Screening Foliage: No ground mounted structure shall be constructed
without appropriate landscaping foliage to reasonably conceal said structure
from view. Planting of screening foliage must be completed within thirty (30)
days from date permit was issued. Replacement foliage will be required where
foliage has died. It shall be a violation of this chapter if appropriate
screening foliage is not properly maintained.
   (F)   Other Receivers: No structure shall be linked physically or
electronically to a receiver which is not located on the same lot, premises or
parcel of land as said structure.
   (G)   Construction By Licensed Contractor: Construction shall be performed
by a licensed contractor registered with the village, or in appropriate
circumstances may be performed by the individual homeowner. Licensed electrical
contractors are required to install all line voltage electrical work.
   (H)   Materials; Color: The structure shall be constructed with galvanized
structural supports and shall be nonreflective. Coloration shall blend with
surroundings.
   (I)   Advertising; Signage: Structure shall have no advertising or signage
of any type displayed on it other than name of manufacturer in letters not to
exceed two inches (2"). (Ord. 1106, 1985)
4-17-4: EXISTING SATELLITE ANTENNAS:
Satellite antennas legally in existence at the time of the passage of this
chapter shall be considered "grandfathered" for a period of two (2) years from
the effective date of this chapter. At the end of the two (2) year period the
antennas must be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1106,
1985)
4-17-5: VARIATION:
   (A)   The satellite antenna board, consisting of the building
superintendent, building inspector and one member of the electrical commission,
may hold public hearings on any requested variation of this chapter, after
giving proper public notice. Notice shall be published at least fifteen (15)
days before said hearing. Anyone requesting a variation from these regulations
must request said variation in writing and detail the reasons for the request.
Said request for variation shall be accompanied by a payment of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) to cover the cost of the variation hearing. At said public
hearing the petitioner and any interested parties may be given the opportunity
to be heard.
   (B)   After said public hearing, the satellite antenna board shall send
their recommendations to the village board, who shall make the final decision
on granting any variation of these regulations. (Ord. 1106, 1985)
4-17-6: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed severable, and the invalidity of
any provision or provisions thereof shall not affect the validity of the
remaining provisions. (Ord. 1106, 1985)
4-17-7: PENALTY:
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for a
fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the penalty
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state
statutes for each offense. A separate violation shall be deemed to have been
committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues to occur.
(Ord. 1106, 1985; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 18
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
SECTION:
4-18-1: Property Maintenance Code Adopted
4-18-2: Applicability
4-18-3: Building Department Code Official
4-18-4: Duties And Powers Of The Building Superintendent
4-18-5: Modifications And Approval
4-18-6: Violations
4-18-7: Notices And Orders
4-18-8: Unsafe Structures And Equipment
4-18-9: Emergency Measures
4-18-10: Demolition
4-18-11: Means Of Appeal
4-18-12: Definitions
4-18-13: General Requirements
4-18-14: Exterior Structure
4-18-15: Interior Structure
4-18-16: Rubbish And Garbage
4-18-17: Extermination
4-18-18: Light, Ventilation And Occupancy Limitations
4-18-19: Plumbing Facilities And Fixture Requirements
4-18-20: Mechanical And Electrical Requirements
4-18-21: Fire Safety Requirements
4-18-22: Outdoor Parking And/Or Storage Containers
4-18-1: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE ADOPTED:
   (A)   The 2018 Property Maintenance Code as published by the International
Code Council and as from time to time amended, is hereby adopted and
incorporated in full as if set forth at length herein and shall apply and
control within the Village of Midlothian, save and except such portions as
hereinafter deleted, modified or amended.
   (B)   Other Code References. References to International Codes and other
codes herein shall mean and apply as follows:
      1.   International Building Code (IBC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      2.   References to the International Existing Building Code are hereby
deleted.
      3.   International Fire Code (IFC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the National Fire Code, 2009 Edition published by the National
Fire Protection Association, the National Fire Protection Association Code
(NFPAC) #1, 2009 Edition, the National Fire Protection Association Code 101,
Life Safety Code, 2009 Edition and their subsequent revisions and the whole
thereof, except such portions pertaining to the organization, administration,
operation, and equipment of the fire department and such portions as are
otherwise inapplicable to the Village, or as are hereinafter deleted, modified
or amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      4.   International Plumbing Code (IPC) references shall be deleted and
replaced with the Illinois Plumbing Code as adopted and amended by the Village
of Midlothian.
      5.   International Residential Code (IRC) as adopted and amended by the
Village of Midlothian.
      6.   International Mechanical Code (IMC) and the International Fuel Gas
Code (IFGC) as adopted and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      7.   References to the International Private Sewage Disposal Code is
hereby deleted and replaced with the provisions of Title III, Chapter 5 of the
Village Code.
      8.   International Property Maintenance Code (IPMC) as adopted and
amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      9.   References to NFPA 70-the National Electrical Code is hereby deleted
and replaced with the provisions of the 2017 Chicago Electrical Code as adopted
and amended by the Village of Midlothian.
      10.   References to Accessible and Usable Buildings and Facilities is
hereby deleted and replaced with the Illinois Accessibility Code as adopted by
the Village of Midlothian.
   (C)   Amendments. The following amendments to the 2018 edition of the
International Property Maintenance Code, shall apply in the Village of
Midlothian:
      1.   Section 101.1 shall name the Village of Midlothian as the
jurisdiction and shall state the following: These regulations shall be known as
the "Property Maintenance code of the Village of Midlothian," hereinafter
referred as "this code."
      2.   Section 103.5 referencing "Fees" shall be amended to provide the
fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out
its responsibilities under this code and shall be determined by Village Board
Resolution and published by the Village Clerk or Building Superintendent.
      3.   Section 109.4 referencing "Emergency Repairs" shall be amended to
provide the following: Application for a permit must be made for all repair
work requiring permits under this Code however, where equipment replacement and
repairs must be performed in an emergency situation making prior application
impracticable, the permit application shall be submitted within the next
business day to the building official.
      Maintenance items such as painting, sealing, decorating and repair
related home improvements are not considered to be repairs and do not require
that a fee be paid. Such repairs shall not include the cutting away of any
wall, partition or portion thereof, the removal or cutting of any structural
beam or load-bearing support, or the removal or change of any required means of
egress, or rearrangement of parts of a structure affecting the egress
requirements; nor shall ordinary repairs include addition to, alteration of,
replacement or relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage,
drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or
mechanical or other work affecting public health or general safety.
      4.   Section 111 referencing "Means of Appeals" is hereby amended to
delete all its provisions except for Section [A] 111.1 which is amended to
provide as follows: Any person directly affected by a decision of the code
official or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to
appeal under the provisions of
4-20-4 of the Village Code.
      5.   Section 302.4 referencing "Weeds" is hereby amended to delete its
provisions and replace with the following provisions: All premises and exterior
property shall be maintained free from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight
inches (8") except as provided in this section. All noxious weeds shall be
prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include common turf grasses under eight inches (8") in height, cultivated
flowers and gardens.
      Action to Cut or Destroy Weeds: Upon failure of the owner or agent having
charge of a property to cut and destroy weeds after service of a notice of
violation, they shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with section
4-20-4 of the Village Code. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the village or contractor hired by
the village shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation and cut
and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal shall be
paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
      6.   Section 303 referencing "SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS" is
hereby deleted and the provisions of
4-5-1 of the Village Code shall apply.
      7.   Section 304.14 referencing "Insect screens" is hereby amended to add
the requirement dates of April 1, to November 1, of each year.
      8.   Section 308 referencing "RUBBISH AND GARBAGE" is hereby amended to
add the following provisions after Section 308.3.2 as follows:
         (a)   Violations: With regard to residential or commercial properties,
the following shall be a violation of this chapter:
            (1)   Open Garbage or Refuse For Scavenger Pick Up: To allow, cause
or permit garbage or refuse to be set out upon the parkways, at the rear of
store buildings, or other places, for the purpose of being picked up by a
garbage or scavenger collector, in containers which are not suitable or which
permit or allow the garbage/refuse contents to be scattered or blown around,
causing an unclean and unhealthy condition.
            (2)   Scavenger Pick up Timing: To place, cause or permit any
tangible thing to be placed upon or permitted to remain upon any parkway within
the village, except for the purpose of being picked up by a regularly scheduled
scavenger service; to allow or permit the placement of items for pick up by a
scavenger service upon any parkway sooner than four o'clock (4:00) P.M. the day
before the regularly scheduled day for pick up; to allow or permit containers
or other tangible things to remain upon any parkway after ten o'clock (10:00)
P.M. of the regularly scheduled day for scavenger service pick up.
            (3)   Garbage Or Refuse On Premises: To cause or permit to remain
on any premises garbage, refuse, ashes, miscellaneous waste or any animal or
vegetable matter which is likely to become offensive or injurious to health or
to be blown about by the wind at any time, except in approved containers with
tightfitting covers thereon from which regular garbage collection is made at
least once a week or as otherwise provided in this code.
            (4)   Storage of Junk: To permit or maintain an unsightly yard, lot
or premises where there is an accumulation or deposit of junk or debris
including but not limited to, metal, glass or plastic containers, broken glass,
metal or plastic materials, refuse, yard waste, straw, tree stumps, tree
clippings, brush, discarded or broken building materials, discarded sod,
lumber, brick or concrete blocks not in use as landscaping, machinery or parts
thereof, or other like matter or things. It shall be unlawful for any person
owning, leasing, occupying or controlling any plot of real estate to permit the
accumulation or deposit of the aforesaid junk and debris.
            (5)   Garbage, Debris, Yard Waste and Snow in Street/Public Way: It
shall be unlawful to blow, rake, place or cause the accumulation of yard waste,
manure, grass clippings, leaves, twigs, branches, trees, ashes, stone, sand,
snow, ice, dirt, building materials or debris or other refuse of any kind on
the public way or street.
            (6)   Discarded, broken or unused building materials incident to
construction on the site where the debris is located shall not remain on the
plot for more than seven (7) days. Failure to remove said building materials
within seven (7) days or permitting the deposit or accumulation of any of the
other garbage or debris described in this chapter for any period of time shall
constitute a violation of this chapter.
            Action to Remove: In the event any person notified as provided in
this chapter shall fail or refuse to comply with said notices or citations, the
village may cause such garbage, debris or junk to be removed in any manner
provided by law, and to charge the cost of such removal to any person owning,
leasing, occupying or controlling such real estate. The cost for so doing shall
be calculated on the basis of an administration fee of two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00), plus the actual cost of garbage and debris removal. The
administrative fee and costs shall be in addition to any fine imposed under
4-20-6 of the Village Code.
            (7)   An authorized village official or representative thereof
shall serve or cause to be served a notice or citation upon any person owning,
leasing, occupying or controlling any real estate within the village upon which
the prohibited conditions described in this chapter are found to exist. The
notice requiring them to remove the garbage debris and waste constituting a
violation of this chapter within twenty-four (24) hours shall be made in
accordance with the provisions of
4-20-4 of the Village Code.
            (8)   Lien Upon Property: The cost and expense incurred by the
village, and/or by the person or firm performing the service by authority of
the village, in the abatement of the nuisance following the refusal or failure
of the responsible party to abate the nuisance, including reasonable attorney
fees, shall constitute a lien upon the real estate affected, which lien shall
be enforced as provided by statute. The village shall provide notice of the
lien either by personally serving or sending notice by certified mail to the
person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for
the last preceding year.
            (9)   Repeat Offender: Any commercial or residential property
within the village that has been previously issued a notice or citation under
this section within the same calendar year will be considered a repeat offender
and the village shall have the authority to abate the violation without
additional prior notice, and the real estate property owner will have a lien
placed upon this property as provided for in
4-20-10(B) of the Village Code and applicable law.
            (10)   Burning Garbage Or Leaves: It shall be illegal to burn
materials in any fashion not permitted by section
6-8-15 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1872, 6-11-2014)
            (11)   Open Building Materials: To create or allow to be created or
to remain upon any premises in a residential district for a period of more than
seven (7) days, unless incident to construction on the premises and then not to
exceed thirty (30) days, the storing, piling, accumulating, heaping, amassing
or collecting bricks, concrete blocks, lumber, iron, pipe or any building
materials in such quantities that the same is, or may become a threat to the
health of individuals or the public; or that the same is unsightly, unhealthy
and a detriment to those living in the neighborhood or to the public; or that
the same may or does become dangerous to children present in the neighborhood;
or that the same may become an attraction to rats or other vermin and thereby
become a danger to the health of any individual or the public.
            (12)   Business Use of Public Property: To use or occupy any part
of a street, parkway, alley or sidewalk of the village for the purpose of
carrying on, soliciting or promoting any trade, business or other enterprise;
also, to cause or permit the storage of any product, supplies for or equipment
incidental to the operations of such business or enterprises, upon any street,
parkway, alley or sidewalk within the village.
            (13)   Obstructing Public Ways: To obstruct or encroach upon public
streets and highways, private ways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots or
public places of the village so as to interfere with the passage of vehicles or
persons thereon. (Ord. 1764, 9-14-2011)
      9.   Section 506.1 referencing "General" is hereby amended to delete the
words "either" and "or to an approved private sewer disposal system" so as to
require and allow only a connection to a public sewer system.
      10.   Section 602.3 referencing "Heat supply" is hereby amended to add
the following dates in the first paragraph to read "from October 1 to May 15."
      11.   Section 602.4 referencing "Occupation work spaces" is hereby
amended to add the following dates in the first paragraph to read “from October
1 to May 15." (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2045, 1-8-2020)
4-18-2: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Residential Districts: In residential zoning districts:
      1.   No commercial vehicles shall be parked and/or stored for any length
of time in excess of one hour.
      2.   The parking and/or storage of recreational vehicles in excess of two
(2) consecutive days shall be permitted, but only if the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   The parking of such vehicles is behind the front building line,
no closer to the rear lot line than five feet (5') and no closer than three
feet (3') from the side lot line; and
         (b)   No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes at any time; and
         (c)   Such vehicle is properly covered.
      3.   No commercial vehicles or recreational vehicles shall be parked in
the public right of way at any time in a residential district.
      4.   Business vehicles are allowed to be parked in residential zoning
districts; however, business vehicles shall not be allowed to be parked in the
front yard, rear yard or side yard unless in a driveway.
      5.   Any recreational vehicle or business vehicle that is parked or
stored in any residential zoning district must be owned or legally controlled
by residents or occupants of the premises on which it is parked.
      6.   Pickup trucks and/or vans principally used as passenger cars are
excluded from the regulations contained herein.
      7.   Inoperable motor vehicles shall not be parked and/or stored in
residential zoning districts for a time period in excess of two (2) days unless
such inoperable motor vehicle is parked and/or stored in a garage or fully
enclosed structure. No inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked or stored for
any time period on side yards, rear yards or front yards.
   (B)   Storage Containers: Containers made of plastic, fiberglass, metal,
wood or any composite material of any size shall not be stored outside in any
zoning district except as provided below. This includes commercial storage
containers, commercial steel containers and/or steel intermodal containers, POD
containers and other similar containers. Such containers shall include any
container placed or stored on a front yard, side yard, back yard or driveway.
This subsection shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Any containers which are stored in a garage or fully enclosed
structure; or
      2.   Any containers used by a residential homeowner prior to moving into
a new home or moving out of a home, as long as the storage of such container is
on the driveway, is not stored for more than ten (10) consecutive days, and the
homeowner has obtained a permit from the village; or
      3.   Any containers used for garbage, recycling or lawn/yard waste in
compliance with the provisions of
8-2-8 of the Village Code or
      4.   Temporary construction trailers and/or storage bins, for which a
permit has been issued by the village, as long as such construction trailers
and/or construction storage bins are removed within seventy-two (72) hours of
the completion of the project for which such temporary construction trailers or
temporary construction storage bins are placed on the property. (Ord. 1721, 5-
12-2010; amd. Ord. 2045, 1-8-2020)
4-18-3: BUILDING DEPARTMENT CODE OFFICIAL:
   (A)   General: The official in charge of this code shall be the building
superintendent.
   (B)   Deputies: In accordance with the prescribed procedures of the village
of Midlothian and with the concurrence of the village president, the building
superintendent shall have the authority to appoint a deputy building
superintendent, other related technical officers, inspectors and other
employees.
   (C)   Liability: The building superintendent, officer or employee charged
with the enforcement of this code, while acting for the jurisdiction, shall not
thereby be rendered liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
Any suit instituted against any officer or employee because of an act performed
by that officer or employee in the lawful discharge of duties and under the
provisions of this code shall be defended by the legal representative of the
jurisdiction until the final termination of the proceedings. The building
superintendent or any subordinate shall not be liable for costs in an action,
suit or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of this
code; and any officer of the department of property maintenance inspection,
acting in good faith and without malice, shall be free from liability for acts
performed under any of its provisions or by reason of any act or omission in
the performance of official duties in connection therewith.
   (D)   Fees: The fees for activities and services performed by the department
in carrying out its responsibilities under this code shall be set by the
village board by resolution or ordinance from time to time and shall be made
available to the general public. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-4: DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BUILDING SUPERINTENDENT:
   (A)   General: The building superintendent shall enforce the provisions of
this code.
   (B)   Rulemaking Authority: The building superintendent shall have authority
as necessary in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the
provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such
rules shall not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance
requirements specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted
engineering methods involving public safety.
   (C)   Inspections: The building superintendent shall make all of the
required inspections, or shall accept reports of inspection by approved
agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections shall be in writing
and be certified by a responsible officer of such approved agency or by the
responsible individual. The building superintendent is authorized to engage
such expert opinion as deemed necessary to report upon unusual technical issues
that arise, subject to the approval of the appointing authority.
   (D)   Right Of Entry: The building superintendent is authorized to enter the
structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or not
obtained, the building superintendent is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law.
   (E)   Identification: The building superintendent shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or premises in the performance of
duties under this code.
   (F)   Notices And Orders: The building superintendent shall issue all
necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
   (G)   Department Records: The building superintendent shall keep official
records of all business and activities of the department specified in the
provisions of this code. Such records shall be retained in the official records
as long as the building or structure to which such records relate remains in
existence, unless otherwise provided for by other regulations. (Ord. 1721, 5-
12-2010)
4-18-5: MODIFICATIONS AND APPROVAL:
   (A)   Modifications: Whenever there are practical difficulties involved in
carrying out the provisions of this code, the building superintendent shall
have the authority to grant modifications for individual cases, provided the
building superintendent shall first find that special individual reason makes
the strict letter of this code impractical and the modification is in
compliance with the intent and purpose of this code and that such modification
does not lessen health, life and fire safety requirements. The details of
action granting modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department
files.
   (B)   Alternative Materials, Methods And Equipment: The provisions of this
code are not intended to prevent the installation of any material or to
prohibit any method of construction not specifically prescribed by this code,
provided that any such alternative has been approved. An alternative material
or method of construction shall be approved where the building superintendent
finds that the proposed design is satisfactory and complies with the intent of
the provisions of this code, and that the material, method or work offered is,
for the purpose intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this
code in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and
safety.
   (C)   Required Testing: Whenever there is insufficient evidence of
compliance with the provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or
method does not conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to
substantiate claims for alternative materials or methods, the building
superintendent shall have the authority to require tests to be made as evidence
of compliance at no expense to the jurisdiction.
      1.   Test Methods: Test methods shall be as specified in this code or by
other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and accepted test
methods, the building superintendent shall be permitted to approve appropriate
testing procedures performed by an approved agency.
      2.   Test Reports: Reports of tests shall be retained by the building
superintendent for the period required for retention of public records.
   (D)   Material And Equipment Reuse: Materials, equipment and devices shall
not be reused unless such elements are in good repair or have been
reconditioned and tested when necessary, placed in good and proper working
condition and approved. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-6: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation
to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Notice Of Violation: The building superintendent shall serve a notice
of violation or order in accordance with section 4-18-7 of this chapter.
   (C)   Prosecution Of Violation: Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with section 4-18-7 of this chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor or civil infraction as determined by
the village, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If
the notice of violation is not complied with, the building superintendent shall
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this code
or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the
authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the
real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such
real estate.
   (D)   Violation Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this
code, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements thereof,
shall be prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. Each day
that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a
separate offense.
   (E)   Abatement Of Violation: The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or
premises. (Ord. 1764, 9-14-2011)
4-18-7: NOTICES AND ORDERS:
   (A)   Notice To Person Responsible: Whenever the building superintendent
determines that there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to
believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given in the manner
prescribed in subsections (B) and (C) of this section to the person responsible
for the violation as specified in this code. Notices for condemnation
procedures shall also comply with section 4-18-8 of this chapter.
   (B)   Form: Such notice prescribed in subsection (A) of this section shall
be in accordance with all of the following:
      1.   Be in writing.
      2.   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.
      3.   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued.
      4.   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make the
repairs and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
      5.   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.
      6.   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance with
subsection 4-18-6(C) of this chapter.
   (C)   Method Of Service: Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served
if a copy thereof is:
      1.   Delivered personally;
      2.   Sent by certified or first class mail addressed to the last known
address; or
      3.   If the notice is returned showing that the letter was not delivered,
a copy thereof shall be posted in a conspicuous place in or about the structure
affected by such notice.
   (D)   Penalties: Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notices shall
be as set forth in subsection 4-18-6(D) of this chapter.
   (E)   Transfer Of Ownership: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon whom a
notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or
otherwise dispose of such dwelling unit or structure to another until the
provisions of the compliance order or notice of violation have been complied
with, or until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the building superintendent and shall furnish to the building
superintendent a signed and notarized statement from the grantee, transferee,
mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or
notice of violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition
for making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-8: UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT:
   (A)   General: When a structure or equipment is found by the building
superintendent to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human
occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to
the provisions of this code.
      1.   Unsafe Structures: An unsafe structure is one that is found to be
dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains unsafe
equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of
such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or complete
collapse is possible.
      2.   Unsafe Equipment: Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device, flammable
liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the structure
which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a hazard to
life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the premises or
structure.
      3.   Structure Unfit For Human Occupancy: A structure is unfit for human
occupancy whenever the building superintendent finds that such structure is
unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the structure is in
disrepair or lacks maintenance, is insanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains
filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or
heating facilities or other essential equipment required by this code, or
because the location of the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of
the structure or to the public.
      4.   Unlawful Structure: An unlawful structure is one found in whole or
in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this code, or was
erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.
   (B)   Closing Of Vacant Structures: If the structure is vacant and unfit for
human habitation and occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse,
the building superintendent is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on
the premises and order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive
nuisance. Upon failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time
specified in the order, the building superintendent shall cause the premises to
be closed and secured through any available public agency or by contract or
arrangement by private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate and may be collected by any other legal resource.
   (C)   Notice: Whenever the building superintendent has condemned a structure
or equipment under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a
conspicuous place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served
on the owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or
equipment in accordance with subsection 4-18-7(C) of this chapter. If the
notice pertains to equipment, it shall also be placed on the condemned
equipment. The notice shall be in the form prescribed in subsection 4-18-7(B)
of this chapter.
   (D)   Placarding: Upon failure of the owner or person responsible to comply
with the notice provisions within the time given, the building superintendent
shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard bearing the word
"Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for occupying the
premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.
      1.   Placard Removal: The building superintendent shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any person who defaces
or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the building
superintendent shall be subject to the penalties provided by this code.
   (E)   Prohibited Occupancy: Any occupied structure condemned and placarded
by the building superintendent shall be vacated as ordered by the building
superintendent. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall
operate placarded equipment, and any owner or any person responsible for the
premises who shall let anyone occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded
equipment shall be liable for the penalties provided by this code. (Ord. 1721,
5-12-2010)
4-18-9: EMERGENCY MEASURES:
   (A)   Imminent Danger: When, in the opinion of the building superintendent,
there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure
which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen
and life is endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is
actual or potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity
of any structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the
presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or
dangerous equipment. The building superintendent is hereby authorized and
empowered to order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith.
The building superintendent shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its
Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Village of Midlothian Building
Department". It shall be unlawful for any person to enter such structure except
for the purpose of securing the structure, making the required repairs,
removing the hazardous condition or of demolishing the same.
   (B)   Temporary Safeguards: Notwithstanding other provisions of this code,
whenever, in the opinion of the building superintendent, there is imminent
danger due to an unsafe condition, the building superintendent shall order the
necessary work to be done, including the boarding up of openings, to render
such structure temporarily safe whether or not the legal procedure herein
described has been instituted; and shall cause such other action to be taken as
the building superintendent deems necessary to meet such emergency.
   (C)   Closing Streets: When necessary for public safety, the building
superintendent shall temporarily close structures and close, or order the
authority having jurisdiction to close, sidewalks, streets, public ways and
places adjacent to unsafe structures, and prohibit the same from being
utilized.
   (D)   Emergency Repairs: For the purposes of this section, the building
superintendent shall employ the necessary labor and materials to perform the
required work as expeditiously as possible.
   (E)   Costs Of Emergency Repairs: Costs incurred in the performance of
emergency work shall be paid by the jurisdiction. The legal counsel of the
jurisdiction shall institute appropriate action against the owner of the
premises where the unsafe structure is or was located for the recovery of such
costs.
   (F)   Hearing: Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply
with such order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition
directed to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.
(Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-10: DEMOLITION:
   (A)   General: The building superintendent or an authorized representative
may recommend to the village board and send notice to the owner of the premises
and any lienholder of record upon which is located any structure or part
thereof which in his judgment is so old, dilapidated or has become so out of
repair as to be dangerous, unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human
habitation, occupancy or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair
the same, to raze and remove such structure or part thereof; or if it can be
made safe by repairs and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at the
owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of
any structure for a period of more than thirty (30) days as per section 4-3-
3 of this title, to raze and remove such structure or part thereof.
   (B)   Notices: The building superintendent or an authorized representative
may order demolition by serving notice of violation of this chapter. Such
notice shall state that unless the violation is corrected within a reasonable
time of not less than fifteen (15) days, except for emergency situations, the
village shall then do such things as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this chapter or any village code or ordinance. All expenses
incurred by the village shall be billed to said owner and the bill shall be
recoverable in a court of law. Except as otherwise provided in this section to
the contrary, all notices shall comply with section 4-18-7 of this chapter.
   (C)   Failure To Comply: If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a
demolition order within the time prescribed, the building superintendent shall
cause the structure to be demolished and removed, either through an available
public agency or by contract or arrangement with private persons, and the cost
of such demolition and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   (D)   Salvage Materials: When any structure has been ordered demolished and
removed, the governing body or other designated officer under said contract or
arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable
materials at the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after
deducting the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly
remitted with a report of such sale or transaction, including the items of
expense and the amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto,
subject to any order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned
over, the report shall so state. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-11: MEANS OF APPEAL:
   (A)   Application For Appeal: Any person directly affected by a decision of
the building superintendent or a notice or order issued under this code shall
have the right to appeal to the village president, provided that a written
application for appeal is filed within twenty eight (28) days after the day the
decision, notice or order was served. An application for appeal shall be based
on a claim that the true intent of this code or the rules legally adopted
thereunder have been incorrectly interpreted, the provisions of this code do
not fully apply, or the requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by
other means.
   (B)   Notice Of Hearing: The village president shall conduct an appeal
hearing upon receipt of application for appeal within thirty (30) days of the
receipt of said application for appeal.
   (C)   Open Hearing: All hearings shall be open to the public. The appellant,
the appellant's representative, the building superintendent and any person
whose interests are affected shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The
building superintendent shall be represented by the village attorney.
      1.   Procedure: The hearing shall not require compliance with strict
rules of evidence, but shall require that only relevant information be
received. A record of the hearing shall be maintained through electronic means
or the use of a court reporter.
   (D)   Decision: The village president may affirm, modify or reverse the
decision of the building superintendent.
      1.   Records And Copies: The decision of the village president shall be
in writing. Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the building
superintendent within thirty (30) days of the hearing.
      2.   Administration: The building superintendent shall take immediate
action in accordance with the decision of the village president.
   (E)   Court Review: Any person, whether or not a previous party of the
appeal, shall have the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of
certiorari to correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in
the manner and time required by law following the filing of the decision of the
village president.
   (F)   Stays Of Enforcement: Appeals of notice and orders (other than
imminent danger notices) shall stay the enforcement of the notice and order
until the appeal is heard by the village president. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-12: DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Introduction:
      1.   Scope: Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall,
for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
      2.   Interchangeability: Words stated in the present tense include the
future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter;
the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the singular.
      3.   Terms Defined In Other Codes: Where terms are not defined in this
code and are defined in the international building code, or the 2008 NEC
electrical code, such terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as stated
in those codes.
      4.   Terms Not Defined: Where terms are not defined through the methods
authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted meanings
such as the context implies.
      5.   Parts: Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises",
"building", "rooming house", "rooming unit", "housekeeping unit" or "story" are
stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words "or any part thereof".
   (B)   General Definitions:
   APPROVED: Approved by the building superintendent.
   BASEMENT: That portion of a building which is partly or completely below
grade.
   BATHROOM: A room containing plumbing fixtures including a bathtub or shower.
   BEDROOM: Any room or space used or intended to be used for sleeping purposes
in either a dwelling or sleeping unit.
   BUILDING SUPERINTENDENT: The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
   CONDEMN: To adjudge unfit for occupancy.
   DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living
facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   EASEMENT: That portion of land or property reserved for present or future
use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the property.
The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above a said lot or
lots.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY: The open space on the premises and on adjoining property
under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   EXTERMINATION: The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible
materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying, fumigating, trapping or
by any other approved pest elimination methods.
   GARBAGE: The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   GUARD: A building component or a system of building components located at or
near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes the possibility
of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.
   HABITABLE SPACE: Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating or
cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or utility spaces,
and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.
   HOUSEKEEPING UNIT: A room or group of rooms forming a single habitable space
equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating which
does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
   IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INFESTATION: The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises,
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: A vehicle which cannot be driven upon the public
streets for reason including, but not limited to, being unlicensed, wrecked,
abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved under its own
power.
   LABELED: Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which has been
affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a nationally
recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other organization
concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic inspection of the
production of the above labeled items and by whose label the manufacturer
attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized standards.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET: To permit, provide or offer possession or
occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, premises or
structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record thereof,
pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to
a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   OCCUPANCY: The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized
or occupied.
   OCCUPANT: Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having
possession of a space within a building.
   OPENABLE AREA: That part of a window, skylight or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR: Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER: Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of the
state, county or village as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such
person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if
ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
   PERSON: An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group acting as
a unit.
   PREMISES: A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including
any structures thereon.
   PUBLIC WAY: Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially
unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.
   ROOMING HOUSE: A building arranged or occupied for lodging, with or without
meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-family dwelling.
   ROOMING UNIT: Any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit
occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living, but not for cooking
purposes.
   RUBBISH: Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage; the
term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
   SLEEPING UNIT: A room or space in which people sleep, which can also include
permanent provisions for living, eating and either sanitation or kitchen
facilities, but not both. Such rooms and spaces that are also part of a
dwelling unit are not sleeping units.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE: An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE: That which is built or constructed or a portion thereof.
   TENANT: A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or not the
legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
   TOILET ROOM: A room containing a water closet or urinal but not a bathtub or
shower.
   VENTILATION: The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.
   WORKMANLIKE: Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level,
square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
   YARD: An open space on the same lot with a structure. (Ord. 1764, 9-14-2011)
4-18-13: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum
conditions and the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures,
equipment and exterior property.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall maintain the
structures and exterior property in compliance with these requirements, except
as otherwise provided for in this code. A person shall not occupy as owner-
occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a
sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of
this chapter. Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit
are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part
of the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.
      3.   Vacant Structures And Land: All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and
sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a blighting problem or
adversely affect the public health or safety.
   (B)   Exterior Property Areas:
      1.   Sanitation: All exterior property and premises shall be maintained
in a clean, safe and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of
the exterior property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and
sanitary condition.
      2.   Grading And Drainage: All premises shall be graded and maintained to
prevent the erosion of soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon.
         (a)   Exception: Approved retention areas and reservoirs.
      3.   Sidewalks And Driveways: All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways,
parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, and
maintained free from hazardous conditions.
      4.   Weeds: All premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of eight inches (8"). All noxious weeds
shall be prohibited. "Weeds" shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and
vegetation, other than trees or shrubs provided; however, this term shall not
include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Upon failure of the owner or agent having charge of a property to cut and
destroy weeds after service of a notice of violation, they shall be subject to
prosecution in accordance with section 4-18-7 of this chapter and as prescribed
by the authority having jurisdiction. Upon failure to comply with the notice of
violation, any duly authorized employee of the jurisdiction or contractor hired
by the jurisdiction shall be authorized to enter upon the property in violation
and cut and destroy the weeds growing thereon, and the costs of such removal
shall be paid by the owner or agent responsible for the property.
      5.   Rodent Harborage: All structures and exterior property shall be kept
free from rodent harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall
be promptly exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to
human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
eliminate rodent harborage and prevent reinfestation.
      6.   Exhaust Vents: Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not
discharge gases, steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous
or particulate wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private
property or that of another tenant.
      7.   Accessory Structures: All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound and in good
repair.
      8.   Motor Vehicles: Except as provided for in other village ordinances,
no inoperative or unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on
any premises, and no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major
disassembly, disrepair, or in the process of being stripped or dismantled.
Painting of vehicles is prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray
booth.
         (a)   Exception: A vehicle of any type is permitted to undergo major
overhaul, including bodywork, provided that such work is performed inside a
structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes.
      9.   Defacement Of Property: No person shall wilfully or wantonly damage,
mutilate or deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any
private or public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said surface to an
approved state of maintenance and repair.
   (C)   Swimming Pools, Spas And Hot Tubs:
      1.   Swimming Pools: Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and
sanitary condition, and in good repair.
      2.   Enclosures: Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas, containing
water more than twenty four inches (24") (610 mm) in depth shall be completely
surrounded by a fence or barrier at least forty eight inches (48") (1219 mm) in
height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away
from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers shall be self- closing and
self-latching. Where the self-latching device is less than fifty four inches
(54") (1372 mm) above the bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be
located on the pool side of the gate. Self-closing and self-latching gates
shall be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when
released from an open position of six inches (6") (152 mm) from the gatepost.
No existing pool enclosure shall be removed, replaced or changed in a manner
that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.
         (a)   Exception: Spas or hot tubs with a safety cover that complies
with ASTM F 1346 shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. (Ord.
1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-14: EXTERIOR STRUCTURE:
   (A)   General: The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the
public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Protective Treatment: All exterior surfaces, including, but not
limited to, doors, door and window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies,
decks and fences shall be maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces,
other than decay resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and
decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking
and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter
of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and
watertight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion shall be coated to
inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or corrosion shall
be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains
shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by
oxidation are exempt from this requirement.
   (C)   Premises Identification: Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers shall be
a minimum of four inches (4") (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5
inch (12.7 mm).
   (D)   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained free
from deterioration, and shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead
and live loads.
   (E)   Foundation Walls: All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and
free from open cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to
prevent the entry of rodents and other pests.
   (F)   Exterior Walls: All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks,
and loose or rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly
surface coated where required to prevent deterioration.
   (G)   Roofs And Drainage: The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and
not have defects that admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent
dampness or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure.
Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in good repair and free
from obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates
a public nuisance.
   (H)   Decorative Features: All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta
trim, wall facings and similar decorative features shall be maintained in good
repair with proper anchorage and in a safe condition.
   (I)   Overhang Extensions: All overhang extensions including, but not
limited to, canopies, marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes
and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored
so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather coating materials, such as paint or similar
surface treatment.
   (J)   Stairways, Decks, Porches And Balconies: Every exterior stairway,
deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be
maintained structurally sound, in good repair, with proper anchorage and
capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (K)   Chimneys And Towers: All chimneys, cooling towers, smokestacks, and
similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in
good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the
elements and against decay or rust by periodic application of weather coating
materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
   (L)   Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (M)   Window, Skylight And Door Frames: Every window, skylight, door and
frame shall be kept in sound condition, good repair and weathertight.
      1.   Glazing: All glazing materials shall be maintained free from cracks
and holes.
      2.   Openable Windows: Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
easily openable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.
   (N)   Insect Screens: Every door, window and other outside opening required
for ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service areas
or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food for human
consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or stored shall be supplied
with approved tightly fitting screens of not less than sixteen (16) mesh per
inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen door used for insect control shall
have a self-closing device in good working condition.
      1.   Exception: Screens shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
   (O)   Doors: All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units and
sleeping units shall tightly secure the door. Locks on means of egress doors
shall be in accordance with subsection 4-18-21(B)3 of this chapter.
   (P)   Basement Hatchways: Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to
prevent the entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
   (Q)   Guards For Basement Windows: Every basement window that is openable
shall be supplied with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved
protection against the entry of rodents.
   (R)   Building Security: Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units,
room units or housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to
provide security for the occupants and property within.
      1.   Doors: Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or
housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped with a dead
bolt lock designed to be readily openable from the side from which egress is to
be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort and shall have a
lock throw of not less than one inch (1") (25 mm). Such dead bolt locks shall
be installed according to the manufacturer's specifications and maintained in
good working order. For the purpose of this section, a sliding bolt shall not
be considered an acceptable dead bolt lock.
      2.   Windows: Operable windows located in whole or in part within six
feet (6') (1828 mm) above ground level or a walking surface below that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with a window sash locking device.
      3.   Basement Hatchways: Basement hatchways that provide access to a
dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let
shall be equipped with devices that secure the units from unauthorized entry.
(Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-15: INTERIOR STRUCTURE:
   (A)   General: The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.
Occupants shall keep that part of the structure which they occupy or control in
a clean and sanitary condition. Every owner of a structure containing a rooming
house, housekeeping units, a hotel, a dormitory, two (2) or more dwelling units
or two (2) or more nonresidential occupancies, shall maintain, in a clean and
sanitary condition, the shared or public areas of the structure and exterior
property.
   (B)   Structural Members: All structural members shall be maintained
structurally sound, and be capable of supporting the imposed loads.
   (C)   Interior Surfaces: All interior surfaces, including windows and doors,
shall be maintained in good, clean and sanitary condition. Peeling, chipping,
flaking or abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or
loose plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.
   (D)   Stairs And Walking Surfaces: Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony,
porch, deck or other walking surface shall be maintained in sound condition and
good repair.
   (E)   Handrails And Guards: Every handrail and guard shall be firmly
fastened and capable of supporting normally imposed loads and shall be
maintained in good condition.
   (F)   Interior Doors: Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within
its frame and shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and
securely attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer
of the attachment hardware.
   (G)   Handrails And Guardrails Required:
      1.   General: Every exterior and interior flight of stairs having more
than four (4) risers shall have a handrail on one side of the stair and every
open portion of a stair, landing, balcony, porch, deck, ramp or other walking
surface which is more than thirty inches (30") (762 mm) above the floor or
grade below shall have guards. Handrails shall not be less than thirty inches
(30") (762 mm) high or more than forty two inches (42") (1067 mm) high measured
vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the finished floor of the
landing or walking surfaces. Guards shall not be less than thirty inches (30")
(762 mm) high above the floor of the landing, balcony, porch, deck, or ramp or
other walking surface.
         (a)   Exception: Guards shall not be required where exempted by the
adopted building code. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-16: RUBBISH AND GARBAGE:
   (A)   Accumulation Of Rubbish Or Garbage: All exterior property and
premises, and the interior of every structure, shall be free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
   (B)   Disposal Of Rubbish: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved
containers.
      1.   Rubbish Storage Facilities: The owner of every occupied premises
shall supply approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the
premises shall be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
      2.   Refrigerators: Refrigerators and similar equipment not in operation
shall not be discarded, abandoned or stored on premises without first removing
the doors.
   (C)   Disposal Of Garbage: Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of
garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved
garbage disposal facility or approved garbage containers.
      1.   Garbage Facilities: The owner of every dwelling shall supply one of
the following: an approved mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit;
an approved incinerator unit in the structure available to the occupants in
each dwelling unit; or an approved leakproof, covered, outside garbage
container.
      2.   Containers: The operator of every establishment producing garbage
shall provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leakproof
containers provided with close fitting covers for the storage of such materials
until removed from the premises for disposal.
   (D)   Violations: With regard to residential or commercial properties, the
following shall be a violation of this chapter:
      1.   Open Rubbish:
         (a)   To allow, cause or permit rubbish to be set out upon the
parkways, at the rear of store buildings, or other places, for the purpose of
being picked up by a rubbish collector, in containers which are not suitable or
which permit or allow the rubbish contents to be scattered or blown around,
causing an unclean condition to the annoyance, prejudice or discomfort of
others.
         (b)   To place, cause or permit any tangible thing to be placed upon
or permitted to remain upon any parkway within the village, except for the
purpose of being picked up by a regularly scheduled scavenger service; to allow
or permit the placement of items for pick up by a scavenger service upon any
parkway sooner than four o'clock (4:00) P.M. Central Standard Time or six
o'clock (6:00) P.M. Central Daylight Savings Time the day before the regularly
scheduled day for pick up; to allow or permit containers or other tangible
things to remain upon any parkway after eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. of the
regularly scheduled day for scavenger service pick up.
      2.   Garbage Or Refuse On Premises: To cause or permit to remain on any
premises garbage, offal, refuse, ashes, miscellaneous waste or any animal or
vegetable matter which is likely to become offensive or injurious to health or
to be blown about by the wind, for a longer period of time than twenty four
(24) hours at any one time, except in metal or concrete containers with
tightfitting covers thereon from which regular garbage collection is made at
least once a week or as otherwise provided in this code.
      3.   Garbage And Debris:
         (a)   To permit or maintain an unsightly yard, lot or premises where
there is an accumulation or deposit of tin cans, glass jars, bottles, metal
materials, refuse, rubbish, junk, waste, manure, straw, weeds, tree stumps,
tree clippings, brush, discarded or broken building materials, discarded sod,
old lumber, old brick or concrete blocks, machinery or parts thereof, or other
like matter or things. It shall be unlawful for any person owning, leasing,
occupying or controlling any plot of real estate to permit the accumulation or
deposit of the aforesaid garbage and debris except as hereinafter provided.
         (b)   Discarded or broken building materials incident to construction
on the site where the debris is located shall not remain on the plot for more
than seven (7) days. Failure to remove said building materials within seven (7)
days or permitting the deposit or accumulation of any of the other garbage or
debris described in this chapter for any period of time shall constitute a
violation of this chapter.
         (c)   An authorized village official or representative thereof shall
serve or cause to be served a notice or citation upon any person owning,
leasing, occupying or controlling any real estate within the village upon which
such a nuisance is found to exist, requiring them or any of them to remove the
garbage and debris constituting such nuisance within twenty four (24) hours.
The notice or citation will be served in one of the following manners:
            (1)   By a written notice sent by United States certified mail,
postage prepaid, to the last known person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling the real estate and as to the owner the notice may be addressed to
the address shown on the most recent tax bill for said real estate.
            (2)   By general notice addressed to all owners, lessees, occupants
or persons controlling real estate printed in a newspaper of general
circulation in the village, which notice shall direct attention to the
provisions of this section and provide that the garbage and debris shall be
removed not later than ten (10) days after said notice is so printed.
            (3)   By a written notice personally delivered by the village
official or representative to the person owning, leasing, occupying or
controlling the real estate.
         (d)   In the event any person so notified shall fail or refuse to
comply with said notices or citations, it shall be lawful for the village to
cause such garbage and debris to be removed in any manner it shall designate,
and to charge the cost of such removal to any person owning, leasing, occupying
or controlling such real estate. The cost for so doing shall be calculated on
the basis of an administration fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00), plus the
actual cost of garbage and debris removal.
         (e)   The cost and expense incurred by the village, and/or by the
person or firm performing the service by authority of the village, in the
abatement of the nuisance following the refusal or failure of the responsible
party to abate the nuisance, including reasonable attorney fees, shall
constitute a lien upon the real estate affected, which lien shall be enforced
as provided by statute. The village shall provide notice of the lien either by
personally serving or sending notice by certified mail to the person to whom
was sent the tax bill for the general taxes on the property for the last
preceding year.
         (f)   Any commercial or residential property within the village that
has been previously issued a notice or citation under this section within the
same calendar year will be considered a repeat offender and the village will
have the authority to abate the nuisance without additional prior notice, and
the real estate property owner will have a lien placed upon this property per
the above stated procedures. Notice of the lien shall be sent as in subsection
(D)3(e) of this section. (Ord. 1764, 9-14-2011)
      4.   Burning Garbage Or Leaves: It shall be illegal to burn materials in
any fashion not permitted by section 6-8-15 of this code. (Ord. 1872, 6-11-
2014)
      5.   Open Building Materials: To create or suffer to be created or to
remain upon any premises in a residential district for a period of more than
seven (7) days, unless incident to construction on the premises and then not to
exceed thirty (30) days, the storing, piling, accumulating, heaping, amassing
or collecting bricks, concrete blocks, lumber, iron, pipe or any building
materials in such quantities that the same is, or may become a menace to the
health of individuals or the public; or that the same is unsightly,
objectionable and offensive to those living in the neighborhood or to the
public; or that the same may or does become dangerous to the children playing
in the neighborhood; or that the same may or does become an attraction to rats
or other vermin and thereby become, or is dangerous to the health of any
individual or the public.
      6.   Business Use Of Public Property: To use or occupy any part of a
street, parkway, alley or sidewalk of the village for the purpose of carrying
on, soliciting or promoting any trade, business or other enterprise; also, to
cause or permit the storage of any product, supplies for or equipment
incidental to the operations of such business or enterprises, upon any street,
parkway, alley or sidewalk within the village.
      7.   Obstructing Public Ways: To obstruct or encroach upon public streets
and highways, private ways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, parking lots or public
places of the village so as to interfere with the passage of vehicles or
persons thereon. (Ord. 1764, 9-14-2011)
4-18-17: EXTERMINATION:
   (A)   Infestation: All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent
infestation. All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be
promptly exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
   (B)   Owner: The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.
   (C)   Single Occupant: The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-
tenant nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the
premises.
   (D)   Multiple Occupancy: The owner of a structure containing two (2) or
more dwelling units, a multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential
structure shall be responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas
of the structure and exterior property. If infestation is caused by failure of
an occupant to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant
shall be responsible for extermination.
   (E)   Occupant: The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the
continued rodent and pest free condition of the structure.
      1.   Exception: Where the infestations are caused by defects in the
structure, the owner shall be responsible for extermination. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-
2010)
4-18-18: LIGHT, VENTILATION AND OCCUPANCY LIMITATIONS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for light, ventilation and space for occupying a
structure.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain light, ventilation and space conditions in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner- occupant, or permit another
person to occupy, any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
section.
      3.   Alternative Devices: In lieu of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation
complying with this section shall be permitted.
   (B)   Light:
      1.   Habitable Spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one
window of approved size facing directly to the outdoors or to a court. The
minimum total glazed area for every habitable space shall be eight percent (8%)
of the floor area of such room. Wherever walls or other portions of a structure
face a window of any room and such obstructions are located less than three
feet (3') (914 mm) from the window and extend to a level above that of the
ceiling of the room, such window shall not be deemed to face directly to the
outdoors nor to a court and shall not be included as contributing to the
required minimum total window area for the room.
         (a)   Exception: Where natural light for rooms or spaces without
exterior glazing areas is provided through an adjoining room, the unobstructed
opening to the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent (8%) of the floor
area of the interior room or space, but not less than twenty five (25) square
feet (2.33 m2). The exterior glazing area shall be based on the total floor
area being served.
      2.   Common Halls And Stairways: Every common hall and stairway in
residential occupancies, other than in one- and two-family dwellings, shall be
lighted at all times with at least a sixty (60) watt standard incandescent
light bulb for each two hundred (200) square feet (19 m2) of floor area or
equivalent illumination, provided that the spacing between lights shall not be
greater than thirty feet (30') (9144 mm). In other than residential
occupancies, means of egress, including exterior means of egress, stairways
shall be illuminated at all times the building space served by the means of
egress is occupied with a minimum of one foot-candle (11 lux) at floors,
landings and treads.
      3.   Other Spaces: All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light sufficient to permit the maintenance of sanitary conditions,
and the safe occupancy of the space and utilization of the appliances,
equipment and fixtures.
   (C)   Ventilation:
      1.   Habitable Spaces: Every habitable space shall have at least one
openable window. The total openable area of the window in every room shall be
equal to at least forty five percent (45%) of the minimum glazed area required
in subsection (B)1 of this section.
         (a)   Exception: Where rooms and spaces without openings to the
outdoors are ventilated through an adjoining room, the unobstructed opening to
the adjoining room shall be at least eight percent (8%) of the floor area of
the interior room or space, but not less than twenty five (25) square feet
(2.33 m2). The ventilation openings to the outdoors shall be based on a total
floor area being ventilated.
      2.   Bathrooms And Toilet Rooms: Every bathroom and toilet room shall
comply with the ventilation requirements for habitable spaces as required by
this section, except that a window shall not be required in such spaces
equipped with a mechanical ventilation system. Air exhausted by a mechanical
ventilation system from a bathroom or toilet room shall discharge to the
outdoors and shall not be recirculated.
      3.   Cooking Facilities: Unless approved through the certificate of
occupancy, cooking shall not be permitted in any rooming unit or dormitory
unit, and a cooking facility or appliance shall not be permitted to be present
in the rooming unit or dormitory unit.
         (a)   Exceptions:
            (1)   Where specifically approved in writing by the building
superintendent.
            (2)   Devices such as coffeepots and microwave ovens shall not be
considered cooking appliances.
      4.   Process Ventilation: Where injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious
fumes, gases, dusts or mists are generated, a local exhaust ventilation system
shall be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source. Air shall be
exhausted to the exterior and not be recirculated to any space.
      5.   Clothes Dryer Exhaust: Clothes dryer exhaust systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be exhausted in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
   (D)   Occupancy Limitations:
      1.   Privacy: Dwelling units, hotel units, housekeeping units, rooming
units and dormitory units shall be arranged to provide privacy and be separate
from other adjoining spaces.
      2.   Minimum Room Widths: A habitable room, other than a kitchen, shall
not be less than seven feet (7') (2134 mm) in any plan dimension. Kitchens
shall have a clear passageway of not less than three feet (3') (914 mm) between
counterfronts and appliances or counterfronts and walls.
      3.   Minimum Ceiling Heights: Habitable spaces, hallways, corridors,
laundry areas, bathrooms, toilet rooms and habitable basement areas shall have
a clear ceiling height of not less than seven feet (7') (2134 mm).
         (a)   Exceptions:
            (1)   In one- and two-family dwellings, beams or girders spaced not
less than four feet (4') (1219 mm) on center and projecting not more than six
inches (6") (152 mm) below the required ceiling height.
            (2)   Basement rooms in one- and two-family dwellings occupied
exclusively for laundry, study or recreation purposes, having a ceiling height
of not less than six feet eight inches (6'8") (2033 mm) with not less than six
feet four inches (6'4") (1932 mm) of clear height under beams, girders, ducts
and similar obstructions.
            (3)   Rooms occupied exclusively for sleeping, study or similar
purposes and having a sloped ceiling over all or part of the room, with a clear
ceiling height of at least seven feet (7') (2134 mm) over not less than one-
third (1/3) of the required minimum floor area. In calculating the floor area
of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area with a clear ceiling
height of five feet (5') (1524 mm) or more shall be included.
      4.   Bedroom And Living Room Requirements: Every bedroom and living room
shall comply with the requirements set forth below:
         (a)   Room Area: Every living room shall contain at least one hundred
twenty (120) square feet (11.2 m2) and every bedroom shall contain at least
seventy (70) square feet (6.5 m2).
         (b)   Access From Bedrooms: Bedrooms shall not constitute the only
means of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as
the only means of egress from other habitable spaces.
            (1)   Exception: Units that contain fewer than two (2) bedrooms.
         (c)   Water Closet Accessibility: Every bedroom shall have access to
at least one water closet and one lavatory without passing through another
bedroom. Every bedroom in a dwelling unit shall have access to at least one
water closet and lavatory located in the same story as the bedroom or an
adjacent story.
         (d)   Prohibited Occupancy: Kitchens and nonhabitable spaces shall not
be used for sleeping purposes.
         (e)   Other Requirements: Bedrooms shall comply with the applicable
provisions of this code including, but not limited to, the light, ventilation,
room area, ceiling height and room width requirements of this chapter; the
plumbing facilities and water heating facilities requirements of section 4-18-
19 of this chapter; the heating facilities and electrical receptacle
requirements of section 4-18-20 of this chapter; and the smoke detector and
emergency escape requirements of section 4-18-21 of this chapter.
      5.   Overcrowding: The number of persons occupying a dwelling unit shall
not create conditions that, in the opinion of the Building Superintendent,
endanger the life, health, safety or welfare of the occupants.
      6.   Efficiency Unit: Nothing in this section shall prohibit an
efficiency living unit from meeting the following requirements:
         (a)   A unit occupied by not more than two (2) occupants shall have a
clear floor area of not less than two hundred twenty (220) square feet (20.4
m2). A unit occupied by three (3) occupants shall have a clear floor area of
not less than three hundred twenty (320) square feet (29.7 m2). These required
areas shall be exclusive of the areas required by subsections (D)2 and (D)3 of
this section.
         (b)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking
appliance and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of
not less than thirty inches (30") (762 mm) in front. Light and ventilation
conforming to this Code shall be provided.
         (c)   The unit shall be provided with a separate bathroom containing a
water closet, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
         (d)   The maximum number of occupants shall be three (3).
      7.   Food Preparation: All spaces to be occupied for food preparation
purposes shall contain suitable space and equipment to store, prepare and serve
foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be adequate facilities and services for
the sanitary disposal of food wastes and refuse, including facilities for
temporary storage. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-19: PLUMBING FACILITIES AND FIXTURE REQUIREMENTS:
The provisions of the Illinois Plumbing Code (77 Ill. Adm. Code 890) with
amendments as adopted in section 4-11-2 of this title shall govern the minimum
plumbing systems, facilities and plumbing fixtures within the Village of
Midlothian. (Ord. 2034, 7-24-2019)
4-18-20: MECHANICAL AND ELECTRICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy any premises which does not comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (B)   Heating Facilities:
      1.   Facilities Required: Heating facilities shall be provided in
structures as required by this section.
      2.   Residential Occupancies: Dwellings shall be provided with heating
facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of sixty eight degrees
Fahrenheit (68°F) (20°C) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Cooking appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the
requirements of this section.
      3.   Heat Supply: Every owner and operator of any building who rents,
leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units on terms, either
expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a temperature of
not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) (20°C) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms.
         (a)   Exceptions: When the outdoor temperature is below the winter
outdoor design temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required provided that the heating system is operating
at its full design capacity.
      4.   Occupiable Work Spaces: Indoor occupiable work spaces shall be
supplied with heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to maintain a
temperature of not less than sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) (18°C) during
the period the spaces are occupied.
         (a)   Exceptions:
            (1)   Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling
or special temperature conditions.
            (2)   Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
      5.   Room Temperature Measurement: The required room temperatures shall
be measured three feet (3') (914 mm) above the floor near the center of the
room and two feet (2') (610 mm) inward from the center of each exterior wall.
   (C)   Mechanical Equipment:
      1.   Mechanical Appliances: All mechanical appliances, fireplaces, solid
fuel burning appliances, cooking appliances and water heating appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe working condition, and shall be
capable of performing the intended function.
      2.   Removal Of Combustion Products: All fuel burning equipment and
appliances shall be connected to an approved chimney or vent.
         (a)   Exception: Fuel burning equipment and appliances which are
labeled for unvented operation.
      3.   Clearances: All required clearances to combustible materials shall
be maintained.
      4.   Safety Controls: All safety controls for fuel burning equipment
shall be maintained in effective operation.
      5.   Combustion Air: A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space containing the fuel burning equipment shall be
provided for the fuel burning equipment.
      6.   Energy Conservation Devices: Devices intended to reduce fuel
consumption by attachment to a fuel burning appliance, to the fuel supply line
thereto, or to the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom, shall not be installed
unless labeled for such purpose and the installation is specifically approved.
   (D)   Electrical Facilities:
      1.   Facilities Required: Every occupied building shall be provided with
an electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this subsection and
subsection (E) of this section.
      2.   Service: The size and usage of appliances and equipment shall serve
as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance
with the 2008 NEC electrical code. Dwelling units shall be served by a 3-wire,
120/240 volt, single- phase electrical service having a rating of not less than
sixty (60) amperes.
      3.   Electrical System Hazards: Where it is found that the electrical
system in a structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient receptacle and
lighting outlets, improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or
for similar reasons, the building superintendent shall require the defects to
be corrected to eliminate the hazard.
   (E)   Electrical Equipment:
      1.   Installation: All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall
be properly installed and maintained in a safe and approved manner.
      2.   Receptacles: Every habitable space in a dwelling shall contain at
least two (2) separate and remote receptacle outlets. Every laundry area shall
contain at least one grounded type receptacle or a receptacle with a ground
fault circuit interrupter. Every bathroom shall contain at least one
receptacle. Any new bathroom receptacle outlet shall have ground fault circuit
interrupter protection.
      3.   Luminaires: Every public hall, interior stairway, toilet room,
kitchen, bathroom, laundry room, boiler room and furnace room shall contain at
least one electric luminaire.
   (F)   Elevators, Escalators And Dumbwaiters:
      1.   General: Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be maintained
in compliance with ASME A17.1. The most current certification of inspection
shall be on display at all times within the elevator or attached to the
escalator or dumbwaiter, or the certificate shall be available for public
inspection in the office of the building operator. The inspection and tests
shall be performed at not less than the periodical intervals listed in ASME
A17.1, appendix N, except where otherwise specified by the authority having
jurisdiction.
      2.   Elevators: In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least
one elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the building is
occupied.
         (a)   Exception: Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for testing or
servicing.
   (G)   Duct Systems:
      1.   General: Duct systems shall be maintained free of obstructions and
shall be capable of performing the required function. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-2010)
4-18-21: FIRE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   General:
      1.   Scope: The provisions of this section shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for fire safety relating to structures and exterior
premises, including fire safety facilities and equipment to be provided.
      2.   Responsibility: The owner of the premises shall provide and maintain
such fire safety facilities and equipment in compliance with these
requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner- occupant or permit another
person to occupy any premises that do not comply with the requirements of this
section.
   (B)   Means Of Egress:
      1.   General: A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be
provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of
egress shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws and village
ordinances.
      2.   Aisles: The required width of aisles in accordance with all
applicable state and federal laws and village ordinances shall be unobstructed.
      3.   Locked Doors: All means of egress doors shall be readily openable
from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys,
special knowledge or effort, except where the door hardware conforms to that
permitted by all applicable state and federal laws and village ordinances.
      4.   Emergency Escape Openings: Required emergency escape openings shall
be maintained in accordance with the code in effect at the time of
construction, and the following. Required emergency escape and rescue openings
shall be operational from the inside of the room without the use of keys or
tools. Bars, grilles, grates or similar devices are permitted to be placed over
emergency escape and rescue openings provided the minimum net clear opening
size complies with the code that was in effect at the time of construction and
such devices shall be releasable or removable from the inside without the use
of a key, tool or force greater than that which is required for normal
operation of the escape and rescue opening.
   (C)   Fire Resistance Ratings:
      1.   Fire Resistance Rated Assemblies: The required fire resistance
rating of fire resistance rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions
and floors shall be maintained.
      2.   Opening Protectives: Required opening protectives shall be
maintained in an operative condition. All fire and smokestop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors shall not
be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
   (D)   Fire Protection Systems:
      1.   General: All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire,
actuate an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof
shall be maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with
all applicable state and federal laws and village ordinances.
      2.   Smoke Alarms: Single or multiple station smoke alarms shall be
installed and maintained in all zoning classifications in dwellings not zoned
for residential occupancies, regardless of occupant load at all of the
following locations:
         (a)   On the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area in
the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
         (b)   In each room used for sleeping purposes.
         (c)   In each story within a dwelling unit, including basements and
cellars but not including crawl spaces and uninhabitable attics. In dwellings
or dwelling units with split levels and without an intervening door between the
adjacent levels, a smoke alarm installed on the upper level shall suffice for
the adjacent lower level provided that the lower level is less than one full
story below the upper level.
Single or multiple station smoke alarms shall be installed in other groups in
accordance with all applicable state and federal laws and village ordinances.
      3.   Power Source: In residential zoning occupancies and in dwellings not
zoned for residential occupancies, single station smoke alarms shall receive
their primary power from the building wiring provided that such wiring is
served from a commercial source and shall be equipped with a battery backup.
Smoke alarms shall emit a signal when the batteries are low. Wiring shall be
permanent and without a disconnecting switch other than as required for
protection.
         (a)   Exception: Smoke alarms are permitted to be solely battery
operated in buildings where no construction is taking place, buildings that are
not served from a commercial power source and in existing areas of buildings
undergoing alterations or repairs that do not result in the removal of interior
wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an attic,
crawl space or basement available which could provide access for building
wiring without the removal of interior finishes.
      4.   Interconnection: Where more than one smoke alarm is required to be
installed within an individual dwelling unit and in dwellings not zoned for
residential occupancies, the smoke alarms shall be interconnected in such a
manner that the activation of one alarm will activate all of the alarms in the
individual unit. The alarm shall be clearly audible in all bedrooms over
background noise levels with all intervening doors closed.
         (a)   Exceptions:
            (1)   Interconnection is not required in buildings which are not
undergoing alterations, repairs, or construction of any kind.
            (2)   Smoke alarms in existing areas are not required to be
interconnected where alterations or repairs do not result in the removal of
interior wall or ceiling finishes exposing the structure, unless there is an
attic, crawl space or basement available which could provide access for
interconnection without the removal of interior finishes. (Ord. 1721, 5-12-
2010)
4-18-22: OUTDOOR PARKING AND/OR STORAGE CONTAINERS:
   (A)   Definitions:
   BUSINESS VEHICLES: All passenger vehicles owned by a business or vehicles
which are registered as and carry a "B" license plate or those vehicles which
are required to be, but are not registered as or which, although required to,
do not carry a "B" license plate.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLES: Miscellaneous trailers, commercial trucks, commercial
trailers or commercial vehicular equipment which are registered as and carry a
"TVL", "TMX", "TA", "TB" or "D" license plate or those trailers, trucks,
vehicles or equipment which are required to be, but are not registered as or
which, although required to, do not carry a "TVL", "TMX", "TA", "TB" or "D"
license plate.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLES: All mobile homes, travel trailers, camping trailers,
recreational vehicles, motor homes, boats, boat trailers or miscellaneous
trailers which are registered as and carry an "RV" or "RT" license plate or
those vehicles which are required to be, but are not registered as or which,
although required to, do not carry an "RV" or "RT" license plate.
   (B)   Residential Districts: In residential zoning districts:
      1.   No commercial vehicles shall be parked and/or stored for any length
of time in excess of one hour.
      2.   The parking and/or storage of recreational vehicles in excess of two
(2) consecutive days shall be permitted, but only if the following conditions
are met:
         (a)   The parking of such vehicles is behind the front building line,
no closer to the rear lot line than five feet (5') and no closer than three
feet (3') from the side lot line; and
         (b)   No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes at any time; and
         (c)   Such vehicle is properly covered.
      3.   No commercial vehicles or recreational vehicles shall be parked in
the public right of way at any time in a residential district.
      4.   Business vehicles are allowed to be parked in residential zoning
districts; however, business vehicles shall not be allowed to be parked in the
front yard, rear yard or side yard unless in a driveway.
      5.   Any recreational vehicle or business vehicle that is parked or
stored in any residential zoning district must be owned or legally controlled
by residents or occupants of the premises on which it is parked.
      6.   Pickup trucks and/or vans principally used as passenger cars are
excluded from the regulations contained herein.
      7.   Inoperable motor vehicles shall not be parked and/or stored in
residential zoning districts for a time period in excess of two (2) days unless
such inoperable motor vehicle is parked and/or stored in a garage or fully
enclosed structure. No inoperable motor vehicle shall be parked or stored for
any time period on side yards, rear yards or front yards.
   (C)   Storage Containers: Containers made of plastic, fiberglass, metal,
wood or any composite material of any size shall not be stored outside in any
zoning district except as provided below. This includes commercial storage
containers, commercial steel containers and/or steel intermodal containers, POD
containers and other similar containers. Such containers shall include any
container placed or stored on a front yard, side yard, back yard or driveway.
This subsection shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Any containers which are stored in a garage or fully enclosed
structure; or
      2.   Any containers used by a residential homeowner prior to moving into
a new home or moving out of a home, as long as the storage of such container is
on the driveway, is not stored for more than ten (10) consecutive days, and the
homeowner has obtained a permit from the village; or
      3.   Any containers used for garbage, recycling or lawn/yard waste which
do not exceed one hundred twenty (120) gallons; or
      4.   Temporary construction trailers and/or storage bins, for which a
permit has been issued by the village, as long as such construction trailers
and/or construction storage bins are removed within seventy two (72) hours of
the completion of the project for which such temporary construction trailers or
temporary construction storage bins are placed on the property. (Ord. 1782, 2-
22-2012)
CHAPTER 19
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING
SECTION:
4-19-1: Purpose, Crime Prevention, Definitions
4-19-2: Interpretation; Scope; Responsibility; Licensing Registration
4-19-3: Enforcement
4-19-4: Access For Inspection
4-19-5: Violations
4-19-6: Hearing
4-19-7: Residential Rental Housing Registration
4-19-8: Crime Free Program
4-19-9: Fees
4-19-10: Zoning Ordinance
4-19-11: Property Maintenance
4-19-12: Residential Rental Housing Standards
4-19-13: Parking And Bicycles
4-19-14: Tenant Responsibilities
4-19-15: Penalties
4-19-16: Severability
4-19-17: Effective Date
4-19-1: PURPOSE, CRIME PREVENTION, DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Purpose:
      1.   Minimum Residential Rental Housing Standards: The purpose of this
chapter is to provide minimum standards for the protection of the life, safety,
health, welfare, and property of residential rental housing owners and tenants,
as well as that of the general public.
      2.   Maximum Occupant Loads: To prevent the overcrowding of residential
rental housing by requiring compliance with minimum space standards per
occupant for each dwelling unit.
      3.   Prevent Slum Areas: To facilitate the enforcement of minimum
standards for the maintenance of existing residential rental housing and thus
to prevent slums and blight.
      4.   Maintain Property Values: To preserve the value of land and
buildings throughout the village of Midlothian.
      5.   Crime Free Multihousing Program: To reduce and prevent crimes from
occurring within residential rental housing and surrounding neighborhoods.
   (B)   Crime Prevention: This chapter is intended to promote the reduction in
crime with regulations that require the land/building owners to be annually
licensed by the village. A residential rental housing license will be issued
when application forms are completed with the accurate tenant records as
required by the Midlothian police department and/or Midlothian building
department. "Crime prevention through environmental design" (CPTED) will also
be part of building construction standards.
   (C)   Definitions:
   ABANDONED DWELLING: A dwelling unit, building, structure, property, or part
thereof that has not been actively used for its intended, designed, or
permitted purpose for a period of twelve (12) consecutive months, or for a
cumulative period of eighteen (18) months during any three (3) year period.
   ABANDONED USE: A legal, nonconforming use within a dwelling unit, building,
structure, property, or part thereof, that has been discontinued for a period
of twelve (12) consecutive months, or for a minimum of eighteen (18) months
during any three (3) year period. This does not include a special use pursuant
to section 11-2-16 of this code.
   APARTMENT: A unit within an apartment building.
   APARTMENT BUILDING: A residential building containing two (2) or more
dwelling units in which one or more units is leased or rented to a household
other than the owner. An apartment building may also be classified as a multi-
family dwelling.
   APPROVED: Having received approval of the village of Midlothian building
department.
   BATHROOM: A room meeting the criteria of subsection
4-19-12(A) of this chapter.
   BEDROOM: A room within a dwelling unit capable of being used for sleeping
purposes, having a closet and an operable window, and meeting the minimum
square footage requirements as provided in chapter 18 of this title.
   BUILDING: A structure entirely separated from any other structure by space
or by walls in which there are no communicating doors or windows, or similar
openings, and having a roof supported by walls or columns and properly
supported on a masonry foundation extending down below the frost line, and
adapted to permanent or continuous occupancy for resident or business assembly,
factory or storage purposes; the term “building” shall be construed as if
followed by the words “or part thereof.”
   CRIME FREE RENTAL HOUSING PROGRAM: A system of rules used to educate rental
housing unit owners, owner's managers and/or agents for the control and
recordkeeping for any municipal violation or criminal activity as defined by
local, state or federal law. This includes the environmental design for rental
housing units and facilities.
   DANGEROUS BUILDINGS, STRUCTURE, OR PREMISES: Any building, structure or
premises that has become or remains in an unsafe or dilapidated condition so to
pose a danger to public health, safety or welfare.
   DUPLEX: A single building containing only two (2) dwelling units, side by
side or one above the other.
   DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, but not an automobile house
trailer, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including
single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, and multi-
family dwellings, but not including “hotel/motel” or “bed and breakfast
establishment”.
   DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
   DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: This use includes buildings containing three (3)
or more dwelling units that are not designed as townhouses (see definition of
Dwelling, Townhouse), where each unit is provided with an individual entrance
to the outdoors or to a common hallway, with other dwelling units above and/or
below. “Dwelling, multiple-family” may include apartment buildings,
condominiums and independent living senior housing, but shall not include
“dwelling, townhouse”, as defined herein.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: This use includes detached buildings containing
only one dwelling unit surrounded by yards. Manufactured homes, mobile homes,
travel trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents, or
other forms of temporary or portable housing are not included in this
definition.
   DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: This use includes buildings having three (3) or more
dwelling units that are arranged side by side, sharing common fire resistive
walls without openings, and each occupying an exclusive vertical space without
another dwelling unit above or below. Each dwelling unit shall have at least
one individual entrance to the outdoors. “Dwelling, townhouse” may include
apartments, condominiums and independent living senior housing, but shall not
include “dwelling, multiple-family”, as defined herein.
   DWELLING UNIT: A single unit containing one or more rooms providing
complete, independent living facilities for one household, including permanent
provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
   FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage
or adoption, or members of the same civil union, living together as a single
household unit; or a group of not more than four (4) persons not related by
blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single household unit.
   GRANDFATHERING: Permitted use of a previously existing nonconformity. (See
definition of Previously Existing Nonconformity.)
   GUEST: An individual who is present at a tenant's dwelling unit by
invitation, consent, permission or assent, but who is not an owner, occupant or
tenant of that dwelling unit.
   HABITABLE ROOM: Any room meeting the requirements of this code for living,
sleeping, cooking or dining purposes, but not including bathrooms, pantries,
hallways, storage areas, utility rooms, or unfinished cellars/basements, or
attics.
   HOT WATER: Water at a temperature of not less than one hundred ten degrees
Fahrenheit (110°F).
   HOUSEHOLD: See definition of Family.
   IMMEDIATE FAMILY: Kinship members including:
      Mother or stepmother;
      Father or stepfather;
      Son or stepson;
      Daughter or stepdaughter;
      Brother or stepbrother;
      Sister or stepsister;
      Grandfather or stepgrandfather;
      Grandmother or stepgrandmother;
      Grandson or stepgrandson;
      Granddaughter or stepgranddaughter;
      Spouse;
      Members of the same civil union.
   IMMINENT DANGER: A condition which could cause serious or life threatening
injury or death at any time.
   INDIVIDUAL: A human being.
   KITCHEN: An area or room meeting the criteria of subsection 4-19-12(B),
"Kitchen Equipment", of this chapter.
   LANDLORD: The landowner, lessor, or sublessor of residential rental
property.
   LESSEE: See definition of Tenant.
   OCCUPANT: A person who lives in a dwelling unit. An occupant who is not an
owner is a tenant.
   OWNER: The landowner, person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or otherwise having control of the
property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person, and the
personal representative of the estate of such person.
   OWNER'S AGENT: A person eighteen (18) years of age or older who maintains a
"primary residence" (as defined herein) or an office for the purpose of
transacting business in the village of Midlothian and is customarily present to
perform the duties of managing agent on a full time basis whether the rental
unit is occupied or not.
   PERSON: An individual, partnership, limited liability company, corporation,
unincorporated association, trust or other legal entity.
   PREVIOUSLY EXISTING NONCONFORMITY: Occupancy levels or permissible number of
units in a dwelling granted prior to the adoption of the village zoning
ordinance, which would be less under that code or subsequent amendments.
   PRIMARY RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit maintained and occupied on a routine
basis by at least one individual owner more than fifty percent (50%) of the
year and can be proven to be that individual owner's legal residence through
real estate tax records or other official documents filed with the state or
federal government. A residence occupied by its owner fifty percent (50%) or
less of the year is classified as a "secondary residence".
   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE: The property maintenance code adopted by the
village of Midlothian in chapter 18 of this title.
   REGISTRATION: The process by which owners submit application for a license
to operate one or more rental units in the village. All residential rental
housing must be licensed and registered to be occupied by tenants. A license
and occupancy may be refused or revoked by the village on units not in
compliance.
   RENTAL UNIT: A dwelling unit not occupied by the owner as a primary or
secondary residence. See definition of Residential Rental Housing.
   RENTER: A tenant.
   RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING: A dwelling, townhouse, condominium, single-
family residence, dwelling unit, building, premises or structure for
residential use by a person or persons who is not the legal owner of record.
Units occupied by "immediate family" as herein defined are not considered
residential rental housing provided that the legal owner resides in the
dwelling, townhouse, condominium, single-family residence, dwelling unit,
building, premises or structure for residential use. This chapter is not
intended to, and does not apply to, hotels, motels, hotel clubs, motel clubs,
rooming houses, nursing homes or assisted living facilities.
   SECONDARY RESIDENCE: A dwelling unit occupied by an owner less than fifty
percent (50%) of the year and occupied by no one else at any time, except for
individuals related by blood or marriage, when the owner is actually present.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE: A building designed to be occupied by a family;
single household. See definition of Family.
   TENANT: A person not the owner who occupies a dwelling unit with the consent
of the owner for monetary or nonmonetary consideration.
   VILLAGE: The village of Midlothian, Illinois.
   VILLAGE CODE: The village code of the village of Midlothian, Illinois.
   ZONING ORDINANCE: The village of Midlothian zoning ordinance. (Ord. 1761, 8-
24-2011; amd. Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
4-19-2: INTERPRETATION; SCOPE; RESPONSIBILITY; LICENSING REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements adopted for
the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. This chapter and
chapter 18 of this title, as amended from time to time, shall apply, as minimum
standards for maintenance of residential rental housing. Where the requirements
of this chapter vary from any other lawfully adopted village or state laws,
rules, regulations, ordinances, codes, deed restrictions or covenants, the more
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern. The village
does not enforce any private covenants between landowners or tenants or finally
determine conflicts between neighboring property owners.
   (B)   Scope: This chapter shall apply to all real property located within
the incorporated limits of Midlothian, Illinois, which contains "residential
rental housing", as defined herein.
   (C)   Responsibility: The village of Midlothian has created this chapter
pursuant to its home rule powers and has designated the building department as
the enforcement body. The superintendent of the building department, or his/her
designee, has the authority for enforcing the provisions of this chapter and
shall serve to render interpretations of this chapter. The crime free rental
housing program will be coordinated by the Midlothian police department through
the chief of police or his/her designee.
   (D)   Occupancy, License, And Registration:
      1.   No residential rental housing may be occupied unless it has been
inspected, registered and licensed. The provisions of section
4-19-7 of this chapter shall apply for registration and biennial inspections
(every 2 years, residential rental housing having an even house number shall be
inspected in even calendar years and residential rental housing having an odd
house number shall be inspected in odd calendar years) of any residential
rental housing within the village.
      2.   Occupancy limits shall be determined by this code. No individual
person or persons, corporation or business entity of any kind or nature
whatsoever, shall engage in the business of operating any residential rental
housing to the public, or operating a residential rental dwelling or dwelling
unit, unless a valid and current residential rental housing license has been
issued by the village clerk for the specific location. This is not intended to
apply to licensed professionals acting as brokers or agents, unless licensed
professionals are owners or managers of property subject to this code.
      3.   No person shall rent or occupy a dwelling unit unless a current
valid license has been issued for that specific location. This licensing
requirement shall not apply to group homes governed by the specialized living
centers act, 405 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 et seq., dealing with the
developmentally disabled, or other similar uses governed by state or federal
laws, rules or regulations. No license shall be issued or renewed unless the
owner agrees to such inspections as may be required pursuant to this chapter
and until all applicable inspection fees, license fees, past due water bills,
repair costs owed to the village of Midlothian, liens and citation fines have
been paid to the village. (Ord. 1761, 8-24-2011; amd. Ord. 1946, 12-7-2016;
Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
4-19-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The village of Midlothian departments of building and police shall administer
this chapter. These departments may delegate such duties and responsibilities
in connection with the administration and enforcement of this chapter to such
persons as are appropriate for conformance through respective department chain
of command. The building superintendent and the chief of police, may, when
circumstances dictate, call upon the building department, police department,
county, state, fire department or other authorities, agencies, codes or
regulations in identifying and correcting conditions in rental housing which
constitute violations of this chapter or other duly enacted ordinances,
regulations, or laws as applicable. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-4: ACCESS FOR INSPECTION:
Upon presentation of proper credentials, village authorized representatives may
enter at reasonable times, after giving notice to the landlord of any building,
structure, or land within the village, to perform the duties imposed by this
chapter. Reasonable notice for required scheduled inspections shall be defined
as a minimum of ten (10) calendar days' advance written notice. It shall be the
responsibility of the landlord to notify the tenant(s) of inspection
appointments, arrange access with the tenant(s) and provide access to all
units. In the absence of the building landlord or landlord's agent, an adult at
least eighteen (18) years of age must be present during the inspection.
   (A)   Revocation Of Registration: Units not made accessible for inspection
by the landlord (or otherwise not inspected) in accordance with this chapter,
shall be in violation of this chapter and shall not be licensed/registered or
shall have the registration revoked. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this chapter, a tenant or occupant must be present and must consent to the
inspection. If the tenant or occupant is not present or does not consent to the
inspection, then the inspection shall not be conducted.
   (B)   Residential Rental Property Complaints: In the case of a complaint of
a potentially life or health threatening condition(s) or a property maintenance
violation from any source, the village may promptly inspect or investigate
without prior notice, except that notice of such inspection or investigation
shall be provided to the landlord or agent as soon as reasonably possible.
   (C)   Inspection Areas: Residential rental housing inspections will include
a physical inspection of the property including the interior of all rental
units, building exterior, exterior structures such as garages and storage
areas, common areas, basements/cellars, laundry areas, electrical, plumbing and
storage areas, as deemed appropriate by the inspector/code enforcement official
with the exception of personal items.
   (D)   Denial Of Access: Except in the case of an emergency, if a tenant or
property owner denies an inspector access to a rental property, the building
superintendent or his/her designee shall apply to the circuit court for the
issuance of an administrative search warrant for inspections under this
chapter.
   (E)   Required Inspections: Systematic residential rental housing
inspections will be conducted biennially (every 2 years, residential rental
housing having an even house number shall be inspected in even calendar years
and residential rental housing having an odd house number shall be inspected in
odd calendar years). The village will conduct inspections based upon complaints
when received and when an inspection is determined to be necessary. (Ord. 1722,
5-12-2010; amd. Ord. 1727, 6-9-2010; Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
4-19-5: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this chapter and fines shall be as stated in this chapter or, if
not stated in this chapter, as specified in title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
   (A)   Time Limit For Removal: When a licensing inspection of residential
rental housing reveals any violations of applicable codes, ordinances or laws,
a compliance time frame will be set by the inspector. In establishing a
compliance time frame, the inspector shall determine the reasonable minimal
time necessary to correct the violations based upon the number and severity of
the violations. The village shall send notice to the property owner or the
listed property agent by regular U.S. mail at the last address provided on the
most recent license application. Said notice shall include the following:
      1.   Description of the property sufficient for identification.
      2.   A statement listing the violations of applicable codes.
      3.   The date upon which the licensing reinspection will occur.
      4.   An explanation that, if upon completion of the licensing
reinspection, the requirements of applicable village codes have not been met,
the residential rental housing license may be suspended or revoked.
   (B)   Immediate Action: Notice of violations involving imminent danger to
the life, safety, health, welfare and/or property of the landlord and/or
tenants as well as that of the general public, may be made by any means
reasonably calculated to provide actual notice, which shall include, but not be
limited to, personal delivery, registered or certified mail, or posting of an
appropriate notice on the premises.
   (C)   Occupancy Denial: In the case of imminent danger or fire hazard,
structural failure or danger of imminent collapse, interruptions or failures in
plumbing, heating, electrical systems, or other hazardous health situations,
the village may order immediate repair or correction and may order the premises
vacated pending such repair or correction.
   (D)   Citation Issuance: If, at the conclusion of the period established for
corrective action, the violation has not, in the village's reasonable judgment,
been satisfactorily corrected, then the village may issue citations in
accordance with provisions of this code, suspend or revoke the license for the
affected unit or units, and have the rental unit(s) vacated. Citations for
local municipal violations are adjudicated pursuant to chapter 20 of this
title.
      1.   Units vacated under this subsection shall be posted with signs
indicating that the unit has been determined to be "illegal", or if applicable
"unfit for habitation" and that occupancy is prohibited until the rental unit
has been inspected to verify that the violation has been corrected.
      2.   Any person who defaces or removes a posted sign as described in
subsection (D)1 of this section without the approval of the village shall be in
violation of this code.
   (E)   Time Limit To Vacate A Building Or Unit: If notification has been
presented to the landlord that the property is not properly licensed or that
the license has been suspended or revoked, the landlord shall vacate the rental
property or properties within sixty (60) days of notification.
      1.   If said property is not vacated within the sixty (60) day period,
the landlord will be responsible for all fines as set forth in this chapter.
Citations will be issued with a mandatory court appearance. Fines imposed upon
rental property owners who have initiated statutory eviction proceedings
against tenant(s) pursuant to the crime free housing program, shall be waived
so long as such eviction proceedings are pending and being actively pursued.
This waiver does not relate to fines resulting from property maintenance
violations.
      2.   Notification will be either personally delivered or mailed to the
landlord or property agent as listed on the most recent registration
application. The following notice to the tenants and occupants will be posted:
         1. You are hereby notified that the license for this structure has
been revoked or the owner has failed to license this residential rental
property pursuant to Title IV Chapter 19 of the Village of Midlothian Code.
         2. You must vacate this structure within sixty (60) days of the date
of this notice.
         3. If you fail to vacate this structure, you will be in violation of
this above referenced Ordinance and subject to penalties and fines with a
minimum of $100.00 and a maximum of $750.00 for each day you are found to be in
violation with a mandatory court appearance.
   (F)   "Crime Free Rental Housing": The landlord or managing agent will be in
violation of this code if he/she has not complied with all "crime free housing
program" requirements as stated in section 4-19-8 of this chapter. The chief of
police or his/her designee shall designate a crime free rental housing
coordinator, who shall be responsible for conducting the crime free housing
seminars and maintain a list of the attendees and their dates of attendance.
   (G)   Unfit Properties:
      1.   The village may prohibit persons from entering or occupying, except
for repair related activity, any rental unit, building or structure, including
utility and out buildings, found to be unfit, found not to comply with village
codes or ordinances, or that poses dangerous, unsafe, or unhealthy conditions
for the building's occupants, passersby, or the general public.
      2.   Unfit properties shall be posted with appropriate language that does
not permit occupancy. Any person, not the owner, who enters, occupies, uses or
any person, including the owner, who permits others to enter, occupy or use the
structure after such a posting shall be charged with trespassing pursuant to
section 6-8-23 of this code. Each day the rental unit building or structure is
entered, occupied or used following such a posting shall be considered a
separate offense. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-6: HEARING:
   (A)   Whenever a property owner gets notice of a permit denial, suspension
or threatened revocation and required vacating of a license issued under this
chapter, the licensee shall have the right to request a hearing. The request
shall be made within seven (7) days of receipt of the notice. The request shall
be made by certified or registered mail, overnight courier or hand delivery to
the village building department.
   (B)   Whenever a request for a hearing is made, the village president shall
call a hearing pursuant to the procedures as set forth in section
5-1-11 of this code. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-7: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Registration Form Date:
      1.   Filing Of License: Prior to engaging in the business of renting any
dwelling unit to the public or operating a rental dwelling or dwelling unit,
every owner of residential rental housing, whether occupied or vacant, shall
file with the village a completed license application for the dwelling unit and
owner’s registration form including the appropriate fee for each rental
property and units.
      2.   Initial Registration Time Frame: All residential rental housing must
be licensed and registered with the village within six (6) months of the
effective date of this chapter or within thirty (30) days of notification by
the village. A residential rental license shall be issued for a period of one
calendar year and shall expire on December 31 of each year.
   (B)   Application Form Renewal: Application for license registration renewal
must be filed at least thirty (30) days prior to the registration expiration
date. A failure to renew an existing rental housing building(s) license and
registration will result in an additional charge as specified section 4-19-15
of this chapter.
   (C)   New Owner Registration: Any person becoming an owner of an existing
registered rental unit shall file a complete license application and
registration form within thirty (30) days of the property ownership transfer;
however, the new owner will not have to pay the license and registration fee
until the next annual license and registration if the previous owner had
registered the property and paid the appropriate fees but must attend a "crime
free housing" training seminar within three (3) months of property ownership
transfer.
   (D)   Notification Of Sale: Registration/license is nontransferrable to
another person or to another rental dwelling unit. Every person holding a
registration/license must give notice in writing to the village of Midlothian
within five (5) business days after having legally transferred or otherwise
disposed of the ownership or legal control of any registered/licensed rental
dwelling. Such notice must include the name, address and contact information of
the person succeeding to the ownership or control of such rental dwelling or
dwellings.
   (E)   New Residential Rental Housing Registration: All residential rental
housing must be registered within thirty (30) days of construction, conversion
from owner-occupancy, or change from any other nonrental status.
   (F)   Residential Rental Housing License Application Required Information:
The residential rental housing license application form shall contain the
following information:
      1.   A description of the premises by street name and number and property
tax identification number.
      2.   The name and address of the property owner. If the owner is a
corporation, the name and address of the "owner's agent" thereof shall also be
provided. If the property is held in a land trust, the names and addresses of
all beneficiaries must be disclosed. The agent shall be authorized by the owner
in writing to accept service of any village notices on behalf of the owner,
including appointment letters, notices of code violations, court process or any
other communication or correspondence in connection with the administration and
enforcement of this and other village codes and ordinances.
      3.   The name, address and twenty four (24) hour contact information of
the owner's agent.
         (a)   When a rental unit is owned by more than one individual, or is
owned by an entity that is not a natural person, an owner's agent must be
designated.
         (b)   The village shall be notified in writing within ten (10) days of
any change of the owner's agent.
         (c)   An owner with a designated "owner's agent" who is found not to
be customarily available or able to perform the duties as defined shall
designate a different individual who is able to properly fulfill the
requirements within ten (10) days of being notified of the deficiency.
         (d)   The signature of the owner or the owner's agent.
         (e)   For the purposes of an emergency response to a residential
rental property the owner or owner's designated agent must be located within
thirty (30) miles of the village corporate limits for building and tenant
emergencies. This person must be listed on the license application and
registration form and readily accessible to the unit tenant, village, police
and/or fire departments.
   (G)   Refusals Or Revocation Of License And Registration: Rental units found
to be out of compliance after an administrative adjudication hearing or by an
appropriate court order with this or other applicable laws or ordinances shall
lose rental status, shall have the license and registration refused or revoked,
and shall not be occupied until brought back into compliance. Tenant removal
shall be the responsibility of the building owner. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010; amd.
Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
4-19-8: CRIME FREE PROGRAM:
   (A)   Owner Responsibilities: "Owners" and "owner's agents" must comply with
all rules and regulations required in the crime free rental housing program.
      1.   Owners or "owner's agent" must advise prospective tenants of the
village of Midlothian's crime free rental housing program.
      2.   All owners or owners' agents shall require a signed lease,
identifying all tenants eighteen (18) years of age or older.
      3.   All landlords shall incorporate into the body of all leases or
rental agreements, or renewals of leases or rental agreements, the first and
last legal names, gender and date of birth of all individuals who will reside
at the rental property during the term of the lease. All such landlords shall
also require their tenants, as a condition of their lease, to provide written
notice containing the first and last legal names, gender and date of birth of
any guests who will be temporarily residing at the rental property for more
than a calendar week (7 consecutive days).
      4.   Owners or owner's agents must have all adult tenants sign the crime
free lease addendum that must read as follows:
         In addition to all other terms of this lease, Landlord and Tenant
agree as follows:
         The tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest or any
other person or persons associated with the tenant or his or her household,
         1. Shall not engage in any criminal activity or violation of municipal
ordinances or any other violations of local, state or federal law on or near
the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances;
         2. Shall not engage in any act intended to facilitate any violation of
local municipal ordinances or any other violations as defined by local, state
or federal law and/or obstruct or resist law enforcement efforts regarding
criminal activity on or near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances;
         3. Shall not permit the rental unit, the area on or near the rental
unit, common areas or appurtenances to be used for or to facilitate any
violations of local ordinances or any other violations of local, state or
federal law.
         4. Should the tenant, any member of the tenant's household, any guest
or any other person or persons associated with the tenant, or his/her
household, violate any provisions stated herein on or near the rental unit,
common areas or appurtenances, such a violation shall constitute a material
noncompliance with the lease and shall further constitute grounds for
termination of tenancy and eviction.
         5. Violation of any of the above provisions shall be a material and
irreparable violation of the lease and good cause for termination of tenancy. A
single violation of any of the provisions of this added addendum shall be
deemed a serious violation and a material and irreparable non-compliance. It is
understood that a single violation shall be good cause for immediate
termination of the lease. Proof of violation shall not require criminal
conviction, but the tenant understands and agrees that an arrest for a
described violation or criminal activity shall be sufficient evidence of a
violation and grounds for termination of tenant's tenancy and occupancy.
         6. In case of conflict between the provisions of this addendum and any
other provisions of the lease, the provisions of the addendum shall govern.
   (B)   Tenant Access To Owner Or Owner's Agent: The owner or owner's agent of
a residential rental housing shall provide each tenant or occupant with the
name and telephone number of a responsible person, or managing agent, who in
emergency situations will be available on a twenty four (24) hour basis and who
has the authority to make repairs as needed for occupancy.
   (C)   Maximum Number Of Tenants Notification: The owner of a residential
rental housing shall inform each tenant or occupant in writing, prior to
occupancy, of the maximum number of persons allowable by the occupancy
standards set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Tenant Records Access: The owner or owner's agent of a residential
rental housing shall make available to the building department, building
superintendent and/or chief of police or their designees, upon request, the
following: the signed lease, the signed crime free lease addendum, credit
history, and background checks as required to be maintained by this chapter.
   (E)   Subleasing: The owner or owner's agent must advise all tenants that
subleasing is not allowed without prior approval of the owner/managing agent
and compliance with the "crime free rental housing program" requirements.
   (F)   Construction Requirements: See subsection 4-19-12(L) of this chapter
for "crime prevention through environmental design" (CPTED).
   (G)   Nuisance Residential Rental Property: It is hereby declared a nuisance
and declared to be against the health, safety, peace, and comfort of the
village of Midlothian for any property owner or owner's agent to allow or
permit the following:
      1.   Offenses: Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental housing, to
a tenant who allows any of the following offenses to occur on or near the
rental unit, common areas or appurtenances related to the tenant: murder,
kidnapping, sexual assault, robbery, burglary, aggravated kidnapping,
prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, pandering, obscenity, child
pornography, sale or distribution of obscene publications, possession of
explosives, unlawful use of weapons, sale of firearms, gambling, keeping a
gambling place, concealing a fugitive, violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act, violation of the cannabis control act or commission of any
other crime under state or federal law not specifically listed above.
Prohibition of these offenses applies also to members of the tenant's
household, guests or other parties under control of the tenant.
      2.   Additional Offenses: Rental of a rental unit, or residential rental
housing to a tenant who allows any of the following offenses to occur on or
near the rental unit, common areas or appurtenances relating to the tenant:
commission of four (4) or more village ordinance violations in a six (6) month
period or an unreasonably high number of calls for police service including,
but not limited to, calls that may fall within the descriptions listed above
that when compared to other properties in the village of similar type,
reasonably indicate that the activity at this property is out of character for
the area and is impacting the quality of life of those in the area. Prohibition
of these offenses applies also to members of the tenant's household, guests or
other parties under control of the tenant.
      3.   Police Assistance: The village of Midlothian police department crime
free housing coordinator will attempt to assist property owners in proceedings
for the eviction of tenants that have committed any of the above referenced
offenses, but shall not provide legal advice or engage in the unauthorized
practice of law as set forth in the Illinois attorney act.
      4.   Evidence: For purposes of subsections (G)1 and (G)2 of this section,
it shall be sufficient evidence that a described offense occurred if the
offender has been arrested or cited for one or more of the offenses described
in subsection (G)1 or (G)2 of this section. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
      5.   Exception: No tenant or landlord shall be penalized, considered for
eviction or declared a nuisance based upon the following:
         (a)   Any contact made to police or other emergency services if: 1)
the contact was made with the intent to prevent or respond to domestic violence
or sexual violence; 2) the intervention or emergency assistance was needed to
respond to or prevent domestic violence or sexual violence; or 3) the contact
was made by, on behalf of, or otherwise concerns an individual with a
disability and the purpose of the contact was related to that individual's
disability;
         (b)   An incident or incidents of actual or threatened domestic
violence or sexual violence against a tenant, household member or guest
occurring in the dwelling unit or on the premises; or
         (c)   Criminal activity or a local ordinance violation occurring in
the dwelling unit or on the premises that is directly relating to domestic
violence or sexual violence, engaged in by a tenant, member of a tenant's
household, guest, or other party, and against a tenant, household member, guest
or other party.
      6.   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this section:
      CONTACT: Includes any communication made by a tenant, landlord, guest,
neighbor, or other individual to police or other emergency services.
      CRIMINAL ACTIVITY: A violation of the criminal code of 2012, as amended,
of the cannabis control act, of the Illinois controlled substances act or of
the methamphetamine control and community protection act.
      DISABILITY: With respect to a person:
         (a)   A physical or mental impairment which substantially limits one
or more of such person's major life activities;
         (b)   A record of having such an impairment; or
         (c)   Being regarded as having such an impairment, but such term does
not include current, illegal use of or addiction to a controlled substance, as
defined in the federal controlled substances act, 21 USC section 802.
      DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, LANDLORD, SEXUAL VIOLENCE AND TENANT: Shall have those
meanings provided under section 10 of the safe homes act.
      DWELLING UNIT: Has the meaning provided under subsection (a) of section
15 of the landlord tenant act.
      PENALIZES: Includes, but is not limited to:
         (a)   Assessment of fees or fines;
         (b)   Revocation, suspension, or nonrenewal of any license or permit
required for the rental or occupancy of any dwelling unit;
         (c)   Termination or denial of a subsidized housing contract or
housing subsidy; and
         (d)   Termination or nonrenewal of a residential lease agreement.
      SUBSIDIZED HOUSING: Has the meaning provided under subsection (a) of
section 9-119 of the code of civil procedure. (Ord. 1905, 11-11-2015)
   (H)   Required Class Training: The owner of any residential rental housing,
the owner's agent, and when applicable, the property management agent of any
residential rental housing, shall register, attend and successfully complete a
landlord "crime free rental housing program" training class conducted by the
village of Midlothian within three (3) months from the date of the issuance of
a license or renewal license for any residential rental housing.
      1.   An owner or owner's agent of any residential rental housing who
successfully completes the village landlord training class for "crime free
rental housing program" shall not be required to attend and complete a landlord
training class following the issuance of any subsequent license or renewal
license for any residential rental housing as long as all properties stay in
compliance with the "crime free rental housing program" requirements. If a
residential rental property owner or owner's agent has successfully completed
and received a certificate of completion of the required "crime free rental
housing" training class from another Illinois municipality meeting the
requirements of this chapter in the last five (5) years, the class requirement
will be waived with verification of the certificate.
      2.   If the "crime free rental housing program" class is not attended or
certification is denied, the residential rental license for all properties
owned or managed by that owner or property manager will be denied or revoked.
Penalties set forth in this chapter for nonlicense compliance will be
applicable.
      3.   When a new owner's agent or property management agent is hired for a
residential rental property and that owner's agent or property management agent
has not attended and successfully completed a landlord training class for
"crime free rental housing program" by the village, the new property agent
shall attend and successfully complete this class within three (3) months from
the date of the person's hiring as the owner's agent or property management
agent for the residential rental property. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-9: FEES:
The village board shall set the amount of the registration and residential
rental housing license fees by resolution or ordinance in a fee schedule to be
maintained by the village clerk and which shall be made available to the public
upon request. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010; amd. Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
4-19-10: ZONING ORDINANCE:
No residential rental housing shall be created or occupied unless it complies
with the provisions of the village of Midlothian zoning ordinance and other
applicable village ordinances.
   (A)   New Residential Rental Housing: No new residential rental housing
shall be established or added, nor shall the occupancy limit of any residential
rental housing be increased except in conformity with the village zoning
ordinance and all other applicable village ordinances.
   (B)   Existing Abandoned Residential Rental Housing: Residential rental
housing that has been abandoned, as defined herein, have lost rental status for
any reason, are otherwise unlicensed, unregistered or have not been inspected
in accordance with this chapter, shall lose or forfeit any previously existing
legal nonconformity and must meet current standards and requirements prior to
occupancy. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-11: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE:
No residential rental housing shall be occupied or continued to be occupied
unless the structure in which said unit is located complies with the provisions
and standards of the property maintenance code adopted by the village of
Midlothian as chapter 18 of this title and is maintained in a structurally
sound condition and kept free from health, fire and other hazards to life and
property.
   (A)   General Repair: The owner of residential rental housing shall be
responsible for keeping the premises maintained in good repair and fit for
human habitation, which shall include the building's interior and exterior and
all living areas. Repairs may require obtaining proper village building
permits.
   (B)   Exterior And Site: The building exterior and sites which residential
rental housing are located shall be maintained and be in compliance with
village ordinances, including, but not limited to:
      1.   Building exterior envelope: walls, roof, soffits, doors, windows,
etc.
      2.   Building address.
      3.   Landscaping.
      4.   Parking lot spaces and access aisle repair and maintenance.
      5.   Roof and site water drainage of an "approved" design.
      6.   Public and private sidewalks.
      7.   The property maintenance code adopted by the village of Midlothian
as chapter 18 of this title.
   (C)   Exterior Balconies: Exterior balconies and porches may not be used as
storage areas.
   (D)   Equipment Safety And Maintenance: Every facility, piece of equipment,
utility or service which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed
and/or installed to function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in
satisfactory working condition and shall not be removed, shut off or
disconnected in any occupied residential rental housing, except for such
temporary interruptions as may be necessary while actual repairs or alterations
are in process or during temporary emergencies or tenant's failure to pay
agreed upon services. Utilities or services shared by more than one unit shall
be the owner's responsibility to maintain.
   (E)   Rodents, Insects, And Other Pests: All structures shall be kept free
from insect and rodent infestation. A licensed pest control company shall
inspect and/or treat all residential rental housing annually. Receipts or
reports must be made available upon request to the village inspector. All
structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly exterminated
by approved processes that will not be injurious to human health. If, upon
inspection, there is an insect or rodent infestation in more than one dwelling
unit, the owner shall be required to contract with a licensed extermination
company to treat all common areas and infested units not less than on a monthly
basis for the remainder of the license year.
   (F)   Garbage Containers: Providing for garbage and rubbish removal and
supplying such facilities or containers as are necessary for the sanitary
disposal of all garbage and rubbish is a condition of occupancy. Storage of all
containers shall be at the rear of the building in such a manner as to be
concealed from view from the street or public way of such building. All areas
surrounding the containers must be clean and free of garbage or refuse at all
times. The containers must be emptied at a frequency so that garbage and
rubbish does not overflow provided containers. It is the owner's responsibility
to provide the appropriate type and number of such facilities or containers.
   (G)   Interior Storage: In a common area, patio, balcony, hallway,
stairwell, or in any living areas, it shall be unlawful to:
      1.   Accumulate and store building materials, lumber, boxes, cartons,
scrap metal, machinery, junk, flammable or hazardous materials or devices in
such quantities or in such a manner as to create a fire, health, or other
hazard to the premises or persons residing therein.
      2.   Store gasoline and similar combustible liquids (if in a multi-
family dwelling such liquids must be locked in an approved fire resistant
cabinet).
      3.   Store a motorcycle, moped, gasoline powered lawn mower, snowblower,
or other similar equipment which may contain a hazardous material including,
without limitation, gasoline.
   (H)   Public Utilities: Water, electric, and natural gas utilities must be
made available and operational in buildings and rental residential units for
occupancy approval. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-12: RESIDENTIAL RENTAL HOUSING STANDARDS:
All new and existing residential rental housing shall meet the standards set
forth in chapter 18 of this title and this chapter. In the event of conflict
between standards, the more stringent standard shall apply.
   (A)   Bathroom Equipment: Full bathrooms, shall contain the following
minimum equipment:
      1.   One flush toilet with at least thirty two inches (32") of clear
shoulder width and eighteen inches (18") clear space in front.
      2.   One sink connected to hot and cold running water.
      3.   One bathtub or shower stall connected to hot and cold running water.
      4.   All bathrooms and powder rooms shall be contained within a separate
room providing privacy from other portions of the unit or building.
   (B)   Kitchen Equipment: Kitchens, where required, shall contain the
following minimum equipment:
      1.   One sink connected to hot and cold running water.
      2.   Space and safe access to utility hookups for adequate refrigeration
and cooking appliances.
      3.   Fixed counter space made of impermeable, cleanable and durable
material for food preparation consisting of a minimum of three (3) continuous
linear feet and a minimum of eighteen inches (18") deep.
      4.   Adequate storage space for food, dishes, cookware and utensils in
proportion to the number of occupants configured in a manner to prevent
contamination from food preparation, cleaning activities, pets or vermin.
Storage space may not be directly on the floor unless within a pantry or
closet.
   (C)   Living Space Requirements For Tenants:
      1.   Prohibited Occupancy: Kitchens, living, family, dining rooms and
nonhabitable spaces shall not be used for sleeping purposes. More occupants
than permitted by the minimum area requirements of this chapter shall not
occupy residential rental housing.
      2.   Bedrooms: Every bedroom occupied by one person shall contain at
least seventy (70) square feet of floor area. Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one occupant shall contain at least fifty (50) square
feet of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age and over and at
least thirty five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant less than
twelve (12) years of age.
      3.   Access From Bedrooms: Bedrooms shall not constitute the only means
of access to other bedrooms or habitable spaces and shall not serve as the only
means of egress from other habitable spaces.
      4.   Living Rooms: Living rooms shall be a minimum of one hundred twenty
(120) square feet.
      5.   Dining Rooms: Dining rooms shall be a minimum of eighty (80) square
feet.
   (D)   Plumbing Requirements: All plumbing fixtures, including sinks,
bathtubs, shower stalls and toilets, shall be installed per the state of
Illinois plumbing code and constructed of dense, durable, nonabsorbent
materials and shall have smooth impervious surfaces free from defects and
concealed surfaces unable to be kept sanitary.
      1.   All plumbing fixtures shall be properly maintained, vented and
connected to the village municipal water and/or sewer system.
      2.   All units must have water service to be considered habitable. Any
unit lacking potable water service must be vacated immediately.
   (E)   Heating Requirements:
      1.   The owner or manager of any residential rental housing shall have
heating facilities which are properly installed, maintained in safe and good
working condition, and are capable of safely and adequately heating all
habitable rooms, bathroom, and water closet compartments contained therein to a
minimum temperature of sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F), at a distance of
three feet (3') above floor level. Between the period of October 1 and May 15
of the succeeding year the owner or manager of any residential rental housing
within the village shall provide heat to those persons occupying said
residential rental housing as provided in the following schedules:
   A minimum temperature of seventy degrees Fahrenheit (70°F) from six thirty
o'clock (6:30) A.M. to eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. averaged throughout any room
occupied by the tenant when the outdoor temperature is minus twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (-20°F) or above.
   A minimum temperature of sixty five degrees Fahrenheit (65°F) from eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. to six thirty o'clock (6:30) A.M. averaged throughout any
room occupied by the tenant when outdoor temperature is minus twenty degrees
Fahrenheit (-20°F) or above.
   Gas or electric appliances designed exclusively for cooking or water heating
purposes shall not be considered as heating facilities.
      2.   Any unit where the utility or service required for operation of the
heating system has been removed; shut off or disconnected shall be considered
uninhabitable and must be vacated immediately.
      3.   All gas duct furnaces must be vented to the exterior. All duct
furnaces shall be tested in accordance with ANSI Z83.8 or UL795 and shall be
installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation instructions.
Heating plants designed or intended to serve one or more dwelling units shall
not be located in a habitable room.
      4.   No heater shall be operated with the use of an extension cord. All
floor furnaces shall be approved and tested in accordance with ANSI Z21.86/CSA
2.32 and shall be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions.
      5.   Heaters and vents shall be installed with clearances from
combustible materials in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instruction.
      6.   Any unit or service required for operation of the heating system(s)
must be maintained by the building owner.
      7.   For the protection of building tenants, the village may require the
heating system to be inspected and repaired by a qualified heating system
specialist whenever a hazard condition is apparent or may be considered
possible.
   (F)   Electrical Requirements:
      1.   All electrical wiring shall be protected by a circuit breaker or
fuse. Every room in a rental unit, except a bathroom shall be equipped with not
less than two (2) duplex outlets. Bathrooms shall have at least one outlet.
      2.   Residential rental housing shall have a minimum electrical service
of at least one hundred (100) amps.
      3.   Where provisions are made for major electrical appliances requiring
two hundred twenty (220) volt service such as room heaters, air conditioners,
stoves, washers and dryers, such units shall be on individual circuits.
      4.   No electrical circuit shall serve more than one residential rental
unit.
      5.   Every outlet, circuit, fixture, load center, service entrance or
other component shall be maintained in a safe working condition.
      6.   All kitchen and bathroom outlets shall be equipped with ground fault
circuit interruption (GFCI) outlets.
      7.   All work performed on electrical systems in residential rental
housing must be performed in accordance with applicable codes and regulations
and may require permits and/or additional inspections. Electrical contractors
providing service shall be licensed and bonded as required by village
ordinances.
   (G)   Stairways And Steps Standards:
      1.   All stairways, both interior and exterior, shall be maintained in a
safe condition, as required by chapter 18 of this title or other village
ordinances.
      2.   Building common area stairways must remain illuminated at all times.
Lighting standards for stairways shall not be reduced.
      3.   Storage is not allowed under or near stairwells.
   (H)   Handrails And Guardrails:
      1.   Stairway Handrails: Continuous handrails shall be placed on both
sides of stairways accessible to the general public. Handrail height shall be
not less than thirty inches (30"), nor more than thirty four inches (34"),
measured vertically at the tread nosing for stairways with three (3) or more
risers. Stairways within individual dwelling units may be on one side of the
stairway. Handrails acting as a guardrail along stairways shall follow the
details for guardrail openings in subsection (H)3 of this section.
      2.   Guardrails: Porches, balconies, landings, or raised floors surfaces
located more than thirty inches (30") above the floor or grade below shall have
a guardrail not less than forty two inches (42") above the floor or grade below
in areas open to the general public. Guardrail height may be reduced to thirty
six inches (36") in height when located within a single-family dwelling unit.
      3.   Guardrail Openings: Handrails or guardrails on open sides where the
floor or grade below is more than eighteen inches (18") shall have intermediate
rails, parts, or closures which will not allow passage of an object six inches
(6") in diameter.
   (I)   Light And Ventilation:
      1.   Every bathroom not containing an operable window shall provide
adequate light and mechanical ventilation. Ventilation must vent to the
outside.
      2.   Other permitted living areas without direct access to the exterior
via an operable door or window must provide adequate light and ventilation.
      3.   In every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes, flies and
other insects, every door used or intended to be used for ventilation opening
directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have supplied and
installed screens and a self- closing device; and every window or other device
with opening to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation,
shall likewise be supplied with screens installed. Insect screens must be in
place on all doors, windows and other outside openings required for ventilation
of habitable rooms.
   (J)   Moisture:
      1.   All living areas shall be kept dry and free from exterior moisture
penetration.
      2.   Building components, including enclosed cavities, which have become
wet for any reason, shall be dried adequately to prevent mold growth.
      3.   All areas of a dwelling unit, including nonliving areas of or
adjacent to the dwelling unit, shall be kept free of water entry or standing
water. Measures must be taken to prevent moisture contact with permeable
building components or other materials.
   (K)   Fire Safety And Exits: Dwelling units shall be provided with two (2)
independent fire escape routes. An escape route such as an exterior porch roof,
an accessible operable exterior window or an exterior door or landing may
constitute an independent fire escape route. Exterior fire escapes shall be
designed to prevent the accumulation of snow or ice.
      1.   Exit Requirements: Every bedroom shall have at least one operable
exterior window or exterior door constructed to permit emergency exit or
rescue.
         (a)   Bedrooms protected by a functioning approved sprinkler system
that is tested and certified annually by a qualified inspector may have no
direct exterior exit.
         (b)   Where no exterior door or window exists in a bedroom, two (2)
doors are required.
         (c)   Each door must open into a different room or area and lead to an
independent exit of the unit.
         (d)   Minimum clear window openings shall be eight hundred twenty
(820) square inches (5.7 square feet) with a minimum of twenty four inches
(24") high and a minimum of twenty inches (20") wide. Opening must be
attainable without the use of tools. Bottom of the opening shall be no more
than forty four inches (44") above the floor or to the top of an appropriate
fixed step or platform.
      2.   Smoke Detectors:
         (a)   An electrical (hardwired) smoke detector in each bedroom is
required as regulated by state of Illinois and this code as applicable at time
of building permit issuance.
         (b)   Smoke detectors operated by battery are only acceptable as
allowed by village ordinance and as permitted by the Illinois smoke detector
act 1  and the Illinois facilities requiring smoke detector act 2 .
         (c)   In the case of any dwelling unit that is newly constructed,
reconstructed, or substantially remodeled after December 31, 1987, the
requirements of this section shall apply beginning on the first day of
occupancy of the dwelling unit after such construction, reconstruction or
substantial remodeling. The smoke detectors required in such dwelling unit
shall be permanently wired into the structure's AC power line, and if more than
one detector is required to be installed within the dwelling unit, the
detectors shall be wired so that the actuation of one detector will actuate all
the detectors in the dwelling unit.
         (d)   All smoke alarms shall be listed in accordance with UL 217 and
installed in accordance with the provisions of village ordinances and the
household fire warning equipment provisions of NFPA 72.
            (1)   Smoke detectors are to be installed as required by the
manufacturer and placed on each and every floor level including the basement,
all bedrooms and on the ceiling or wall outside of each separate sleeping area
in the immediate vicinity of bedrooms.
            (2)   Smoke detectors should be installed in all multi-unit common
area hallways, exit passageways, and stairwells.
            (3)   Areas separated by doors or distance may require additional
smoke detectors.
            (4)   All substantially remodeled or rewired, enlarged, expanded,
or otherwise upgraded units shall meet all applicable codes including having
interconnected smoke detectors.
            (5)   All systems, devices and equipment to detect a fire, actuate
an alarm, or suppress or control a fire or any combination thereof shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times in accordance with the
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA). Maintaining the operable condition
of all smoke detectors shall be the responsibility of the owner and managing
agent. Should any smoke detectors be found to have been removed, disabled, or
destroyed by the tenant, the tenant shall be deemed guilty of a municipal
infraction under the provisions of this chapter or state laws as applicable.
      3.   Fire Extinguishers: All residential rental housing shall have one
fire extinguisher, 2.5 pound charge, manufactured by an approved testing agency
for combating class A, B, and C fires.
      4.   Carbon Monoxide Detectors: Carbon monoxide detectors shall be the
owner's responsibility for installation as required by the Illinois carbon
monoxide alarm detector's act 3 .
      5.   Fire Separation And Barriers Between Residential Units: Attached
single- and multi-family dwelling units shall maintain wall and ceiling fire
barriers as required from their original building permit requirements. Openings
between residential units and common use areas shall be patched as needed for
controlling the spread of fire. (Units constructed after December 17, 1985,
require a 2 hour fire separation rating for construction per village
ordinance.)
      6.   Mistaken Egress: Any door, passage or stairway which is neither a
means of egress nor access to a means of egress, and which is so located or
arranged as to be mistaken for a means of egress, shall be properly identified
as to its use.
   (L)   Security; Crime Free Rental Housing Program Requirements: The
following requirements provide "crime prevention through environmental design"
(CPTED). Each rental unit must comply with these requirements:
      1.   Dead bolts with three inch (3") screws secured into the building
framing for strike plates on all unit entry doors.
      2.   Antilift slide devices on sliding doors and windows on the first
floor, garden levels and accessible second levels.
      3.   Adequate security lighting for all hallways, entryways, parking lots
and common areas.
      4.   Proper trimming of trees and shrubs, eliminating hiding places.
      5.   Eye views on entry doors with one hundred eighty degree (180°) view.
      6.   All multi-unit buildings must have the building address in clear
view on the front and back of the building. Single residences must have the
building address in clear view on the front of the building. Each of the
figures of every such address on any residence or apartment building shall not
be less than four inches (4") in height. These numbers must contrast with their
background.
      7.   Buzzer type entry security system must be in proper working order
from all of the dwelling units in every multi-unit building with common
entrances. All front and back entry doors must be locked at all times. (Ord.
1722, 5-12-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 425 ILCS 60/1 et seq.
2 2. 425 ILCS 10/0.01 et seq.
3 1. 430 ILCS 135/1 et seq.
4-19-13: PARKING AND BICYCLES:
   (A)   Off street parking shall be provided and maintained for all
residential rental housing in accordance with the standards set forth in the
village of Midlothian zoning ordinance and other village ordinances.
   (B)   Secure bicycle stands shall be provided where necessary or as
requested by tenants. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-14: TENANT RESPONSIBILITIES:
Every tenant of residential rental housing shall keep in a clean and sanitary
condition that portion of the premises, both interior and exterior, that the
tenant occupies, uses, shares or controls, including, but not limited to, walls
and carpeting. Every tenant shall ensure that his/her trash, garbage and other
refuse is stored and disposed of in a clean and sanitary manner.
   (A)   No tenant, either by negligence or abuse, shall create or contribute
to the creation of any violation of this code.
   (B)   No tenant shall create or permit to be created by others any noise,
smoke, vibration, fumes, vapor, glare, odor or dust within that portion of the
premises that the tenant occupies, uses or controls which interferes with the
reasonable use and enjoyment of other residential rental housing or of nearby
properties.
   (C)   No tenant shall store flammable or hazardous materials or devices in
such quantities or in such a manner as to create a fire, health, or other
hazard to the premises or other persons.
   (D)   Vehicles are to be parked or driven on improved parking areas or
driveways only, without blocking public access to sidewalks or roadways.
   (E)   In a common area, patio, balcony, hallway, stairwell, or in any living
area, a person shall not store or accumulate a motorcycle, moped, gasoline
powered lawn mower, or other similar equipment which may contain a hazardous
material including, without limitation, gasoline. These areas may not be used
as storage areas. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010)
4-19-15: PENALTIES:
   (A)   General: Any individual person or persons, firm, corporation, or other
entity violating any provision of this chapter or other provisions of this code
shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in this chapter or other
provisions of this code. Such individual person or persons, firm, corporation,
or other entity shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every
day or portion thereof during which such violation is committed, continued, or
permitted, and upon finding that a violation has occurred, shall be fined in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of this chapter and this code for
this and subsequent or continuing violations.
   (B)   Fines:
      1.   Failure to register as an owner: Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
per day for each day not registered.
      2.   No show inspections for designated scheduled times by owner/owner's
agent:
 
First offense  $250.00
Second offense 350.00
Third offense  750.00
 
      3.   Fine up to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), but not less than
two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for violations when a citation or ticket(s)
is/are served. Each day shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-2010;
amd. Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
4-19-16: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section or provision of this chapter be declared by a court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall
not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole, or any part thereof other
than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-
2010)
4-19-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect and be in full force immediately upon approval
of the village board of trustees. After the effective date hereof, it shall be
unlawful for any “owner”, as defined herein, to lease or operate residential
rental housing without registering each separate building with the village of
Midlothian and obtaining a license to operate the dwelling unit(s) in such
registered building(s) as residential rental housing and complying with the
provisions of this chapter and with all other applicable ordinances of the
village of Midlothian, as well as federal and state laws. (Ord. 1722, 5-12-
2010; amd. Ord. 2086, 11-10-2021)
CHAPTER 20
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS 1
SECTION:
4-20-1: Purpose
4-20-2: Definitions
4-20-3: Administrative Composition, Code Hearing Department
4-20-4: Code Hearing Procedures
4-20-5: Defenses To Code Violations
4-20-6: Findings, Decision And Order
4-20-7: Eviction Rights Of Occupants
4-20-8: Review Under Administrative Review Law
4-20-9: Judgment On Findings, Decision And Order
4-20-10: Sanctions Applicable To Owner; Property
4-20-11: Federal Government Contracts; Maintenance Of Property; Penalties
4-20-12: Schedule Of Fines And Penalties
4-20-13: Amnesty Program
 
Notes
1 1. Enforcement of this chapter shall begin on May 1, 1997.
4-20-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the building code violation hearing
court. This chapter also makes provisions for the administrative composition of
this court and establishes rules of procedure and other rules and regulations
in order to maintain a system to expedite the prosecution and correction of
code violations within the village. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-2: DEFINITIONS:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: Any employee of the village of Midlothian designated by the
village to enforce building, zoning or similar laws, or his duly authorized
representative.
CODE: Any municipal ordinance, law, housing or building code or zoning code
that establishes construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention,
sanitation or other health and safety standards that are applicable to
structures or property in a municipality.
FAMILY UNIT: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit of living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
HEARING OFFICER: An individual appointed by the village board, whose duties are
defined in this chapter.
PROPERTY OWNER: One or more persons, a corporation, a partnership or any other
legal entity, jointly or severally in whom is vested all or part of the legal
title to the premises, or all or part of the beneficial ownership and a right
to present use and enjoyment of the premises, including a mortgage holder in
possession. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-3: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION, CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
The system of administrative adjudication of building code violations, shall
provide for a building code compliance administrator, hearing officer, computer
operator/system coordinator and hearing room personnel with the power,
authority and limitations as are hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Building Code Compliance Administrator: Shall be empowered and is
hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
building code violations.
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process building code violation notices and
other notices as may be required under this chapter, as may be reasonably
required to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of violations liability.
      4.   Conduct hearings as hearing officer with the same power and
authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the appointed
hearing officer.
      5.   Certify copies of final determination(s) of building code violation
(s) liability and factual reports verifying that the final determination of
building code violation liability was issued in accordance with this chapter.
      6.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administration adjudication of the building code violation system
hereby created.
      7.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
circuit court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of the village in filing complaints, seeking judgments for unpaid fines
or penalties and pursuits of all postjudgment remedies available by current
law.
   (B)   Hearing Officer: "Hearing officer" means a municipal employee or an
officer or agent of a municipality, other than a building inspector or law
enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
      1.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists.
      2.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation.
      3.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing
and all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing.
      4.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether
a code violation exists.
      5.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production
of relevant papers or documentation.
      6.   Assess fines and penalties.
      7.   Make final determination of building code violation liability. (Ord.
1406, 1-22-1997)
The hearing officer appointed under this section may be the same hearing
officer appointed under subsection 10-17-2(B) or section 6-11-2 of this code.
(Ord. 1876, 9-10-2014)
   (C)   Computer Operator/System Coordinator: Are hereby authorized and
directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative
adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information.
      2.   Hearing date(s) and notice dates.
      3.   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).
      4.   Issue payment receipts.
      5.   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of
liability as directed by the building code compliance administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      6.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   (D)   Hearing Room Personnel: Are hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court.
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or building code compliance administrator.
      4.   This position is limited to off duty, full time, part time or
auxiliary police officers.
   (E)   Appointments: The village president is hereby authorized to appoint
persons to hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill
the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.
   (F)   Compensation: To be paid for each of the above stated positions as
determined by the village president and approved by the village board of
trustees. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-4: CODE HEARING PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Citation Issuance: At the end of the time the building superintendent
has allowed for correction of any building code violation previously cited, and
the property is reinspected, and it is determined by the building
superintendent or his authorized representative that such violation has not
been corrected, he may issue a building code violation citation. The citation
will inform the owner of the following:
      1.   Name and address of structure owner.
      2.   Address of structure where the violation was observed.
      3.   Type and nature of violation.
      4.   Time and date violation was observed.
      5.   Name of witnesses of the violation.
      6.   Signature of building department representative.
      7.   Date, time and place of code violation hearing.
   (B)   Serving Of Citation: One copy of the violation shall be retained by
the building department for their files, one copy given to the building code
compliance administrator for processing and one copy shall be served on the
building owner at the time of issuance. If the building owner is unavailable to
receive a copy of said citation, it will be served by first class mail. A
summons from the administrator stating the citation number, date, time and
place of building code violation hearing shall also be served on the owner by
first class mail. If the building owner cannot be ascertained or service on the
owner cannot be made by mail, then service may be made on the owner by posting
or nailing a copy of the citation on the front door of the structure where the
violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled. Service may also be made by police in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-11, or in any other manner provided by law.
   (C)   Hearing Date: The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) days
nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is reported by the building
department.
   (D)   Subpoenas And Defaults: At any time prior to the hearing date the
hearing officer assigned to hear the case may, at the request of the building
inspector or the attorney for the village, or the owner or his attorney, issue
subpoenas directing witnesses to appear and give testimony at the hearing. If
on the date set for hearing the owner or his attorney fail to appear, the
hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a building code
violation.
   (E)   Continuances; Representation At Building Code Hearing: No continuances
shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under this chapter
except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to protect the
rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by the hearing officer under this
chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. The case for Midlothian may be
presented by the building superintendent or by any other employee of the
village or by an attorney designated by the village. However, in no event shall
the case for the municipality be presented by an employee of the building code
hearing department. The case for the dwelling owner may be presented by the
owner, his attorney or any other agent or representative.
   (F)   Hearing Evidence: At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and
hear testimony and accept any evidence relevant to the existence or
nonexistence of a building code violation in the structure indicated. The
strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings shall not apply to
hearings authorized by this chapter.
   (G)   Correction Of Violation Before Hearing: If the building owner corrects
the building code violation and the building department reinspects and approves
the correction in not less than seven (7) days before the hearing date, the
building superintendent may instruct the building code violation administrator
to cancel the hearing for said violation. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-5: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS:
It shall be a defense to a building code violation charge under this chapter if
the owner, his attorney or other agent or representative proves to the hearing
officer's satisfaction that:
   (A)   The building code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact
exist, or at the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or
removed.
   (B)   The building code violation has been caused by the current property
occupants and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the
dwelling free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations.
   (C)   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or his agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting the
building code violation. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-6: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall make a determination
on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a building
code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be
designated as "findings, decision and order". The "findings, decision and
order" shall include the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether
or not the building code violation exists based on the findings of fact, and an
order, ordering the owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case, in
the event a violation is not proved. If a building code violation is proved,
the order may also impose the sanctions that are provided in the building code
for the violation proved. A copy of the findings, decision and order shall be
served on the owner within five (5) days after they are issued; service shall
be in the same manner the citation and summons are served pursuant to this
chapter. Payment of any fine or penalty imposed shall be made to the village in
care of the office of the village clerk. When collected, the fines and
penalties shall be paid into the treasury of the village. Payment of a fine
does not relieve the owner of any violation. The dwelling must still be brought
into compliance. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-7: EVICTION RIGHTS OF OCCUPANTS:
No action of eviction, abatement of nuisance, forcible entry or detainment or
other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against the occupant
of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a
building code violation hearing. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
4-20-8: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review by the circuit court of Cook County and the provisions of the
administrative review law 1 , and all amendments and modifications thereto, and
the rules adopted pursuant thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern
every action of the judicial review of the final findings, decision and order
of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101 et seq.
4-20-9: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
   (A)   Any fine, other sanctions or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion, or the failure
to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review law
shall be a debt due and owing to the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the
building code violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit
court of Cook County for the purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings,
decision and order. The village may consolidate multiple findings, decision and
order against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action
the village shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision and order,
which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts sufficient to
show that the findings, decision and order were issued in accordance with 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., and this chapter. Service of
the summons and a copy of the petition may be made by any method provided by
section 2-203 of the code of civil procedure 1  or by certified mail, return
receipt requested, provided that the total amount of the fines, other sanctions
and costs imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the
findings, decision and order were entered in accordance with 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., and this chapter and that the property
owner had an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with 65 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq., and for judicial review as provided in 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-1 et seq.:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
      2.   The court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are
requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct
a building code violation. (Ord. 1406, 1-22-1997)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/2-203.
4-20-10: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER; PROPERTY:
   (A)   The order to correct a building code violation and the sanctions
imposed by the village as a result of a finding of a code violation under this
chapter shall attach to the property, as well as to the owner of the property,
so that a finding of building code violation against one owner cannot be
avoided by conveying or transferring the property to another owner. Any
subsequent transferee or owner of property takes, subject to the findings,
decision and order of a hearing officer.
   (B)   The village may file a lien upon the real estate in question, sixty
(60) days after the final finding of a village code violation or violations and
sanctions have been imposed by the village by filing notice of the lien in the
office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County, Illinois. Said notice shall
consist of a sworn statement setting out: 1) the description of the real estate
sufficient for identification thereof; 2) the amount of money representing any
fine and sanctions, in the form of costs assessed or otherwise; 3) a statement
of the violation or violations of the code that were found to exist; and 4) the
date or dates of which the findings of the violations and sanctions were
imposed. Upon the property being brought into compliance with this code and
upon the payment of any and all fines imposed, including the costs of preparing
and recording the lien and the costs of preparing the appropriate release of
lien, the lien shall be released by the village. (Ord. 1445, 9-9-1998)
4-20-11: FEDERAL GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS; MAINTENANCE OF PROPERTY; PENALTIES:
   (A)   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including, without limitation, the department of housing and urban
development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct village municipal health
and safety code violations.
   (B)   A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred one dollars
($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 1406, 1-22-
1997)
4-20-12: SCHEDULE OF FINES AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
the building code shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during which a violation occurs
or continues.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided for in this chapter, the village
may file suit seeking the demolition, repair, enclosure, or such other relief,
as provided for in the Illinois statutes or village ordinances. (Ord. 1406, 1-
22-1997)
4-20-13: AMNESTY PROGRAM:
From time to time, the village board may implement an amnesty program for fines
and penalties assessed under this chapter. In order to do so, the village board
shall adopt an ordinance or resolution setting forth the time period within
which the amnesty program will be conducted, the percentage or amounts of fines
and penalties that will be required to be paid and other necessary terms as
determined by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1685, 4-22-2009)
CHAPTER 21
PAYMENT STAMPS
SECTION:
4-21-1: Definitions
4-21-2: Real Estate Payment Stamp
4-21-3: Appeals
4-21-4: Exemptions
4-21-5: Payment Stamp On Exempt Parcels
4-21-6: Violation; Penalty
4-21-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given to them in this section. Whenever the words "dwelling",
"dwelling unit", or "structure" are used in this chapter, they shall be
construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof".
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used as a residence,
including mobile homes, but excluding boarding or lodging houses, nursing
homes, motels, hotels, tourist homes, tents and recreational vehicles.
DWELLING UNIT: A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities
for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping,
eating, cooking and sanitation.
OCCUPANT: Any person living, sleeping, cooking or eating in or having actual
possession of, a dwelling unit.
OWNER: Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
   (A)   Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
   (B)   Shall have charge, or care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, prime tenant, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administration, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner.
Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be bound to comply
with the provisions of this chapter to the same extent as if such person were
the owner.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or limited
liability entity.
PROPERTY: Parcel or parcels of real estate on which a dwelling or structure
exists.
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER ORDINANCE: This chapter, as amended from time to time.
STRUCTURE: An enclosed building over a parcel of land, having a roof and walls.
TENANT: An occupant who occupies a dwelling or dwelling unit, pursuant to a
written or oral agreement with a landlord covering a definite or indefinite
period of one week or more. (Ord. 1643, 4-11-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
4-21-2: REAL ESTATE PAYMENT STAMP:
   (A)   Stamp Requirement Upon Real Estate Transfer:
      1.   Compliance: No owner, agent, or person in charge of a dwelling or a
structure used as a dwelling shall sell, convey, quit claim, trade, or
otherwise transfer same unless said dwelling, structure or property shall have
been determined to be in compliance with all of the provisions of this chapter,
as evidenced by a payment stamp issued by the deputy village clerk or his/her
designee.
      2.   Issuance Of Stamp; Payment Of Village Debts Required: The payment
stamp set forth in subsection (A)1 of this section shall not be issued until
all outstanding debts due from the dwelling, structure or property in question
to the village (including, but not limited to, water fees, sewer fees, refuse
fees, and building code fines) have been paid in full.
      3.   Title Insurance Reports: The requirement of obtaining the payment
stamp, and payment of debts and fees shall be mandatory on all transfers of
ownership of or beneficial interest in all dwellings, structures and property
within the village. This requirement shall further be reflected on all real
estate title insurance reports conducted precedent to the transfer of ownership
to give public notice of the mandatory payment of debts and issuance of the
payment stamp. Copies of this chapter shall be sent to all title insurance
companies with notice that the mandatory payment of debts and payment stamp is
required on any transfer of ownership of real estate in the village.
      4.   Provision Of Affidavit: In addition to the payment of all
outstanding debts owed to the village, the payment stamp set forth in this
subsection shall not be issued until the seller has provided an affidavit, in a
form acceptable to the village, which sets forth that the seller is in
compliance with section 4-18-21 of this title with regard to smoke detectors
and carbon monoxide alarm detectors. In addition, the affidavit shall set forth
that the seller is in compliance with the Illinois smoke detector act and the
Illinois carbon monoxide alarm detector act.
      5.   Application For Payment Stamp: Any person owning real estate located
within the village shall, at the time of offering the real estate for sale or
transfer, but not less than fourteen (14) business days prior to any proposed
sale, assignment or other transfer of any legal or beneficial interest of said
real estate, file for an application for a payment stamp with the deputy
village clerk or his/her designee.
      6.   Issuance: If the deputy village clerk establishes that no debts or
fees are owed on the dwelling, structure or property, then the deputy village
clerk or designee shall issue a payment stamp for said dwelling, structure or
property which shall be affixed upon the original deed or document of transfer.
The payment stamp shall indicate that such dwelling, structure or property
complies with the requirements of this chapter. The village shall affix the
payment stamp upon the original deed or document of transfer. A record of all
payment stamps shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk and
copies shall be furnished, upon request, to any person having an interest or
tenancy interest in the dwelling, structure or property affected.
   (B)   Fees: There shall be no charge to obtain a payment stamp provided that
there are no unpaid debts or fees due the village. In the event there are
unpaid debts or fees owed to the village, the applicant shall pay such
outstanding debts or fees prior to the issuance of the payment stamp by the
village. (Ord. 1643, 4-11-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
4-21-3: APPEALS:
   (A)   Any person whose application for a payment stamp is denied because the
deputy village clerk has determined that debts or fees are owed the village may
appeal the denial in writing. Such appeal shall be filed within five (5)
business days from the date of the denial of the issuance of the stamp and
shall include evidence supporting the applicant's appeal.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an appeal, the deputy village clerk shall submit the
appeal to the village clerk. The village clerk shall review the evidence
presented by the applicant with the applicant's appeal. The village clerk shall
issue a written decision within six (6) business days and shall either:
      1.   Deny the appeal and instruct the deputy village clerk to refrain
from issuing the payment stamp until the applicant pays the debts owed; or
      2.   Issue a variance and instruct the deputy clerk to issue the payment
stamp subject to the conditions set forth in his/her decision. The village
clerk may grant a variance from the requirements of this chapter only when the
owner or manager can prove that:
         (a)   All outstanding debts due from the dwelling, structure or
property in question to the village (including, but not limited to, water fees,
sewer fees, refuse fees, and building code fines) have previously been paid in
full; or
         (b)   Compliance with requirements of these codes will place an
extreme hardship on the owner or manager; or
         (c)   Special conditions identified by the applicant make compliance
impossible. (Ord. 1643, 4-11-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
4-21-4: EXEMPTIONS:
The following deeds or trust documents shall be exempt from the provisions of
this chapter, except as provided in this section:
   (A)   Deeds to or trust documents relating to: 1) property acquired by any
governmental body or from any governmental body, and 2) property or interests
transferred between governmental bodies.
   (B)   Deeds or trust documents that secure a debt or other obligation.
   (C)   Deeds or trust documents, that, without additional consideration,
confirm, correct, modify, or supplement a deed or trust document previously
recorded.
   (D)   Deeds or trust documents where the actual consideration is less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00), and there is no change of occupancy.
   (E)   Deeds or trust documents that release property that is a security for
a debt or other obligation. (Ord. 1643, 4-11-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
4-21-5: PAYMENT STAMP ON EXEMPT PARCELS:
   (A)   A payment stamp shall be issued provided that the property meets one
of the qualifications for exemption provided in section 4-21-4 of this chapter.
   (B)   No fee shall be charged for the application for the payment stamp for
exempt property. (Ord. 1643, 4-11-2007, eff. 6-1-2007)
4-21-6: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   (A)   Any firm, person or corporation who participates in a sale or transfer
in violation of this chapter as seller, buyer, broker or agent shall be fined
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars
($500.00) for such offense.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing penalties, the village may also institute
a civil action against the violator to compel compliance with this chapter. In
the event civil action is necessary, then the village may recover reasonable
attorney fees and court costs from the violator. (Ord. 1643, 4-11-2007, eff. 6-
1-2007)
CHAPTER 22
APPENDIX A
SECTION:
4-22-1: Building Materials Standards
4-22-1: BUILDING MATERIALS STANDARDS:
The following recognized standards shall serve as a guide in determining the
acceptability and use of materials wherever in the rules and regulations
appendix A is referred to, provided the standards are not in conflict with
specific requirements of the rules.
ABBREVIATION AND NAME OF STANDARD - ADDRESS
     American Concrete Institute
ACI  7400 Second Boulevard
     Detroit, MI
     
AISC American Institute of Steel Construction
     New York, NY
     
     American Society for Testing Material
ASTM 206 South Broad Street
     Philadelphia, PA
     
     Federal Specifications
FS   U.S. Department of Commerce
     Superintendent of Documents
     Washington, D.C.
     
     National Board of Fire Underwriters
NBFU 85 John Street
     New York City, NY
     
     National Lumber Manufacturers Association
NLMA 1319 18th Street, N.W.
     Washington, D.C.
     
     Simplified Practice Recommendations
SPR  U.S. Department of Commerce
     Superintendent of Documents
     Washington, D.C.
     
     Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
UL   207 East Ohio Street
     Chicago, IL
 
Material Standard And Specification Number Or Volume
Material                                Standard And Specification Number Or
                                        Volume
Aggregates, concrete                    ASTM-C 33-44
Aggregates, lightweight                 ASTM-C 130-42
Brick, common                           ASTM-C 62-44
Brick, concrete                         ASTM-C 55-37
Brick, fire                             FS-HH-B-67 lb.
                                        Class B-1a
Brick, sand lime                        ASTM-C 73-39
Building paper, see Paper                
Built up roofs, materials for           UL Built-up roof coverings - 41
Cast stone                              ACI-704-44
Cement, Keene's                         ASTM-C 61-40
Cement, Portland                        ASTM-C 150-44
Cement, prepared masonry (for mortar)   ASTM-SC 91-40
Concrete block, hollow load bearing     ASTM-C 90-44
Concrete block, hollow nonload bearing  ASTM-C 129-39
Concrete block, solid, load bearing     ASTM-C 145-40
Concrete construction, design and       ACI 318-41
materials used in
Copper, sheet                           ASTM-B 152-46T
Fiber board, insulating                 FS-ILL-F 322b
Fiber board, structural                 FS-ILL-F 311
Fire resistive construction             NBFU-Building Code-43, appendix A
Fire-clay, plastic                      FS-HH-R-191
Galvanized sheet metal, see Sheet Metal  
Glass block                             NFBFU Building Code-43 - sec. 807 pg.
                                        122-3-4
Lath, gypsum                            ASTM-C 37-42
Lead, sheet                             FS QQ-L 201
Lime, hydrated                          ASTM-C 6-44
Lime, quick                             ASTM-C 5-26
                                        National Design Specifications for
Lumber, stress grade                    Stress Grade Lumber and Fastenings -
                                        NLMA-44
                                        Wood Structural Design Data Supplement
                                       No. 1 - Working stresses for structural
                                        lumber - NLMA-41
                                        Wood Structural Design Data, supplement
                                       no. 3 - Maximum spans for joists and
                                        rafters - NLMA-41
Metal, gypsum                           FS QQ-B 101c
                                        FS UU-P 31
Metal roofings, see Copper, Lead, Tin,   
Zinc
Mortar, see Cement, prepared masonry     
(for mortar)
Paper, sheathing, waterproof            FS-UU-P 536
Plaster, gypsum                         ASTM-C 28-40
Prepared masonry cement, see Cement      
Roofing felt, asphalt saturated         ASTM-D 226-44
Sheathing board, gypsum                 ASTM-C 79-42
Sheet metal, galvanized                 ASTM-A 93-17
Shingles, asbestos cement               FS-SS 291a
                                        FS-FF-N 101
Shingles, asphalt                       ASTM-D 225-44T
Shingles, slats                         FS-SS-S 451
Slag                                    ASTM-C 33-44
Steel - design, fabrication and
erection of structural steel for        AISC-46
buildings
Steel, reinforcing                      ASTM-A 15-39
Steel, structural                       ASTM-A 7-42
Tile, clay for floor and walls          SPR-R 61-44
(ceramic)
Tile, drain                             ASTM-C 4-24
Tile, load bearing clay                 ASTM-C 34-41
Tile, nonload bearing clay              ASTM-C 56-41
Tin roofing (terse plate)               FS-QQ-T 201
Wall board, composition                 FS UU-W 101a
Wall board, gypsum                      ASTM-C 36-42
Wood siding, see Lumber                  
Wire fabric, galvanized                 FS QQ-B 101c
                                        FS UU-F 31
Zinc                                    FS QQ-Z 301a
 
(Ord., 12-12-1962)
CHAPTER 23
REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE AND VACANT PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-23-1: Purpose And Intent
4-23-2: Definitions
4-23-3: Applicability And Jurisdiction
4-23-4: Establishment Of Registry
4-23-5: Inspection And Registration Of Defaulted Mortgage
4-23-6: Inspection And Registration Of Vacant Property
4-23-7: Maintenance Requirements
4-23-8: Security Requirements
4-23-9: Provisions Supplemental
4-23-10: Public Nuisance
4-23-11: Additional Authority
4-23-12: Opposing, Obstructing Enforcement Officer; Penalty
4-23-13: Immunity Of Enforcement Officer
4-23-14: Penalties
4-23-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of the President and Board of Trustees to
establish a process to address crime, the deterioration and decline in value of
Village neighborhoods caused by properties with prolonged vacancies (in excess
of 30 days) or with defaulted mortgages, regardless of occupancy status located
within the Village, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of
these properties located within the Village. It is the intent of the President
and Board of Trustees to establish a registration program as a mechanism to
help protect neighborhoods from becoming blighted through the lack of adequate
maintenance of properties vacant beyond thirty (30) days, or that are in
default or defaulted, and to facilitate timely intervention by monitoring the
status of distressed and/or vacant properties. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
DEFAULT: Shall mean that the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the
mortgage on the property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the
debt, referred to in the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER: Shall mean any law enforcement officer, building official,
zoning inspector, Code Enforcement Officer, fire inspector, building inspector,
or other person authorized by the Village to enforce the applicable ordinance
(s).
EVIDENCE OF VACANCY: Shall mean any condition that on its own, or combined with
other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the
property is vacant. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to:
overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due utility notices and/or disconnected
utilities; accumulation of trash, junk or debris; abandoned vehicles, auto
parts and/or materials; the absence of furnishings and/or personal items
consistent with habitation or occupancy; the presence of an unsanitary,
stagnant swimming pool; accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers and/or
mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery agents or government
agents; and/or the presence of boards over doors, windows or other openings in
violation of applicable ordinance(s).
FORECLOSURE OR FORECLOSURE ACTION: Shall mean the legal process by which a
mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates or attempts to terminate a property
owner's equitable right of redemption to obtain legal and equitable title to
the real property pledged as security for a debt or the real property subject
to the lien. The legal process is not concluded until the real property
obtained by the mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by certificate of
title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an
arm's length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
MORTGAGEE: Shall mean the creditor, including but not limited to, trustees;
mortgage servicing companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent,
servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any
assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage
agreement; or any other person or entity with the legal right to foreclose on
the real property, excluding governmental entities.
OWNER: Shall mean every person, entity, or mortgagee, who alone or severally
with others:
   (A)   Has legal or equitable title to any real property, dwelling, dwelling
unit, mobile dwelling unit, building, structure, parcel of land, vacant or
otherwise, including but not limited to, a mobile home park; or
   (B)   Has legal care, charge or control of any real property, dwelling,
dwelling unit, mobile dwelling unit, building, structure or parcel of land,
vacant or otherwise, including a mobile home park, in any capacity, including
but not limited to, agent, executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the
estate of the holder of legal title; or
   (C)   Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property, or is a mortgagee
with actual control of access to the property by any means including, but not
limited to, changing locks or putting on a lock box; or
   (D)   Is an agent, trustee, or other person appointed by the courts and
vested with possession or control of any such property. The property manager
shall not be considered the owner.
PROPERTY MANAGER: Means any party designated by the owner as responsible for
inspecting, maintaining and securing real property as required in this chapter.
REAL PROPERTY OR PROPERTY: Shall mean any residential or commercial land and/or
buildings, leasehold improvements and anything affixed to the land, or portion
thereof identified by a property parcel identification number, located in the
Village limits.
REGISTRABLE PROPERTY: Shall mean:
   (A)   Any real property located in the Village, vacant or occupied, that is
encumbered by a mortgage in default, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure
action by the mortgagee or trustee, has been the subject of a foreclosure
action by a mortgagee or trustee and a judgment has been entered, or has been
the subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and any properties
transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale. The designation of a
"default/foreclosure" property as "registrable" shall remain in place until
such time as the property is sold to a non-related bona fide purchaser in an
arm's length transaction or the foreclosure action has been dismissed and any
default on the mortgage has been cured; or
   (B)   Any property that is vacant for more than thirty (30) days or any
cancellation of utility or service, whichever occurs first.
REGISTRY: Shall mean a web-based electronic database of searchable real
property records, used by the Village to allow mortgagees the opportunity to
register defaulted properties and pay applicable fees as required in this
chapter.
SEMI-ANNUAL REGISTRATION: Shall mean six (6) months from the date of the first
action that requires registration, as determined by the Village, or its
designee, and every subsequent six (6). The date of the initial registration
may be different than the date of the first action that required registration.
UTILITIES AND SERVICES: Shall mean any utility and/or service that is essential
for a building to be habitable and/or perform a service necessary to comply
with all Village ordinance(s). This includes, but is not limited to,
electrical, gas, water, sewer, lawn maintenance, pool maintenance, and snow
removal.
VACANT: Shall mean any parcel of land in the Village that contains any building
or structure that is not lawfully occupied for more than thirty (30) days.
(Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-3: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
This chapter applies to defaulted and vacant real property within the Village.
(Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF REGISTRY:
Pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter the Village, or its designee, shall
establish a registry cataloging each Registrable Property within the Village,
which shall contain but not be limited to the following information:
   (A)   The property owner's name, address, phone number, and e-mail address.
If the owner is a legal entity, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, the name, address, phone number, and e-mail address of each
officer, director, individual, or entity having more than a five percent (5%)
interest in such entity;
   (B)   When applicable, the name, address, phone number, and e-mail address
of the owner's agent, property manager, other person responsible for the
maintenance of the registrable property who shall reside or whose office shall
be located within fifty (50) miles of the Village of Midlothian and whom is
designated to receive any and all notices with respect to the property;
   (C)   Address and property tax index number of the registrable property;
   (D)   Type of property (commercial, single-family, duplex, multi-unit,
apartment complex, mobile home, etc.);
   (E)   Whether any person(s) has a legal right to occupy or is occupying the
property;
   (F)   Plan and timeline to abate existing nuisances or code violations (if
applicable); and
   (G)   Other information as the Village may require from time to time. (Ord.
2035, 7-24-2019; amd. Ord. 2127, 8-23-2023)
4-23-5: INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF DEFAULTED MORTGAGE:
   (A)   Any mortgagee who holds a mortgage on real property located within the
Village shall perform an inspection of the property upon it being in default or
defaulted by the mortgagor or prior to the issuance of a notice of default.
   (B)   Property inspected pursuant to subsection (A) of this section that
remains in default or defaulted, shall be inspected every thirty (30) days by
the mortgagee or mortgagee's designee. If an inspection shows a change in the
property's occupancy status the mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that
inspection, update the occupancy status of the property registration.
   (C)   Within ten (10) days of the date any mortgagee declares its mortgage
to be in default or defaulted, the mortgagee shall register the real property
with the Village's registry, and at the time of registration, indicate whether
the property is vacant, and if so shall designate in writing a property manager
to inspect, maintain and secure the real property subject to the mortgage in
default or defaulted. A separate registration is required for each defaulted
property.
   (D)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the mortgagee, the mailing address of the mortgagee, e-mail
address, telephone number and name of the property manager and said person's
address, e-mail address, and telephone number.
   (E)   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable semi-annual registration fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for each defaulted property. Subsequent semi-annual registrations of defaulted
properties and fees in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) are
due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previous registration. Any
registerable property remaining vacant after two (2) years shall pay subsequent
registration fees in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) semi-
annually as provided by this chapter. Said fees shall be used to offset the
costs of: 1) registration and registration enforcement, 2) code enforcement and
mitigation related to defaulted properties, and 3) for any related purposes as
may be adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter. The Building
Superintendent of the Village shall be authorized to waive the fee requirements
of this chapter upon written petition of non-profit entities whose purpose and
effect are to reduce the number of registerable properties as provided for in
this chapter.
   (F)   If the defaulted mortgage and/or servicing on a property is sold or
transferred, the new mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this chapter.
Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new mortgagee shall register the
defaulted property or update the existing registration. Any and all previous
unpaid fees, fines, and penalties, including but not limited to unregistered
periods during the foreclosure process shall be the responsibility of the
mortgagee at the time initial registration and/or semi-annual registrations
were required and are subject to enforcement per this chapter. If the mortgage
on a registrable property is sold or transferred, the new mortgagee is subject
to all the terms of this chapter, and within ten (10) days of the transfer or
sale shall update the existing registration. The previous mortgagee will not be
released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and
penalties accrued during that mortgagee's involvement with the defaulted
property. The provisions of this subsection are cumulative with and in addition
to other available remedies. Moreover, the Village is authorized and empowered
to collect on the previous mortgagee's non-payment of previous fees, fines, and
penalties in any lawful manner.
   (G)   If the mortgagee sells or transfers the defaulted property in a non-
arm's length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this chapter, and within ten (10) days of the
transfer, shall register the defaulted property or update the existing
registration. Any and all previously unpaid fees, fines, and penalties,
regardless of who the mortgagee was at the time registration was required,
including but not limited to unregistered periods during the foreclosure
process, are the responsibility of the new owner of the foreclosed property and
are due and payable with the updated registration. The previous mortgagee will
not be released from the responsibility of paying all previously unpaid fees,
fines, and penalties accrued during that mortgagee's involvement with the
defaulted property. The provisions of this subsection are cumulative with and
in addition to other available remedies.
   (H)   If the defaulted property is not registered, or either the
registration fee or the semi-annual registration fee is not paid within thirty
(30) days of when the registration or semi-annual registration is required
pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the
semi-annual registration fee shall be charged for every thirty-day period, or
portion thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable
with the registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and
registrations required by subsequent owners of the defaulted mortgage and/or
defaulted property. Registrations delinquent greater than thirty (30) days are
also subject to additional fines as described herein.
   (I)   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the mortgagee as well as
any properties transferred to the mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure
or by any other legal means.
   (J)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the mortgage is under foreclosure or in
default or defaulted. Until the mortgage or lien on the property in question is
satisfied, or legally discharged, the desire to no longer pursue foreclosure,
the filing of a dismissal of lis pendens and/or summary of final judgment and/
or certificate of title, voluntary or otherwise, does not exempt any mortgagee
holding the defaulted mortgage, from all the requirements of this chapter as
long as the borrower is in default.
   (K)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as
required by this chapter is a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the Village.
   (L)   If any property is in violation of this chapter the Village may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance and recover the cost of the
outstanding obligation and any additional cost incurred to bring the property
into compliance. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-6: INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF VACANT PROPERTY:
   (A)   Any owner of vacant property located within the Village shall within
thirty (30) days after the property becomes vacant, or within ten (10) days
after assuming ownership of the property, whichever is later, register the real
property with the Village of Midlothian Registry.
   (B)   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the owner, the mailing address of the owner, e-mail
address, and telephone number of the owner, and if applicable, the name and
telephone number of the property manager and said person's address, e-mail
address, and telephone number.
   (C)   At the initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable semi-annual registration fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
for each vacant property. Subsequent semi- annual registrations of vacant
properties and fees in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) are
due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the previous registration. Any
registerable property remaining vacant after two (2) years shall pay subsequent
registration fees in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) semi-
annually as provided by this chapter. Said fees shall be used to offset the
costs of: 1) registration and registration enforcement, 2) code enforcement and
mitigation related to vacant properties, and 3) for any related purposes as may
be adopted in the policy set forth in this chapter.
   (D)   Each individual property on the registry that has been registered for
twelve (12) months or more prior to the effective date shall have thirty (30)
days to renew the registration and pay the semi-annual registration fee as
required by subsection (C) of this section.
   (E)   If the property is sold or transferred, the new owner is subject to
all the terms of this chapter. Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new
owner shall register the vacant property or update the existing registration.
The previous owner(s) will not be released from the responsibility of paying
all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during the owner's
involvement with the vacant property.
   (F)   If the vacant property is not registered, or either the registration
fee or the semi-annual registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of
when the registration or semi-annual registration is required pursuant to this
section, a late fee equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the semi-annual
registration fee shall be charged for every thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the
registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and
registrations required by subsequent owners of the vacant property.
   (G)   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the semi-
annual registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the property is vacant.
   (H)   Failure of the owner to properly register or to modify the
registration to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this chapter
is a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement by any of
the enforcement means available to the Village of Midlothian.
   (I)   If any property is in violation of this chapter the Village of
Midlothian may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a
lien on the property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any
additional cost incurred to bring the property into compliance.
   (J)   Properties registered as a result of this section are not required to
be registered again pursuant to the defaulted mortgage property section.
   (K)   Rental properties registered in compliance with section 4-19-7 of this
title shall be exempt from registration under this chapter. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-
2019)
4-23-7: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
Federal, State or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material,
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
   (B)   The property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings
by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color
of the exterior structure.
   (C)   Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, shall be
maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the time registration
is required.
   (D)   Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, grass, ground
covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or
artificial turf/sod. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not
include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar material.
   (E)   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering,
irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and
removal of all trimmings.
   (F)   Pools and spas shall be maintained so the water remains free and clear
of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth in the
applicable Village ordinances.
   (G)   Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly maintain the
property may result in a violation of applicable Village ordinance(s) and
issuance of a citation or notice of violation in accordance with this Code.
Pursuant to a finding and determination by the Village Administrative
Adjudication Hearing Officer or a court of competent jurisdiction, the Village
may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section.
   (H)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable ordinances of the Village. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-
2019)
4-23-8: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Properties subject to these sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   (B)   A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may
allow a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken
windows, doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a child
to access the interior of the property or structure must be repaired.
   (C)   If a property is registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a property manager shall be designated by the mortgagee or owner to
perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with
applicable ordinances, and the property manager shall perform regular
inspections as required in paragraph (D) below to verify compliance with the
requirements of this chapter, and any other applicable laws.
   (D)   In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in
accordance with the applicable ordinances of the Village, maintained in a
secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons and shall:
      1.   Post "No Trespassing" signs at each entry door that shall state: "No
Trespassing. This property is not under lease and may only be occupied by the
owner. Occupying the premises or removing this sign without the owner's consent
is a violation of the Village of Midlothian Code 4-19-2."
      2.   Inspect or cause the property to be inspected weekly and keep a
record of the dates of inspection noting any evidence of trespassers or
criminal activity. In the event said evidence is found it shall be immediately
reported to the Village Police and Buildings Department.
      3.   Prohibit the use of lockboxes on vacant properties except in
compliance with MLS Rules and Regulations as from time to time amended.
      4.   Take immediate legal action to remove unlawful occupants on the
subject property upon knowledge/discovery of the same.
      5.   Failure of the mortgagee and/or property owner of record to properly
inspect and secure a property under this chapter shall be subject to any of the
enforcement means available to the Village and recovery of costs to the Village
in the enforcement thereof. The Village may take necessary action to ensure
compliance with this section, and each day on which a violation of this chapter
continues shall be considered a separate and distinct offense. (Ord. 2035, 7-
24-2019; amd. Ord. 2127, 8-23-2023)
4-23-9: PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit the Village from enforcing its
ordinances by any other means, including, but not limited to, injunction,
abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-10: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
All registrable property is at risk of being a public nuisance and if vacant or
blighted can constitute a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to
the police power of the Village is hereby declared to be necessary for the
health, welfare, and safety of the residents of the Village. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-
2019)
4-23-11: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
   (A)   If the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property
subject to the provisions of this chapter is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare, the Enforcement Officer may temporarily
secure the property at the expense of the mortgagee or owner, and may bring the
violations before a court of competent jurisdiction or the Village
administrative adjudication proceedings as soon as possible to address the
conditions of the property. Nothing herein shall limit the Village from abating
any nuisance or unsafe condition by any other legal means available to it.
   (B)   The Village, through its administrative adjudication proceedings or a
court of competent jurisdiction, shall have the authority to recommend that the
mortgagee or owner affected by this section, implement additional maintenance
and/or security measures including, but not limited to, securing any and all
doors, windows or other openings, employment of an on-site security guard or
other measures as may be reasonably required to help prevent further decline of
the property. The Village's Administrative Hearing Officer or Judge of a court
of competent jurisdiction may consider any of the foregoing in setting
authorized fines.
   (C)   If the property is posing an imminent threat to the public health,
safety, and welfare, then any court of competent jurisdiction may direct or the
Village's Administrative Adjudication Hearing Officer may recommend the Village
to abate the condition or conditions constituting the threat and the mortgagee
or owner may be subject to paying the cost of the abatement.
   (D)   If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the Village for the cost
of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement within thirty (30)
days of the Village sending the mortgagee or owner the invoice for the cost of
securing the property or the abatement, then the Village may recover its costs
in any manner provided by law. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-12: OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY:
Whoever opposes, obstructs or resists any Enforcement Officer or any person
authorized by the Village in the discharge of duties as provided in this
chapter shall be punishable as provided in the applicable ordinance(s) or a
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-13: IMMUNITY OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER:
Any Enforcement Officer or any person authorized by the Village to enforce the
sections here within shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for
reasonable, good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of
duties imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
4-23-14: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided for in this chapter, any violator of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day a violation continues
shall constitute a separate offense. Each section of this chapter that is
violated shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2035, 7-24-2019)
CHAPTER 24
REGULATION OF VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS AND PREMISES
SECTION:
4-24-1: Definitions
4-24-2: Obligation To Register Derelict Buildings
4-24-3: Required Registration Information For Derelict Buildings
4-24-4: Requirements Of Owners, Agents And Other Responsible Parties
4-24-5: Derelict Building Plan
4-24-6: Approval Of Plan
4-24-7: Change Of Ownership
4-24-8: Removal Of Derelict Building Status
4-24-9: Obligation To Register Vacant Commercial Buildings
4-24-10: Required Registration Information For Vacant Commercial Buildings
4-24-11: Minimum Requirements For Vacant Commercial Buildings
4-24-12: Inspections Of Vacant Commercial Buildings
4-24-13: Removal Of Vacant Commercial Building Status
4-24-14: Combined Status
 
4-24-15: Penalties
4-24-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
               The commercial building is being actively marketed, pursuant to reasonable
               industry standards, through a licensed real estate broker, or the owner, who is
               regularly advertising the property in one or more newspapers circulated in and
               around the Midlothian community and/or commercial real estate websites, it is
               being offered for sale or lease at a cost of no more than twenty five percent
               (25%) over the market rate (i.e., the assessed value of the real estate and
               buildings as determined by the Cook County Assessor), and the commercial building
ACTIVELY FOR   is in reasonable condition for sale or lease and in compliance with the minimum
SALE OR LEASE: maintenance standards set forth in Title IV, Chapter 18 of the Village Code. In
               the alternative to utilizing the assessed value of the property, the owner may
               provide the Village with a commercial appraisal using accepted commercial
               appraisal standards to show the market rate. A property owner may also file a
               form with the Village President to list the property at an amount in excess of
               twenty five percent (25%) over market rate for a period of sixty (60) days. Said
               form shall detail the reasons why property value is believed to be over twenty
               five percent (25%) the market rate.
               A building that is generally owned, operated, and/or originally constructed, for
COMMERCIAL     the transaction of business and/or commerce, including but not limited to the
BUILDING:      manufacture, sale or delivery of goods, the storage of materials or goods, the
               provision of services, and/or the rental of spaces for business or commerce uses.
               A building that is:
               A.   Condemned; or
               B.   Unoccupied and unsecured for five (5) days or more; or
               C.   Unoccupied and secured by means other than those approved by the building
               department for a designated limited period of time, or normally used in the
DERELICT       design of buildings of similar structure or design for sixty (60) days or more;
BUILDING:      this includes buildings whose doors, windows, or other openings are boarded up;
               or
               D.   Unoccupied and having more than two (2) property maintenance, fire or
               building code violations existing for thirty (30) days or poses an immediate
               threat to the health, safety and welfare to adjoining property or the general
               public.
FIRE CODE:     The 2009 Edition of NFPA LSC/IBC 2018 as amended from time to time.
               Any person, agent, operator, firm, corporation, limited-liability company or
               other entity having a legal or equitable interest in the property, or holding a
               mortgage on the property, or recorded in the official records of the state,
               county or municipality as holding title to the property; or otherwise having
OWNER:         control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of any such person,
               and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to take
               possession of real property by a court. For purposes of this definition and
               chapter, the term "agent" shall not include any licensee under the Illinois Real
               Estate License Act of 2020.
PREMISES:      A lot, plot or parcel of land, including the buildings or structures thereon.
               A portion of a commercial building that is used for its own individual purpose
SEPARATE UNIT  and/or business, distinct from the other occupants or uses of the commercial
or UNIT:       building, that is separated by walls or ceilings or has an exterior entrance
               separate from the other uses of the commercial building.
SUPERINTENDENT As used herein, shall jointly refer to the Building Superintendent of the Village
OF BUILDINGS:  of Midlothian or to his or her designee.
               No person or persons are actually, currently conducting a lawfully licensed
               business, or lawfully reside or live in any part of the building as the legal or
UNOCCUPIED:    equitable owner(s) or tenant(s). No person or persons are actually, currently
               conducting a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully reside or live in any part
               of the building as the legal or equitable owner(s) or tenant(s).
               Lacking habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the
               premises, or at which substantially all lawful business or construction
               operations or occupancy has ceased, or which is substantially devoid of content.
               In determining whether a commercial building is vacant, it is relevant to
VACANT:        consider, among other factors, whether less than thirty five percent (35%) of the
               total floor area of a building is not lawfully occupied, the condition and value
               of any items in the building and the presence of rental or "for sale" signs on
               the property. If a commercial building has one or more separate units, each unit
               shall be considered on an individual basis.
               A commercial building that is vacant for more than: (1) sixty (60) days if not
               actively for sale or lease; or (2) three hundred sixty five (365) days if
               actively for sale or lease. In addition, any commercial building that is under
               active construction, rehabilitation, or repair without the existence of any code
               violation and having been issued all required permits for such work by the
VACANT         Village of Midlothian shall not be considered vacant. To be considered "active
COMMERCIAL     construction, rehabilitation or repair work" herein, progress must be made in a
BUILDING:      reasonably commercial manner. If a commercial building has separate units, each
               unit shall be considered separately. If one or more units within a commercial
               building are considered "vacant," then said units shall be subject to inspection
               and registration in the same manner as a vacant commercial building with a
               notation on the Village's vacant building registry that only one or more units
               within the commercial building are actually vacant. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
 
4-24-2: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER DERELICT BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Any owner of a derelict building as defined in 4-24-1 of this chapter
shall register such building as a derelict building and submit a derelict
building plan. The derelict building registration and plan shall be filed with
the Superintendent of Buildings together with a registration fee in an amount
as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. Registration of a derelict building shall
be valid for a period of one year from the date of registration. If the
building remains derelict at the expiration of any registration period, the
owner shall renew registration of such building and pay a fee as set forth in
the Schedule of Fees. Each subsequent annual registration for said building
shall be assessed a registration fee as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. All
fees provided for in this section are in addition to any other fees, fines or
penalties provided for by the ordinances of the Village of Midlothian, state or
federal law.
   (B)   Notification Of Derelict Building Status: If the Superintendent of
Buildings or code official designated by the Director determines that a
building is derelict within the meaning of 4-24-1 of this Chapter, the
Superintendent of Buildings or enforcement official shall provide notice to the
last known owner by letter sent by first class mail requesting the owner of the
building to register the building and submit a derelict building plan. Such
notice shall state the reasons for determination of derelict building status.
If the owner's address cannot be determined upon due inquiry, notice may be
posted upon the building. The owner of such building shall, within ten (10)
days of notification, register such building as a derelict building and submit
a derelict building plan to the Superintendent of Buildings. In lieu of
registration, the owner may, within ten (10) days of notification, remedy the
reasons for determination of derelict building status specified in the notice
and arrange for an inspection by the Superintendent of Buildings for
verification. Notification shall have been deemed to have been received within
five days of the mailing and/or posting of the notification of derelict
building status.
   (C)   If more than twenty one (21) days elapse from the day notice of
derelict building status is mailed and/or posted and the building remains
unregistered, the Superintendent of Buildings may:
      1.   Cite the owner of the premises for a violation of this section under
the provisions for administrative adjudication under Section 4-20-4 of this
Title;
      2.   Abate any nuisance or Village Code violations existing on the
premises that threatens the health safety or welfare of adjoining property or
the general public and place a lien for the cost of such abatement on the
property;
      3.   File an action in the circuit court through the Village Attorney for
a judgment, injunctive or other appropriate relief. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-3: REQUIRED REGISTRATION INFORMATION FOR DERELICT BUILDINGS:
The owner registering a derelict building shall supply the following
information:
   (A)   The common description (street address), legal description and tax
parcel identification number of the premises on which the derelict building is
situated.
   (B)   The following ownership information:
      1.   The names and physical addresses of all owners of the property (no
post office box address will be acceptable in lieu of required physical
addresses); or
      2.   If the property is owned by a corporation, partnership, limited-
liability company, land trust or other business entity, the registering owner
or agent must provide the name, physical address and telephone number of an
agent authorized to accept service of process and residing in Cook County,
Illinois.
   (C)   The name, physical address and telephone number of a person
maintaining a work or residential address in Cook County authorized to act in
control of the property in matters of maintenance and who may be contacted in
case of emergency.
   (D)   The date on which the building became derelict.
   (E)   A derelict building plan, as described in Section 4-24-5 of this
chapter.
   (F)   The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of the
person preparing the registration statement and a certification by that person
that the information on said statement is true and correct to the best of that
person's information, knowledge and belief.
   (G)   The person signing the registration form must certify that they are
either the owner of the property or a person acting with direct authority from
the owner in matters pertaining to the registration, control and maintenance of
the property.
   (H)   Any registration lacking the information required by this section will
not be considered complete and will not be accepted for purposes of derelict
building registration. An owner who fails to provide the information required
by this section shall be deemed to have failed to register and be subject to
fines as provided in Section 4-24-15 of this chapter.
   (I)   Any owner required to register a property must report any change of
information required on the registration within ten (10) days after the change.
Failure to report changes as required by this subsection will be punishable by
a fine as provided in Section 4-24-15 of this chapter. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-4: REQUIREMENTS OF OWNERS, AGENTS AND OTHER RESPONSIBLE PARTIES:
Owners, agents and other responsible parties are required:
   (A)   To register derelict properties as required by this chapter and to
report any change of information required on the registration within ten (10)
days after the change.
   (B)   To obtain and maintain general liability insurance in an amount not
less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for buildings designed
primarily for residential use containing not more than four (4) dwelling units,
and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for any other building.
   (C)   To maintain properties in compliance with all applicable provisions of
the Village of Midlothian Code, state and federal law.
   (D)   To repair and maintain any doors, windows, or other openings and to
secure all openings by conventional methods used in the design of the building
or by methods permitted for new construction of similar type. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-
2024)
4-24-5: DERELICT BUILDING PLAN:
When a derelict building is registered as required herein, the owner or agent
shall submit a derelict building plan. The plan shall contain the following:
   (A)   A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or other openings which
are boarded up or otherwise secured by any means other than conventional
methods used in the design of the building or permitted for new construction of
similar type.
   (B)   A plan for the continued care, maintenance and upkeep of the premises
and any building, or structure located upon it.
   (C)   A timetable for repair, return to occupancy, sale or demolition of the
building.
   (D)   A specific date for the abatement of any nuisance existing in or on
the premises. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-6: APPROVAL OF PLAN:
   (A)   The Superintendent of Buildings shall have discretion to approve, deny
or modify the proposed derelict building plan, subject to the right to appeal
as described in Subsection B of this section. Notice will be sent to the owner
or owner's agent of the approval, rejection or modification of the plan.
      1.   In considering the appropriateness of a derelict building plan, the
following factors shall be considered:
         (a)   The threat to the health, safety and welfare of the general
public and community.
         (b)   The purposes of this chapter and the intent of the Village
President and Board of Trustees to minimize the period of time a building is
boarded up or otherwise derelict.
         (c)   The effect of the proposed plan on adjoining property.
         (d)   The cost to implement the proposed plan.
         (e)   The length of time the building has been derelict.
   (B)   Superintendent of Buildings shall, upon notice to the derelict
building owner or owner's agent, have the right to modify the plan by altering
the dates of performance or the proposed methods of action. If the owner of the
building objects to the modifications made by the Superintendent, such owner
shall have the right to appeal to the Village President of the Village of
Midlothian for final determination in accordance with the standards set forth
in this chapter. Such appeal shall be filed with the Village President within
fourteen (14) days of the date of receipt of the Superintendent of Buildings
notice of modification or denial. The notice shall be deemed received five (5)
days after having been mailed to an address listed as the owner's address on
the building registration form.
   (C)   The Village President after considering the testimony and evidence
presented, shall render his or her decision on the owner's appeal of the
Superintendent of Buildings proposed modifications of the derelict building
plan. The Village President shall have the authority to make additional
modifications to the derelict building plan or approve the plan submitted by
the owner or the modified plan submitted by the Superintendent of Buildings
consistent with the intent and purpose of this chapter. The decision of the
Village President shall be final and constitute the derelict building plan.
(Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-7: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP:
The derelict building plan shall remain in effect notwithstanding a change in
ownership. The new owner is required to file a new registration with the
Superintendent of Buildings and supply the name, address and telephone number
of the new owners within thirty (30) days of acquiring title to the premises.
(Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-8: REMOVAL OF DERELICT BUILDING STATUS:
In order to obtain removal of a building from the derelict building registry,
the owner or agent for said property shall contact the Superintendent of
Buildings in order to request the change in status and arrange for inspection
of the property to occur prior to occupancy. If, after inspection, the
Superintendent determines the property no longer falls within the definition of
derelict building as defined in this chapter, the property shall be removed
from the registry of derelict buildings. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-9: OBLIGATION TO REGISTER VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Any owner of a vacant commercial building as defined in this chapter
shall register such building as a vacant commercial building with the
Superintendent of Buildings, together with an initial registration fee in an
amount as set forth in the Schedule of Fees. Registration of a vacant
commercial building shall be valid for a period of twelve (12) months from the
date of registration. Each subsequent twelve (12) month registration period for
said building shall be assessed a progressively fifty percent (50%) greater
fee. If the building remains vacant or unregistered at the expiration of any
registrable period, the fifty percent (50%) greater registration fee shall be
applied to each year registration of the property was required as set forth in
this paragraph. All fees provided for in this section are in addition to any
other fees, fines or penalties provided for by the ordinances of the Village of
Midlothian, state or federal law.
   (B)   Notification Of Vacant Commercial Building Status: If the
Superintendent of Buildings or code official designated by the Superintendent
determines that a commercial building is vacant within the meaning of 4-24-1 of
this chapter, the Superintendent or enforcement official shall provide notice
to the last known owner by letter sent by first class mail requesting the owner
of the building to register the building. Such notice shall state the reasons
for determination of vacant building status. If the owner's address cannot be
determined upon due inquiry, notice may be posted upon the building. The owner
of such building shall, within ten (10) days of notification, register such
building as a vacant building with the Superintendent of Buildings.
Notification shall have been deemed to have been received within five (5) days
of the mailing and/or posting of the notification of vacant building status.
   (C)   If more than fourteen (14) days elapse from the day notice of vacant
building status is mailed and/or posted and the building remains unregistered,
the Superintendent of Buildings may:
      1.   Cite the owner of the premises for a violation of this section under
the provisions for administrative adjudication under Section 4-20-4 of this
Title;
      2.   Abate any nuisance or Village Code violations involving a health,
safety and welfare risk to the general public existing on the premises and
place a lien for the cost of such abatement on the property; and/or
      3.   Apply to the Circuit Court through the Village Attorney for a
judgment, injunctive or other appropriate relief.
   (D)   An owner of a commercial building that is actively for sale or lease
shall provide evidence of such on forms prescribed by the Superintendent of
Buildings. Any vacant commercial building that does not provide the required
forms or related information shall not be considered actively for sale or
lease. The Superintendent of Buildings may waive any fee or fee increase
provided for in this section upon a determination the owner is in compliance
with all building codes, does not owe any debt to the Village and the same is
approved by the Village President. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-10: REQUIRED REGISTRATION INFORMATION FOR VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
The owner registering a vacant building shall supply the following information:
   (A)   The common description (street address), legal description and tax
parcel identification number of the premises on which the vacant building is
situated.
   (B)   The following ownership information:
      1.   The names and physical addresses of all owners of the property (no
post office box address will be acceptable in lieu of required physical
addresses); or
      2.   If the property is owned by a corporation, partnership, limited-
liability company, land trust or other business entity, the registering owner
or agent must provide the name, physical address and telephone number of an
agent authorized to accept service of process and residing in Cook County,
Illinois.
   (C)   The name, physical address and telephone number of a person
maintaining a work or residential address in Cook County authorized to act in
control of the property in matters of maintenance and who may be contacted in
case of emergency.
   (D)   The date on which the building became vacant.
   (E)   The name, street address, mailing address and telephone number of the
person preparing the registration statement and a certification by that person
that they are either the owner of the property or a person acting with direct
authority from the owner and the information on said statement is true and
correct to the best of that person's information, knowledge and belief.
   (F)   Any registration lacking the information required by this section will
not be considered complete and will not be accepted for purposes of vacant
building registration. An owner who fails to provide the information required
by this section shall be deemed to have failed to register and be subject to
fines as provided in this chapter.
   (G)   Any owner required to register a property must report any change of
information required on the registration within ten (10) days after the change.
Failure to report changes as required by this subsection will be punishable by
a fine as provided in of this chapter. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-11: MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
In addition to any other applicable code requirements, each vacant commercial
building must be kept in compliance with the following requirements:
   (A)   Lot Maintenance Standards: The lot the vacant commercial building
stands on, and the surrounding public way, shall be maintained as follows:
      1.   All grass and weeds on the premises, including abutting sidewalks,
gutters and alleys, shall be kept below eight inches (8") in height, and all
dead or broken trees, tree limbs or shrubbery shall be cut and removed from the
premises;
      2.   Junk, rubbish, waste, and any material that creates a health, safety
or fire hazard, including but not limited to any mail or flyers that have been
delivered to the building, shall not be permitted to accumulate on any portion
of the exterior lot of the building;
      3.   No portion of the lot nor any structure, vehicle, receptacle or
object thereon shall be maintained or operated in any manner that causes or
produces any health or safety hazard or permits the premises to become a rodent
harborage or is conducive to rodent harborage;
      4.   The lot shall be maintained so that water does not accumulate or
stand on the ground; and
      5.   All fences and gates and shall be maintained in sound condition and
in good repair.
   (B)   Exterior Maintenance Standard: The exterior of the vacant commercial
building shall be enclosed secured and maintained as follows:
      1.   Foundations, basements, cellars, and crawl spaces shall be
maintained in sound and watertight condition adequate to support the building,
and protected against the freezing of water pipes entry of rodents and or other
animals;
      2.   Exterior walls shall be free of holes, breaks, loose or rotting
boards or timbers, and any other conditions which might admit rain or dampness
to the interior portions of the walls or the interior spaces and shall be
protected against the entry of rodents or other animals;
      3.   Exterior windows and doors shall be maintained in sound condition
and good repair. Windows and doors shall fit tightly within their frames and
the frames shall be constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent
wall construction as to prevent rain from entering the building;
      4.   Exterior windows and doors shall be equipped with hardware for
locking and the locking mechanism shall be maintained in properly functioning
condition;
      5.   All points of possible ingress and egress, including but not limited
to exterior windows and doors, shall be secured to prevent unauthorized entry;
      6.   Any window which is broken, cracked, or missing glass or glazing
shall be replaced and maintained in good repair or the building opening shall
otherwise be adequately secured;
      7.   The roof shall be adequately supported, and shall be maintained in
weathertight condition; the gutters, downspouts, scuppers, and appropriate
flashing shall be in good repair and adequate to remove the water from the
building or structure;
      8.   Chimneys and flues shall be kept in sound, functional, weathertight
condition and in good repair;
      9.   Every outside stair or step shall be maintained in sound condition
and in good repair; every porch, stoop, deck, veranda, balcony and walk shall
be maintained in sound condition for its purpose; and
      10.   All exit areas shall have continuous exterior lighting from dusk to
dawn.
   (C)   Interior Maintenance Standards: The interior of any vacant commercial
building shall be maintained as follows:
      1.   It is prohibited to accumulate or permit the accumulation of junk,
trash and debris, boxes, lumber, scrap metal, junk vehicles or any other
materials in such a manner that may produce any health, fire, or safety hazard,
or provide harborage for rodents or other animals on the premises; materials
stored by the owner or permitted to be stored by the owner shall be stacked
safely, and away from stairs or hallways, and any other places of ingress and
egress;
      2.   Every foundation, roof, floor, wall, stair, ceiling, and any other
structural support shall be safe and capable of supporting the loads that
normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition
and in good repair; floors and stairs shall be free of holes, grooves and
cracks that could be potentially hazardous;
      3.   Any plumbing fixtures shall be maintained with no leaking pipes; and
all pipes for water shall be either completely drained or heated to resist
being frozen;
      4.   Every exit door maintained as such in compliance with this chapter
shall be secured with an internal deadbolt lock and every such exit door shall
be capable of being opened from the inside easily and without the use of a key
or special knowledge;
      5.   Every owner shall be responsible for the extermination of insects,
rodents and other vermin in or about the premises; and
      6.   Vacant buildings that have sprinkler, standpipe, and fire alarm
systems are required to be maintained and operable at all times except as may
be allowed by the Fire Code.
   (D)   Building Security Standards: The following standards apply to the
securing of vacant commercial buildings:
      1.   All building openings shall be closed and secured, using secure
doors, glazed windows, commercial-quality steel security panels, or filled with
like-kind material as the surrounding wall, as applicable to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons; and
      2.   An area may be boarded with plywood, provided that the boarding is
made weathertight and finished with varnish, or paint of a similar color to the
exterior wall and cut to the inside dimension of the exterior of the opening,
unless the boarded area has been breached by rodents or humans, in which case a
more secure panel may be required by the Building Department. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-
2024)
4-24-12: INSPECTIONS OF VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS:
To promote and address health and safety issues, as well as ensure compliance
with the provisions of this chapter, the owner or agent of a vacant commercial
building may be required to arrange an interior and exterior inspection of the
property within sixty (60) days of registration and or upon probable cause to
believe the vacant commercial building is not in compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-13: REMOVAL OF VACANT COMMERCIAL BUILDING STATUS:
In order to obtain removal of a building from the vacant commercial building
registry, the owner or agent for said property shall contact the Buildings
Department in order to request the change in status and arrange for inspection
of the property to occur. If, after inspection, the Department determines the
property no longer falls within the definition of a vacant commercial building
as defined in 4-24-1 of this chapter, the property shall be removed from the
registry of vacant commercial buildings. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-14: COMBINED STATUS:
Properties that qualify as both a derelict and as a vacant commercial building
shall be required to comply with the applicable requirements for each. (Ord.
2140, 4-24-2024)
4-24-15: PENALTIES:
   (A)   Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a
strict liability offense and shall subject the violator to penalties as
provided herein.
   (B)   Failure to register a derelict building or vacant commercial building
within twenty one (21) days of notification as required by this chapter shall
be punishable as an ordinance violation with a fine of not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
per day in addition to any other fees, fines or penalties provided by law.
   (C)   Any person who provides false information on a registration statement
shall be subject to a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00)
nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each false statement
made.
   (D)   Failure to comply with the requirements of the derelict building plan
as approved by the Superintendent of Buildings or modified by the Village
President shall constitute a violation of this chapter and shall subject the
owner to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day in addition to any other fees,
fines or penalties provided by law.
   (E)   Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter, shall
subject the owner, agent or other responsible party to a fine of not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) per day. Each violation shall be deemed a separate offense. Each day
any violation continues shall also be deemed a separate offense.
   (F)   The Village of Midlothian may file actions in the Circuit Court of
Cook County to enforce the provisions of this chapter and recover unpaid fees,
fines and costs associated with the registration and maintenance of derelict
buildings. The Village may also file a lien on the property on which a derelict
building is located for unpaid fees, fines and costs associated with the
registration and maintenance of a derelict building. (Ord. 2140, 4-24-2024)
TITLE 5
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
General Provisions   1
Amusements   2
Food Service Establishments   3
Other Businesses (Except Alcoholic Beverages)   4
Occupation Taxes   5
Liquor Regulations   6
Regulation Of Sale Of Consumer Commodities   7
Packaging Of Food   8
Municipal Utility Tax   9
Municipal Telecommunications Tax   10
Comprehensive Regulation Of Tobacco Products   11
Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee   12
Firearms Dealer's License   13
Farmers' Market   14
Emergency Energy Plan   15
Cable/Video Service Provider Fee And PEG Access Support Fee   16
Cable And Video Customer Protection Law   17
Fair Housing   18
Motor Fuel Tax   19
Massage Regulations   20
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1-1: Applications
5-1-2: Forms
5-1-3: Signatures
5-1-4: Inspections And Investigations
5-1-5: Fees
5-1-6: Termination Of Licenses
5-1-7: Change Of Location
5-1-8: Nuisances
5-1-9: Access To Premises And Samples
5-1-10: License
5-1-11: Suspension, Revocation Of License Or Permit
5-1-12: Posting License
5-1-13: Penalty
5-1-14: License Fees Based On Square Footage
5-1-15: Requirement Of License And Prohibition Of Assignment Or Transfer Of
Same
5-1-16: Vehicles To Be Identified
5-1-17: Sanitary Conditions Required
5-1-18: Sidewalk Sales
5-1-19: Raffle Licenses
5-1-1: APPLICATIONS:
Applications for licenses and permits required by this title shall be made in
writing to the village clerk upon forms provided by said clerk. Each
application shall state the name of the applicant, the permit or license
desired, the location to be used, if any, and the square footage of the
premises to be used by the licensee, and each application shall contain such
additional information as may be required by this title or requested by the
village officials. No permit or license shall be issued or renewed until the
applicant shall have furnished all information requested by the clerk or other
municipal official and all other provisions of village ordinances have been
complied with including, but not limited to, all applicable inspection fees,
license fees, past due water bills, repair costs owed to the village of
Midlothian, liens and citation fines having been paid to the village. (Ord.
1947, 12-7-2016)
5-1-2: FORMS:
Forms for all licenses and permits, and all applications therefor, shall be
prepared and kept on file by the village clerk. (1963 Code)
5-1-3: SIGNATURES:
Each license or permit issued shall bear the signatures of the president and
village clerk in the absence of any provision to the contrary. (Ord. 979, 6-24-
1980)
5-1-4: INSPECTIONS AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit, or upon
receipt of a complaint, or upon the normal yearly inspection or where the
ordinances of the municipality necessitate an inspection or investigation and
before the issuance of any permit or license, the clerk shall refer such
application or complaint to the proper office for such investigation or
inspection within forty eight (48) hours of the time of such receipt. The
officer charged with the duty of making any investigations or inspection shall
make a report thereon in writing, within ten (10) days. The health officer
shall make the inspections in connection with sanitation; the fire chief or
other personnel of the fire department designated by the fire chief, shall make
inspections of all premises in regard to compliance with fire regulations and
the building inspectors shall make or cause to be made any inspections relative
to compliance with ordinances relative to the construction of buildings or
other structures. All investigations except where otherwise provided, shall be
made by the chief of police or by some other officer designated by the
president.
   (B)   Any original inspection made as a result of a complaint which is found
to be justified and any reinspection required because of noncompliance with any
village code or state statute; the applicant or licensee shall be required to
pay an additional fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each inspection or
reinspection. The village shall send the bill for the charges to the
appropriate party and if said bill is not paid within thirty (30) days, the
charge will increase to fifty dollars ($50.00) for each inspection or
reinspection and no license shall be issued or reissued until said fee is paid.
(Ord. 1060, 2-8-1984)
5-1-5: FEES:
   (A)   All fees and charges for licenses or permits shall be paid in advance
to the village clerk at the time the license application is filed. Any business
in operation by January 1 of any license year shall obtain its license by
January 7 of the same license year. When the license is issued after January 7
of the license year for business in operation on January 1 of the license year,
the license fee shall be double the rate as set forth in the village ordinance.
If a new business starts after July 1 of a license year, the license for the
remainder of the year shall be issued upon payment of one-half (1/2) the annual
fee.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions in subsection (A) of this section, all
business license fees and fee payment schedules for hotels, motels, hotel
clubs, motel clubs or rooming houses are provided below:
      1.   Upon the issuance of an occupancy permit (in the case of new
construction) or a business license for a new hotel, motel, hotel club, motel
club or rooming house, the business license fee shall be due on February 1 in
the amount of thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00). If an occupancy permit
(where new construction occurs) or a business license application for a new
hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or rooming house is submitted after
February 1, the fee will be a prorated amount from the date the application is
submitted.
      2.   With regard to a hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or rooming
house, the calendar year will be the year of operation (January 1 through
December 31). Business license fees shall be due on February 1 of the year
following the first full calendar year of operation.
      3.   The greater of thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) or four
percent (4%) of room revenues generated during the first full calendar year
shall be due on February 1 of the subsequent year for the business license fee.
      4.   The greater of thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) or four and
one-half percent (4.5%) of the room revenues generated during the second full
calendar year shall be due on February 1 of the subsequent year for the
business license fee.
      5.   The greater of thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) or five
percent (5%) of room revenues generated during the third full calendar year
shall be due on February 1 of the subsequent year for the business license fee.
      6.   The greater of thirty five thousand dollars ($35,000.00) or four
percent (4.0%) of the room revenues generated in the prior year for each year
thereafter, shall be due on February 1 for the business license fee.
      7.   Along with the filing by the developer of its business license
application, business license fee as stated above, the developer shall also be
required to submit a financial report showing room revenues for the prior
calendar year, which shall be certified as being accurate and shall be
notarized. Thereafter, the developer shall, on or before April 30 of each year,
submit a copy of the developer's tax return with the page showing room revenues
for the prior calendar year to the village, with a similar notarized
certification of the accuracy of said page of tax return. (Ord. 1683, 3-11-
2009)
5-1-6: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
   (A)   All licenses shall terminate on December 31 where no provision to the
contrary is made, with the exception of licenses issued for hotels, motels,
hotel clubs or motel clubs, which shall begin on February 1 and shall end on
January 31.
   (B)   The village clerk shall mail to all licensees of the village a
statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an
annual one, at least three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expiration.
Provided, that a failure to send out such notice, or the failure of the
licensee to receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain
a new license, or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense and an action
for operation without a license. (Ord. 1683, 3-11-2009)
5-1-7: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation, or of any permitted act,
may be changed, provided ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the village
clerk. The new location must be in compliance with all building, zoning,
frontage consent requirements and other ordinances. (Ord. 699, 4-8-1970)
5-1-8: NUISANCES:
No business shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to a nuisance in
fact. (Ord. 699, 4-8-1970)
5-1-9: ACCESS TO PREMISES AND SAMPLES:
Whenever an inspection of the premises used for, or in connection with the
operation of a business or occupation is provided for, or is reasonably
necessary to ensure compliance with any ordinance, it shall be the duty of the
licensee, or the person in charge of the premises to admit thereto for the
purpose of making such inspection any authorized officer or employee of the
municipality.
Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material is necessary to ensure
conformance with any ordinance, it shall be the duty of any licensee to give to
any authorized officer or employee of the municipality requesting same,
sufficient samples of such material or commodity for such analysis.
In addition to any other penalty which may be provided, the president may
revoke any license if the licensee refuses to permit any officer or employee to
make an inspection, or take an adequate sample of a desired commodity, or
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty.
Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such cause unless written demand
is made upon the licensee or person in charge of the premises, in the name of
the municipality, stating that such inspection or sample is desired. (Ord. 699,
4-8-1970)
5-1-10: LICENSE:
A license only authorizes a licensee to engage in the business, activity or
occupation for which the license is issued. No activity can be operated under a
business license unless said activity is owned by identical persons or entities
and is conducted within a single building and contains activities that are
closely related. The decision of what are "closely related" activities shall be
that of the village clerk. If any licensee engages in any other business,
activity or occupation for which a license is required under the provisions of
this section, the licensee must secure an additional license for that business,
activity or occupation. (Ord. 1398, 8-28-1996)
5-1-11: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE OR PERMIT:
   (A)   When the conduct or operation of any business, occupation, activity or
establishment, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall constitute a nuisance in
fact and a clear and present danger to the public health, safety or general
welfare, or where the holder of any license shall have refused to allow an
inspection of his premises or has refused to furnish a sample of his goods for
testing, the president shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of
business and the closing of the premises until the danger no longer exists.
   (B)   Within eight (8) days after a license or permit is suspended, the
president shall call a hearing for the purpose of determining whether or not
the license or permit should be revoked.
   (C)   Licenses and permits issued by the municipality, unless otherwise
provided, may be revoked or suspended by the president after notice and hearing
as provided in subsections (D) and (E) of this section for any of the following
causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of provisions of this
code or other ordinances of the municipality relating to the license or permit,
the subject matter of the license or permit or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor where such conviction indicates their inability to operate a safe,
honest and legitimate business operation within the village.
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine, penalty or
charge owed to the village.
      5.   Refusal to permit an inspection or sampling or any interference with
a duly authorized municipal officer or employee while in the reasonable
performance of his duties in making such inspections.
      6.   If complaints are received against a business and the mayor feels
the complaints justify a hearing.
Such revocation or suspension, if ordered, shall not preclude prosecution and
imposition of any other penalties provided for the violation of other
applicable provisions of this code or other ordinances of the municipality.
   (D)   Notice of the hearing for revocation or suspension of a license or
permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the
complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be sent by
certified mail (return receipt requested) to the licensee or permittee at his
last known address, at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the
hearing, or notice may be delivered personally two (2) days before the hearing.
If the licensee shall request a continuance in the date of the hearing,
suspension may be put into effect until two (2) days after the final hearing
date. This suspension is to be determined by the mayor.
   (E)   At the hearing, the municipal attorney shall present the complaint and
shall represent the municipality. The licensee or permittee shall be permitted
counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross examine
witnesses. The mayor shall preside and shall render the decision.
   (F)   A stenographic or electronically recorded record of the hearing shall
be kept. The municipality shall pay the cost of attendance fees of the reporter
and the cost of the transcript, if such transcript shall be ordered by the
municipality. The licensee or permittee shall pay the cost of any transcript
ordered by him.
   (G)   Within a reasonable time after the conclusion of the hearing, but not
later than thirty (30) days after such conclusion, the mayor shall file a
written decision in which he has summarized the evidence and has stated the
reasons for his decision. (Ord. 1005, 8-12-1981)
5-1-12: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any licensee conducting a business in the municipality
to keep the license posted in a prominent place on the premises used for such
business. (Ord. 699, 4-8-1970)
5-1-13: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the penalty as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during,
or on which, such violation occurs or continues. The penalty provisions hereof
shall not preclude the municipality from any other legal or equitable remedy
available. (Ord. 699, 4-8-1970; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
5-1-14: LICENSE FEES BASED ON SQUARE FOOTAGE:
Where license fees are computed on a square footage area basis, the fees shall
be computed as follows: (Ord. 909, 4-12-1978)
Square Feet License Fee
Square Feet     License Fee
1,500 or less   $100.00
1,500 to 3,000  160.00
3,000 to 4,500  240.00
4,500 to 6,000  320.00
6,000 to 8,000  400.00
8,000 to 10,000 500.00
10,000 and over 600.00
 
(Ord. 1852, 11-13-2013)
In computing square footage, there shall be included the entire building floor
area and any adjacent storage or display area.
License fees based on square footage entitle the licensee to one business.
There shall be an additional license obtained for any other business or portion
of business conducted at the same address or under the same roof or on the same
property of the licensee.
The primary license of any licensee obtaining a license on a square footage
basis shall be that business or occupation that occupies the majority of the
"square footage" as provided in this section. If the licensee shall operate any
other business or engage in any other activity on the same premises that is
required to be licensed under the provisions of this title, the licensee shall
pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) fee for each additional license. (Ord. 909, 4-12-
1978)
5-1-15: REQUIREMENT OF LICENSE AND PROHIBITION OF ASSIGNMENT OR TRANSFER OF
SAME:
No person, firm or corporation shall operate any business or engage in any
occupation for which a license is required by the ordinances of the village
without securing such a license.
No business license shall be assigned or transferred to any person, firm or
corporation. (Ord. 699, 4-8-1970)
5-1-16: VEHICLES TO BE IDENTIFIED:
Any truck used in the conduct of any business or occupation licensed under this
chapter shall bear thereon in legible characters the name and address of the
operator of the business. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-1-17: SANITARY CONDITIONS REQUIRED:
The public portion of the premises of all business and occupations licensed
hereunder shall be kept in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. The chief
of police, chief of the fire department and the health officer are authorized
to make inspections to determine that the premises are maintained in accordance
with this section. All licenses shall provide toilet and lavatory facilities
for employees. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-1-18: SIDEWALK SALES:
   (A)   Finding And Purpose: It is found and declared that:
      1.   The primary purpose of public streets and sidewalks, and walkways
within shopping centers are for use by pedestrian traffic and/or motor
vehicles.
      2.   Reasonable regulations of street and sidewalk sales, signage and
display of merchandise is necessary to protect the public health, safety and
welfare.
      3.   The regulations contained in this section do not prohibit free
speech by religious organizations but merely regulate the activities of the
organizations which are commercial in nature.
      4.   Under this section "sidewalk sale" includes, but is not limited to,
sale of a product or service, or advertising or displaying a product or service
on a sidewalk, walkway, street, parkway, public place in the village, including
shopping centers.
   (B)   License Required:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale or to display or
advertise any food, beverage or merchandise, product or service on any street,
sidewalk, walkway, parkway or public place within the village (including within
shopping centers) without first obtaining a license therefor.
      2.   Only businesses which are licensed in the village may obtain a
license for a sidewalk sale and said sidewalk sale can only be held in the
immediate sidewalk or walkway adjacent to their business.
      3.   Application for a sidewalk sale license must be filed a minimum of
thirty (30) days prior to proposed sale and shall include the following:
         (a)   Name, home and business address of the applicant.
         (b)   A description of the type of food, beverage, product, service or
merchandise to be sold, displayed or advertised.
         (c)   A description of the proposed location of the sidewalk sale, how
it will be conducted, and who will be in charge of the sale for the business.
         (d)   Proof of insurance policy issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state of Illinois protecting the licensee and
the village from all claims to damages for property and bodily injury which may
result from the operation under or in the connection with the license. Such
insurance shall name as an additional insured the village and its officials,
employees or agents.
         (e)   Indicate if any food or beverage is going to be sold at the
sale.
         (f)   The hours and days of the proposed sidewalk sale.
         (g)   The applicant shall supply the village with any other
information required by the village after they have applied for the license.
   (C)   Issuance: No later than thirty (30) days after the filing of the
completed application for a sidewalk sale license, the applicant shall be
notified by the village clerk's office of the decision on the issuance or
denial of the license. The village may place reasonable restrictions on any
license they issue. The village clerk shall consider the standards set forth in
this section and other village ordinances in determining whether to grant a
license. If a license is approved, the clerk's office shall issue the license.
If the license is denied, the applicant shall be provided with a statement of
reasons therefor, which reasons shall be stated in writing. A license issued
pursuant to this section is valid for a maximum period of three (3) consecutive
days. The cost of the license shall be twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day, or
three (3) consecutive days for fifty dollars ($50.00).
   (D)   Sidewalk Sales Prohibited In Certain Locations: Sidewalk sales as
defined in subsection (A)4 of this section are prohibited with the following
exceptions:
      Sidewalk sales on village sidewalks or walkways, or within plazas or
shopping centers, are permitted directly adjacent to the business in question
after obtaining appropriate license.
   (E)   Prohibited Conduct:
      1.   No licensee shall conduct a sidewalk sale within twenty feet (20')
of any crosswalk or intersection or within twenty feet (20') of any bus stop,
sign or shelter.
      2.   Sidewalk sales shall only be allowed after nine o'clock (9:00) A.M.
and until one-half (1/2) hour after sunset of each day that the license is
valid.
      3.   No sidewalk sales are allowed from any streets and no sidewalk sales
are allowed in any residential area. No sidewalk sales can be held from any
type of motor vehicle.
      4.   All licensees must clean up after each day's sidewalk sale, and it
is therefore prohibited to leave any location without first picking up, moving
and disposing of all trash or refuse remaining from the sidewalk sales.
      5.   Sound systems are not allowed. Therefore, sound which produce a loud
and raucous noise or use or operation of any loudspeaker, public address
system, radio, sound amplifier or similar device to attract attention of the
public is prohibited.
      6.   Vendors must not block the whole sidewalk and must leave room on
sidewalk for pedestrians and wheelchairs to pass by in front of their business
and to enter their business or any other businesses adjacent to where the
sidewalk sale is taking place.
      7.   All signs must comply with the village sign ordinance 1 , including
any signs which are temporary signs.
      8.   The licensee must comply with all restrictions of the sidewalk sale
as set forth by the village in their permit.
      9.   The licensee must only sell goods or services which they are
permitted to sell under their business license.
      10.   Display of merchandise or services on a walkway, sidewalk, parkway
or public place without a license for a sidewalk sale is prohibited.
   (F)   Health And Sanitary Requirements For Food and Beverage Sales:
Licensees of food and beverages shall comply with any inspection regulations
set out by the village code and any special requirements set forth in the
license.
   (G)   Safety Requirements: The sales must be conducted in a safe and proper
manner by the licensee. No instruments which are sharp or hot or dangerous
shall be accessible to purchasers or pedestrians in the area.
   (H)   Display Of License: All licensees shall display at all times during
the operation of the sidewalk sale the license received from the village.
   (I)   Renewal: All licenses are valid only for the time set forth on the
license that is issued, unless revoked or suspended prior to the expiration. A
sidewalk sales license shall only be issued to a business two (2) times in a
calendar year.
   (J)   Denial, Suspension, Revocation: Any license may be denied, suspended
or revoked for any of the following causes:
      1.   Fraud or misrepresentation contained in the application for the
license.
      2.   Fraud or misrepresentation made in the course of carrying on the
sidewalk sale.
      3.   Conduct of the licensed business in such a manner as to create a
public nuisance or to constitute a danger to the public health, safety and
welfare.
      4.   Conduct which is contrary to the provisions of this section or any
other village ordinances or state statutes.
   (K)   No License Required; Private Parking Lots: Nothing in this section
will prevent a shopping center or a business with its own private parking lot
for fifty (50) cars or more from holding a sale for their own business in a
portion of their lot without a permit as long as it does not violate the spirit
of this section or violate other village ordinances or state statutes. All said
sales must be conducted in a safe manner, shall not be a public nuisance and
all health and sanitary regulations are followed. They must leave enough
parking space for their customers. (Ord. 1263, 7-22-1992)
   (L)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine not to
exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes per day. Each day of the violation shall be
considered a separate violation. (Ord. 1263, 7-22-1992; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-
1995)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 11, chapter 14 of this code.
5-1-19: RAFFLE LICENSES:
All entities who intend to run raffles, as defined under Illinois law 1  shall
obtain a raffle license. Such raffle license shall be limited to those
organizations that are organized, established and operate for religious,
educational or charitable functions and shall include, but necessarily require
an entity to be, a 501(c)3 organization. A 501(c)3 organization is an
organization as defined under section 501(c)3 of the internal revenue code.
Such raffle license shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance and
shall cost five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 1711, 12-9-2009)
 
Notes
1 1. 230 ILCS 15/1 et seq.
CHAPTER 2
AMUSEMENTS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Billiard And Pool Halls
5-2-2: Bowling Alleys
5-2-3: Carnivals, Parks, Menageries, Exhibitions
5-2-4: Circuses
5-2-5: Amusement Devices
5-2-6: Motion Pictures And Theatricals
5-2-7: Shooting Galleries
5-2-8: General Requirements
5-2-9: Video Gaming
5-2-10: Streaming Services
5-2-1: BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS:
   (A)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis.
   (B)   Minors: Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall under no
circumstances frequent, loiter, go to or remain in any hall licensed hereunder
at any time, unless it be upon some lawful errand sent by the direction or with
the consent and knowledge of the parent, guardian or other person having the
lawful custody of said minor; and it shall be unlawful for the proprietor of
any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to frequent, loiter or
remain within the hall in violation of this section. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (C)   Hours: The business establishments shall not be open from eleven
o'clock (11:00) P.M. to twelve o'clock (12:00) noon.
   (D)   Alcoholic Beverages: No alcoholic beverages shall be allowed on the
premises.
   (E)   Open View: No person conducting or opening a billiard or pool hall
shall be allowed or permit any screens, curtains, partitions or other
obstructions to be placed between the front window and the back or rear wall of
such room. An unobstructed view of the entire interior must be maintained at
all times. This provision, however, shall not be construed to preclude the
maintenance of washrooms or toilet rooms or the maintenance of closets for
storing purposes exclusively.
   (F)   Enforcement: It is the responsibility of the owner and/or manager and/
or supervisor to see that all terms of this section are followed.
   (G)   Revocation Of License:
      1.   The village president may revoke any license for any violation of
any provisions of this section or for the violation of any state laws or for
violations of ordinances of the village.
      2.   The village president may hold hearings regarding any violations. At
said hearings the owner must appear as well as all employees of the licensed
establishment which were working the day of the violations.
      3.   After the hearings and within five (5) days the president may enter
an order which he feels is appropriate under local ordinances and/or under
state statutes and shall serve a copy of said order within five (5) days upon
said licensee. He may revoke the license or suspend same for a period up to
sixty (60) days. (Ord. 831, 5-14-1975)
   (H)   Penalty: Any persons convicted of violating any of the provisions of
this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding the penalty as provided
in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for such
offense. (Ord. 831, 5-14-1975; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
5-2-2: BOWLING ALLEYS:
   (A)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis.
   (B)   Minors: Minors under the age of eighteen (18) years shall under no
circumstances frequent, loiter about, go to or remain in any hall licensed
hereunder at any time, unless it be upon some errand or sent by the direction
and with the consent and knowledge of or accompanied by the parent, guardian or
other person having the lawful custody of said minor; and it shall be unlawful
for the proprietor of any hall so licensed to allow or permit any such minor to
frequent, loiter about, or remain within the hall in violation of this section;
provided, however, that boys over the age of fourteen (14) years may be
employed in such halls if the person operating or conducting the same shall
have first procured the written consent of the parent or guardian or other
person having lawful custody of the minor so employed. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-2-3: CARNIVALS, PARKS, MENAGERIES, EXHIBITIONS:
   (A)   Fees: The annual license fee shall be:
      1.   Parks where amusement rides are operated during summer season:
Thirty dollars ($30.00) per season for first ride and ten dollars ($10.00) for
each additional ride.
      2.   Carnivals: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per day together with ten dollars
($10.00) per day for each side show and concession connected therewith.
      3.   Menageries: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per day.
      4.   Exhibitions: Thirty dollars ($30.00) per day.
      5.   Other amusement not specifically licensed: Thirty dollars ($30.00)
per day. (Ord. 910, 4-12-1978)
5-2-4: CIRCUSES:
   (A)   Fees: The fee for circus licenses shall be four hundred dollars
($400.00) for each day during which the circuses are conducted or open to the
public. There shall be an additional license fee for each side show and
concession operated in connection with a circus in the amount of thirty dollars
($30.00) per day. (Ord. 910, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Inspection: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and the fire
chief to see that inspections shall be made of all circus performances and of
the premises used.
   (C)   Bond: It shall be unlawful to conduct or exhibit any parade connected
with a circus in or on any public street, alley or other public way or place in
the municipality unless a permit therefor is first obtained from the chief of
police. Such permit shall specify the route to be followed, and shall be
accompanied by a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00)
conditioned to indemnify the municipality for any loss, damage or liability
incurred or caused by the conduct or exhibition of such parade. (Ord. 633B, 12-
14-1966)
5-2-5: AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
   (A)   Definition: An "amusement device" (hereafter referred to as "amusement
device") is any device which, upon the insertion of a coin, paper bill, credit
card, debit card, slug, token or disk, may be operated by the public as a game,
entertainment or amusement. It includes, but is not limited to, such devices as
pinball machines, computer games, CD-ROM driven devices, skill ball machines,
bagatelle, pigeon hole, pool or any other table or implement kept for a similar
purpose and electronic games using a video screen and electrical impulses that
are not video gaming devices as defined in this chapter. It includes any other
type of mechanical game the object of which is to secure a particular score or
high score by the use of balls, spheres, springs, trigger devices, electrical
impulses, or throwing objects at targets. Billiard and pool halls are also
covered by section
5-2-1 of this chapter. Electronic card game devices, as defined in this
chapter, are not covered under this section, and are not "amusement devices" as
used in this section. Such electronic card game devices are covered under
section
5-2-9 of this chapter. Video gaming devices, as defined in this chapter, are
not covered under this section, and are not "amusement devices" as used in this
section. Such video gaming devices are covered under section
5-2-9 of this chapter.
   (B)   Regulations:
      1.   Each license issued shall be for a period of one calendar year and
is the responsibility of the business license holder.
      2.   A renewal application must be filed prior to the expiration of the
current license and pursuant to the provisions of renewing the owner's business
license where the device is located.
      3.   The annual license fee for each device shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00).
      4.   Each device shall have posted in a prominent place on its front side
a current village decal with an assigned number.
      5.   A license shall not be transferable from person to person nor place
to place and shall be usable only at the place and by the person designated on
the license. License for devices as defined in subsection (A) of this section
may be transferred to another similar device upon application to and receiving
approval from the village clerk. The transfer fee shall be five dollars ($5.00)
per device.
   (C)   Restrictions:
      1.   Except as specified below, it shall be unlawful for any person or
business to keep or use in any place of business or any club, clubhouse,
clubroom or hall within the village an "amusement device" as defined in
subsection (A) of this section.
      2.   The exceptions to the above are as follows:
         (a)   All licensees who have a class A, C, D or E liquor license shall
be allowed twenty (20) amusement devices on their premises as long as they are
properly licensed and are not gambling devices (video gaming devices or other
devices used for gambling).
         (b)   For the purpose of this section, a jukebox shall be considered a
device. However, it shall not be included as one of the twenty (20) devices
allowed.
         (c)   Such devices must be placed in a location which does not block
or slow the use of any entrance or exit doors.
         (d)   Additional amusement devices may be obtained as follows:
            (1)   Application filed with the village clerk requesting
additional devices.
            (2)   Tentative approval by the police, fire and building
department heads. Unanimous approval required to validate request.
            (3)   Final approval determined by village board of trustees.
         (e)   No person holding a license under this section shall permit
persons under eighteen (18) years of age to play or operate any "amusement
devices" as defined under subsection (A) of this section.
   (D)   Penalty:
      1.   Tickets may be issued to the owner of the business license and the
owner of any devices kept or used in violation of this section.
      2.   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section, shall
be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty
as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state
statutes for each offense, and each day that the violation continues shall be
regarded as constituting a distinct and separate offense.
      3.   Gambling violations may cause the business owner's business and/or
liquor license to be suspended and/or revoked.
      4.   Illegal devices or devices not properly licensed must be removed
within five (5) days of notification to the owner of the business or the
village may remove them and charge the owner of the business and/or the owner
of the device rent and cost of removal. (Ord. 1801, 8-22-2012)
5-2-6: MOTION PICTURES AND THEATRICALS:
The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage basis. (Ord. 633B,
12-14-1966)
5-2-7: SHOOTING GALLERIES:
   (A)   Fees: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis.
   (B)   Safety: Targets shall be placed before a backstop of steel,
sufficiently thick to prevent any bullet from piercing it, and so arranged that
there will be no danger from ricochetting bullets or deflected pieces of
bullet. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-2-8: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Order; Crowding: The audience of any amusement, show or theatrical
must be orderly and quiet at all times, and it shall be unlawful for any person
attending such amusement, show or theatrical to create a disturbance in the
audience.
      It shall be unlawful to permit or gather such a crowd to witness any
amusement or show as to create a dangerous condition because of fire or other
risks.
   (B)   Inspection: It shall be the duty of the chief of police and fire
marshal to see that every exhibition, amusement, theatrical or other public
show or amusement is inspected by a member of the police and fire department,
and to ensure conformity with the provisions concerning such amusements.
   (C)   Exhibitions Of Criminals: It shall be unlawful for any person to
exhibit any criminal or the body of any criminal or any person who shall have
become notorious because of the commission of a crime, in any theatrical,
exhibition, carnival or other public place.
   (D)   Riots: It shall be unlawful to present any public amusement or show of
any kind which tends to or is calculated to cause or promote any riot or
disturbance.
   (E)   Smoking: It shall be unlawful to smoke or carry a lighted cigar,
cigarette or pipe on or beneath the stage or in a dressing room of any building
used as an assembly hall with seating accommodations for more than one hundred
(100) persons or in which theatricals, shows, amusements, lectures or other
entertainments are offered, presented, operated or exhibited.
      It shall be the duty of the owner of such premises or of the occupant in
charge, to provide and place printed signs on which the words "No Smoking"
shall appear in letters at least four inches (4") high, in conspicuous places,
at least two (2) signs being upon the stage or in the wings thereof and one in
each dressing room.
   (F)   Exit Lights: It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant in charge
of any building or hall used as an assembly hall with accommodations for one
hundred (100) persons or more in which theatricals, shows, amusements,
lectures, and other entertainment is offered, operated or presented to provide
and place a sign on which the word "Exit" shall appear in letters at least six
inches (6") high, over every door or other opening from such hall to every
means of egress therefrom, and a light shall be provided with a red globe and
placed at or over such sign, which lights shall be kept burning during the
entire period that the hall is open to the public and until the audience has
left the hall. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-2-9: VIDEO GAMING:
   (A)   Definitions:
 
                          Any Illinois Gaming Board licensed retail
                          establishment where alcoholic liquor is drawn,
LICENSED ESTABLISHMENT:   poured, mixed, or otherwise served for consumption on
                          the premises, whether the establishment operates on a
                          nonprofit or for-profit basis.
                          Means an individual, partnership, corporation, or
                          limited liability company that is licensed under 230
                          ILCS 40/5 of the Illinois Video Gaming Act and that
TERMINAL OPERATOR:        owns, services, and maintains video gaming terminals
                          for placement in licensed establishments, licensed
                          truck stop establishments, licensed large truck stop
                          establishments, licensed fraternal establishments, or
                          licensed veterans' establishments.
                          A licensed establishment whose primary business
                          enterprise is providing video gaming terminals for
VIDEO GAMING CAFÉ/PARLOR:video gaming on the premises, and the sale of
                          alcohol, food and other goods or services is
                          incidental to the operation of the video gaming
                          enterprise.
                          Any electronic video gaming machine, or device that,
                          upon insertion of cash, credit card, debit card,
                          electronic cards or vouchers is available to play or
                          simulate the play of a video game, including, but not
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL:    limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as
                          defined in the video gaming act, 230 Illinois
                          Compiled Statutes 40/1 et seq., as amended and which
                          fully complies with the provisions of the video
                          gaming act, 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/1 et
                          seq., as amended.
 
   (B)   Video gaming is allowed in licensed establishments within the village.
No establishment licensed by the Illinois Gaming Board shall be permitted to
operate any video gaming terminal pursuant to the Illinois Video Gaming Act
unless the establishment has also obtained a license and paid a yearly fee to
the village. No license may be issued where the license applicant owes a debt,
fine, fee or penalty to the village.
      1.   The annual licensing fees for licensed establishments beginning
November 1, 2021 and thereafter shall be:
         (a)   Five hundred dollars ($500) per year for each video gaming
terminal as defined in the Illinois Video Gaming Act (ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40); or
         (b)   One hundred dollars ($100) per year for each video gaming
terminal for fraternal or veterans' establishments.
   (C)   Application to the village for a video gaming license shall be made in
conformity with Title V of this code except as otherwise provided herein. The
applicant shall meet and provide for the following criteria as part of said
application:
      1.   A copy of the applicant's active state video gaming license;
      2.   The location of the premises where the video gaming terminal is to
be located, maintained and/or operated;
      3.   The charge to be made to the player for operating the device;
      4.   That the applicant is over the age of twenty one (21);
      5.   That the applicant or any principal officer therein has not held a
license under this section or had an interest therein that was revoked for
cause;
      6.   That the applicant or any principal officer therein has not
furnished false or misleading information on the application;
      7.   That the applicant has a liquor license in good standing in the
Village of Midlothian and has provided the Liquor Commissioner with a report or
reports showing its gross annual sales totals and categories, including food
and beverage sales and if a new applicant the establishments projected sales;
      8.   That the video gaming area shall be bounded by a minimum four-foot
(4') barrier wall. If said barrier walls prohibit applicant from complying with
ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, § 58, applicant shall maintain video surveillance of the
gaming area at all times. If applicant provides sufficient evidence that the
gaming area is fully contained in an area of the establishment that can only be
accessed by persons twenty one (21) or older, the requirement of a four-foot
(4') barrier wall is not applicable;
      9.   Such other information as the village may determine is necessary.
   (D)   No more than six (6) video gaming terminals may be located, maintained
or operated in any one establishment except that large truck stop
establishments may have as many as ten (10) gaming terminals as provided in 230
ILCS 4/5. No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of a video
gaming terminal in a manner which will disturb the peace of persons otherwise
properly within or without the premises where the terminal is located or
otherwise constitute a nuisance.
   (E)   The Village Clerk shall issue a license to each licensed establishment
that obtains a license to locate, maintain and/or operate any video gaming
terminal on its premises. The license must be displayed by the applicant in a
conspicuous place and must indicate the number of video gaming terminals
allowed.
   (F)   All current annual licenses shall terminate no later than December 31
in each year where no provision to the contrary is made. If at the time of
application for a license six (6) months or more of the calendar year have
expired, the applicant shall be required to pay one-half (1/2) of the license
fee set forth above. No license shall be issued for less than one-half (1/2) of
the annual fee.
   (G)   All existing licenses as of November 1, 2021 shall be valid until
their expiration date with no additional fees.
   (H)   The Village Clerk shall mail to all licensees a statement three (3)
weeks prior to the date of expiration informing the licensees of the upcoming
expiration date. Failure to send out the notice, or failure of any licensee to
receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from failure to secure a new license,
or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in any action for operation
without a license.
   (I)   Any licensee who fails to pay the fees and charges for the renewal of
a license by January 31 of the year following expiration of the license shall
be charged a penalty of fifty dollars ($50) per unlicensed video gaming
terminal. The penalty shall be paid at the time of renewal of the license.
   (J)   Issuance: In addition to all other general licensing requirements set
forth in this code. Issuance will occur after all application requirements as
outlined above in paragraph (B) above of this section are met.
   (K)   Terminal Operators: The regulations and provisions contained in this
section shall apply to terminal operators as such term is defined in the
Illinois Video Gaming Act and govern applications and qualifications for the
issuance of terminal operators' licenses issued by the village.
      1.   No terminal operator shall own, maintain, operate or place a video
gaming terminal in the village unless:
         (a)   He or she has a valid terminal operator's state license issued
under the Video Gaming Act; and
         (b)   He or she has a valid village video gaming terminal operators
license for each video gaming terminal placed and maintained in the village.
      2.   Each terminal operator shall pay to the village a yearly fee of
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750) per each video gaming terminal it owns,
maintains, operates or places within the village. A terminal operator may only
place video gaming terminals in the village for use in licensed video gaming
locations. It is unlawful to operate a video gaming terminal in the village
without a valid video gaming sticker affixed thereon.
      3.   Application to the village for a terminal operator's license shall
be made in conformity with Title V of this Code except as otherwise provided
herein. The applicant shall provide the following as part of said application:
         (a)   A copy of the applicant's active state video gaming license;
         (b)   The location of the premises where the video gaming terminal is
to be located, maintained and/or operated;
         (c)   The charge to be made to the player for operating the device;
and
         (d)   Such other information as the village may determine is
necessary.
      4.   No license issued hereunder shall permit the operation of a video
gaming terminal in a manner which will disturb the peace of persons otherwise
properly within or without the premises where the terminal is located or
otherwise constitute a nuisance.
      5.   The Village Clerk shall issue a license to each terminal operator
for each licensed establishment that obtains a license to locate, maintain and/
or operate any video gaming terminal in the village. The license must be
displayed by each licensed establishment in a conspicuous place and must
indicate the number of video gaming terminals allowed. A copy of the terminal
operator license will be provided by the village to the establishment upon
successful issuance to the terminal operator.
      6.   All annual licenses shall terminate on December 31 in each year
where no provision to the contrary is made. If at the time of application for a
license six months or more of the calendar year have expired, the applicant
shall be required to pay one-half (1/2) of the license fee set forth above. No
license shall be issued for less than one-half (1/2) of the annual fee.
      7.   The Village Clerk shall mail to all licensees a statement three
weeks prior to the date of expiration informing the licensees of the upcoming
expiration date. Failure to send out the notice, or failure of any licensee to
receive it, shall not excuse the licensee from failure to secure a new license,
or a renewal thereof, nor shall it be a defense in any action for operation
without a license.
   (L)   Gaming Cafés/Parlors shall offer for sale prepared food and non-
alcoholic beverages for patron consumption on the premises. The failure to
provide the food and beverages as stated in this paragraph shall be grounds for
the suspension and or revocation of the business owner's business license. At
no time shall more than seven (7) gaming café/parlor licensees be issued in the
Village concurrently.
   (M)   Penalty:
      1.   Tickets may be issued to the owner of the business license and the
owner of any devices kept or used in violation of this section.
      2.   Any person who shall violate the provisions of this Section, shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the penalty
as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense,
and each day that the violation continues shall be regarded as constituting a
distinct and separate offense.
      3.   Gambling violations may cause the business owner's business and/or
liquor license to be suspended and/or revoked.
      4.   Illegal devices or devices not properly licensed must be immediately
made inoperable or inaccessible for use and removed within five (5) days of
notification to the owner of the business or the village may remove them and
charge the owner of the business and/or the owner of the device rent and cost
of removal. (Ord. 1801, 8-22-2012; amd. Ord. 1836, 5-30-2013; Ord. 1948, 12-14-
2016; Ord. 2076, 3-17-2021; Ord. 2084, 10-27-2021)
5-2-10: STREAMING SERVICES:
   (A)   Applicability Of Provisions: The provisions of this Section except as
otherwise provided, shall apply to all streaming services as hereinafter
defined, whether specifically licensed or regulated under other provisions of
this Code or other ordinances, or not.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purpose of this Section the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning. The masculine, feminine, singular or plural is included in any
circumstances.
 
            The gross amount of consideration paid for the privilege to enter, to witness, to
            view or to participate in a streaming service, including amounts paid for the
            right to access a streaming service, valued in money, whether received in money
            or otherwise, including cash, credits, property, and services, determined without
            any deduction for costs or expenses whatsoever. The term Charges Paid includes
CHARGES     any and all charges that the patron pays incidental to obtaining the privilege to
PAID:       enter, to witness, to view or to participate in a streaming service, including
            but not limited to any and all related markups, service fees, convenience fees,
            facilitation fees, cancellation fees and other such charges, regardless of
            terminology. The term Charges Paid does not include charges that are added on
            account of the tax imposed by this Section or on account of any other tax or
            surcharge imposed on the charge.
            (a)   Any person who sells or resells a ticket or other license to a streaming
            service for consideration or who, directly or indirectly, receives or collects
            the charges paid for the sale or resale of a ticket or other license to the
            streaming service. The term includes, but is not limited to, persons engaged in
            the business of selling or reselling tickets or other licenses to streaming
            services, whether online, in person or otherwise;
            (b)   With respect to the owner of a streaming service, any person which has an
            ownership or leasehold interest in such streaming service or any person who has a
OWNER OR    proprietary interest in the streaming service so as to entitle such person to all
OPERATOR:   or a portion of the proceeds, after payment of reasonable expenses, from the
            operation, conduct or presentation of such streaming service, excluding proceeds
            from non-amusement services and from sales of tangible personal property;
            (c)   Any person or entity operating a community antenna television system or
            wireless cable television system, or any person or entity receiving consideration
            from the patron for furnishing, transmitting, or otherwise providing access to
            paid television programming; or
            (d)   A person or entity operating a system, or any person or entity receiving
            consideration from the patron, for providing access to or electronically
            delivering video streaming, audio streaming or online games to patrons.
PAID        Programming that can be viewed on a television or other screen, and is
TELEVISION: transmitted by cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or
            similar means to members of the public for consideration.
            Any person who acquires the privilege to enter, to witness, to view or to
PATRON:     participate in a streaming service in the Village; or any person who has a
            primary place of use within the Village who purchases the right to access a
            streaming service.
            Any individual, firm, organization, society, foundation, institution,
            partnership, limited liability company, association, joint stock company, joint
PERSON:     venture, public or private corporation, receiver, executor, trustee, or other
            representative appointed by the order of any court, or any other entity
            recognized by law.
            Any paid television programming, whether transmitted by wire, cable, fiber
STREAMING   optics, laser, microwave, radio, satellite, or similar means. Any video
SERVICE:    streaming, audio streaming or remotely accessed online games made available or
            delivered electronically to patrons on a rental or subscription basis, including,
            but not limited to, shows, movies, videos or music.
 
   (C)   Tax Imposed:
      1.   A streaming service tax of five percent (5%) of the charges paid for
such streaming service is imposed upon every patron for the privilege of access
to and witnessing, viewing, or participating in any streaming service in the
Village or that is delivered to a patron with a primary place of use with the
jurisdictional boundaries of the Village.
      2.   The tax imposed by paragraph (1) of this Section shall not be
imposed on transactions where the patron pays for the rights of the permanent
use of an electronic amusement.
      3.   In the case of streaming services that are delivered electronically
to mobile devices, as in the case of video streaming, audio streaming and
online games, the rules set forth in the Illinois Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Conformity Act, 638 ILCS 35, as amended, may be utilized for the
purpose of determining which customers and charges are presumed to be subject
to the streaming service tax. If those rules indicate that the tax applies, it
shall be presumed that the tax does apply unless the contrary is established by
books, records, or other documentary evidence.
   (D)   Payment And Collection:
      1.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the streaming
service tax shall be borne by the patron and shall never be shifted to the
owner or operator.
      2.   The owner or operator of each streaming service shall bear, jointly
and severally, the duty to collect the streaming service tax from each patron.
The owner or operator shall secure the streaming service tax from the patron at
the time that the charges paid for the streaming service are collected. For
purposes of this Section, it shall be presumed that the amount of the streaming
service tax imposed on each person, unless the person or owner or operator
provides otherwise with books, records, or other documentary evidence, has been
collected from the person by the owner or operator.
      3.   Every owner or operator who is required to collect the streaming
service tax shall be considered a tax collector for the Village. All streaming
service taxes collected shall be held by such tax collector as trustee for and
on behalf of the Village. The failure of the tax collector to collect the tax
shall not excuse or release the patron from the obligation to pay the tax.
      4.   The streaming service tax shall be paid in addition to any and all
other taxes and charges.
   (E)   Registration:
      1.   Every owner or operator providing services to customers subject to
the streaming service tax within the Village shall apply for registration as a
tax collector with the Village no later than thirty (30) days after commencing
such business or thirty (30) days after the effective date of this Section
imposing the streaming service tax, whichever occurs later.
      2.   The application shall be submitted to the Village Finance Director
on forms prepared by the Village and shall contain such information as
reasonably required by the Village to impose, collect, and audit all amounts
related to the streaming service tax.
   (F)   Administration And Enforcement:
      1.   The Village Finance Director, or such designee, shall administer and
enforce the streaming service tax. It shall be the responsibility and duty of
the Village Finance Director or such designee, to collect all amounts due the
Village from every person required to collect the streaming service tax.
      2.   A sworn monthly streaming service tax return, prepared on a calendar
month basis, shall be filed by each person required to collect the streaming
service tax with the Village Finance Director on forms prepared by the Village,
showing the gross receipts from the streaming service and the amount of
streaming service tax collected. Said tax returns and payment of the streaming
service tax collected during the reporting period shall be received by the
Village on or before the last day of the calendar month succeeding the end of
the monthly filing period. Acceptance by the Village of any amount tendered in
payment of the tax shall be without prejudice to any claim, demand or right on
account of any deficiency.
      3.   Any officer or employee of any entity who is an owner or operator
subject to the provisions of this Section who has the control supervision or
responsibility of collecting the streaming service tax, filing returns and
transmitting the collected tax and who willfully fails to file such return or
to transmit any tax so collected to the Village shall be personally liable for
any such amounts collected, including interest and penalties thereon, if after
proper proceedings for the collection of such amount, such entity is unable to
pay such amounts to the Village, and the personal liability of such officer or
employee shall survive dissolution of the entity. For purposes of this Section,
an officer or employee willfully fails to act if the officer or employee takes
any conscious and voluntary action intending not to perform any of the
officer's or employee's obligations hereunder, including but not limited to the
utilizing of tax proceeds collected for the Village to pay any other entity
obligations.
      4.   The Village Finance Director or such designee, may upon reasonable
notice inspect and examine the books and records of an owner or operator for
the proper administration of this tax, and for the enforcement of the
collection of the tax. It is unlawful for any person to prevent, hinder, or
interfere with the Village Finance Director or such designee, in the discharge
of the Village or such designee's duties hereunder. It shall be the duty of
every person required to collect the tax to keep accurate and complete books
and records, containing all information necessary for the collection of the
tax, to which the Finance Director or such designee, shall have full access.
      5.   In the event that the inspection and examination by the Village
Finance Director or such designee, discloses a discrepancy in excess of five
percent (5%) from the information furnished by the person required to collect
the tax, the cost of said inspection and examination shall be borne by said
person.
      6.   The Village is authorized to adopt, promulgate, and enforce any
additional rules and regulations pertaining to the interpretation, collection,
administration, and enforcement of this Section.
   (G)   Penalties: In the event of any failure by any person required to
collect the streaming service tax to file the required streaming service tax
return or collect and pay the streaming service tax on or before the due date,
penalty provisions of Section
1-4-1 shall apply with respect to late filing, late payment and failure to file
penalties. The total of such late filing, late payment, or failure to file
penalties shall be paid along with the tax imposed.
   (H)   Proceeds Of Tax: All proceeds resulting from the imposition of the
streaming service tax, including penalties, shall be paid into the treasury of
the Village.
   (I)   Suit For Collection: Whenever any person fails to pay any streaming
service tax, or when any person required to collect the streaming service tax
fails to collect the tax from the patron, the Village Attorney shall, upon
request of the Village, bring an action to enforce the payment of said tax on
behalf of the Village in any court of competent jurisdiction, with costs of
such enforcement to be borne by the defendant.
   (J)   Application Of Village Code: Any citation under this Section shall be
in addition to any other citations issued by the Village under any and all
applicable Sections of this Code.
   (K)   Fines:
      1.   Any owner or operator of a business with activity subject to the
streaming service tax failing or omitting to pay said tax when due; failing or
omitting to collect, to account for, or to pay over said tax and any penalty,
failing to maintain or allow examination of the required records; falsely
reporting or failing to report the amount of tax due as required by this
Section; or knowingly furnishing false or inaccurate information to the Village
shall in addition to any other payment or penalty provided herein or elsewhere
by law or ordinance, be imposed a fine of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and also be
ordered to pay all of the costs and fees incurred by the Village in prosecuting
the violation, which may include, but shall not be limited to the costs of an
administrative adjudicative proceeding or court proceeding and reasonable
attorney's fees and costs.
      A separate and distinct offense shall be regarded as committed on each
day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. All fines shall be in
addition to the unpaid streaming service tax plus penalties. The payment of a
fine shall not relieve the person so fined from liability for the streaming
service tax. The purpose of imposing penalties for the violation of this
Section is to ensure the integrity of the collection process established
pursuant to this Section. (Ord. 2141, 4-10-2024, eff. 7-1-2024)
CHAPTER 3
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5-3-1: Bakeries
5-3-2: Beverage Dealers; Wholesale
5-3-3: Food Delivery Vehicles
5-3-4: Food Refrigeration Locker Plants
5-3-5: Retail Food Dealers
5-3-6: Milk Dealers
5-3-7: Restaurants
5-3-8: Wholesale Provision Dealer
5-3-9: General Conditions
5-3-1: BAKERIES:
   (A)   Definition: Any place or establishment used for any process of mixing,
compounding or baking for sale, any bread, biscuits, pretzels, crackers, buns,
rolls, macaroni, cake, pies or any food product of which flour or meal is the
principal ingredient, shall be deemed a bakery for the purpose of this section,
provided that restaurants in which any of the foregoing food products are mixed
and baked, on or in an ordinary kitchen stove or range shall not be considered
to be a bakery.
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis.
   (C)   Specific Regulations: Every place used as a bakery shall be adequately
lighted at all times and shall be ventilated by means of windows or skylights
or airshafts or ducts, or mechanical apparatus, if necessary, to ensure a free
circulation of fresh air at all times. Such ventilation construction and
equipment shall be of such character that a complete change of air in all parts
of the bakery may be made at least four (4) times each hour; provided, however,
that it shall not be necessary to ventilate at such times or in such a manner
that the process of mixing or raising dough shall of necessity be interfered
with or prevented. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-2: BEVERAGE DEALERS; WHOLESALE:
   (A)   Definition: A "wholesale beverage dealer" is a person, firm or
corporation who or which engages in the business of the manufacture or sale for
wholesale distribution of nonalcoholic carbonated beverages.
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-3: FOOD DELIVERY VEHICLES:
   (A)   Definition: "Food delivery vehicles" are any vehicles, including
wagons and motor vehicles and vehicles propelled by manpower, for the storage
or carrying of any meat, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, bread
or bakery goods, or any other provisions intended for human consumption,
including beverages, but excluding milk, for the purpose of delivering any such
foodstuffs as a retail sale to any place in the municipality. (Ord. 633B, 12-
14-1966)
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee for such license shall be fifty dollars
($50.00) for each vehicle delivering at retail. (Ord. 911, 4-12-1978)
   (C)   Exemption: No license fee shall be required for any vehicle used to
deliver foodstuffs from any establishment which is licensed and inspected as a
food dealing establishment in the municipality.
   (D)   Specific Regulations: If unwrapped foodstuffs are transported in any
such vehicle such foods shall be carried in a portion or compartment of the
vehicle which is screened and protected against dust and insects. (Ord. 633B,
12-14-1966)
5-3-4: FOOD REFRIGERATION LOCKER PLANTS:
   (A)   Definitions:
   FOOD: Shall mean and include any edibles or beverages used or intended for
human consumption.
   FOOD REFRIGERATION LOCKER PLANT: Shall mean and include any establishment
wherein compartments are rented, leased or made available to other than the
owner of the establishment for the refrigeration of food.
   (B)   Application For License: In addition to all other information
contained in such application, it shall state the number of units maintained on
the premises, and the size of each unit; and each application shall also state
whether a unit is maintained in which food will be stored belonging to several
individuals in addition to the separate units rented to other than the owner of
the premises.
   (C)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis.
   (D)   Temperature Requirements: No food shall be stored in any such plant
unless such food has been frozen to a temperature of zero degrees Fahrenheit
(0°F) or below being so stored; and the lockers or compartments used for the
refrigerated storage of food must be kept at all times at a temperature of
below fifteen degrees Fahrenheit (15°F). (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-5: RETAIL FOOD DEALERS:
   (A)   Definition: A retail food dealer is a person, firm or corporation who
or which engages in the retail sale at a permanent location of meat, produce,
fruit, groceries, soft drink beverages and other food products not intended to
be consumed on seller's premises.
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis.
   (C)   Milk Dealers: Retail food dealers engaging in the sale of dairy
products are not subject to subsections 5-3-6(A), (B) and (C) of this chapter;
however, such licensees are subject to all other provisions of said section 5-
3-6 of this chapter. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-6: MILK DEALERS:
   (A)   Definition: A "milk dealer" is a person, firm or corporation who or
which engages in the sale or distribution of milk, cream or other dairy
products from a vehicle operating on the public streets. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-
1966)
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
vehicle used for delivery. (Ord. 911, 4-12-1978)
   (C)   Standards: "Milk", as the term is used herein, shall mean the whole,
fresh clean lacteal secretion obtained by the complete milking of one or more
healthy cows, properly fed and kept clean, excluding that obtained within
fifteen (15) days before and five (5) days after calving, or such longer period
as may be required to render the milk practically colostrum free, and shall
contain not less than three percent (3%) of milk fat; and not less than eight
and one-half percent (81/2%) of milk solids not fat. No milk not conforming to
this section shall be sold or offered for sale in the municipality.
   (D)   State Dairy Statute: All skim milk, buttermilk and cream shall conform
to the standards fixed in the state dairy statute, and the sale or offering for
sale of any milk or milk products not in conformity with this law is
prohibited.
   (E)   Percentage Of Butterfat In Cream; Regulations For Selling Cream: No
cream shall be sold, offered for sale, exchanged or delivered or kept for the
purpose of sale that contains less than eighteen percent (18%) of milk fat, or
that is obtained from any impure, diseased, adulterated or unwholesome milk, or
from milk to which any foreign substance has been added, or from milk
containing less than three percent (3%) of butterfat or from cows fed on refuse
or slop, mash or food which has been subject to fermentation, or any food other
than good, wholesome food.
   (F)   Artificial Preservative: It shall be unlawful to sell any milk or
cream containing any artificial preservative.
   (G)   Milk Animals; Bacterial Rating: All milk offered for sale or sold must
come from animals under state and federal supervision and proven free from all
contagious and infectious diseases, and shall contain not more than fifty
thousand (50,000) bacteria per cubic centimeter and no pathogenic bacteria, and
shall be produced under the following conditions:
      1.   All persons living upon farms, employed thereon or coming in contact
with milk in dairies or other places shall be free from contagious or
infectious diseases and shall not have been exposed to anyone having such
diseases within a period of one week prior to the exercise of such duties.
      2.   No person who is a paratyphoid, typhoid, diphtheria or septic sore
throat carrier shall be employed in the production or handling of such milk.
      3.   It shall be the duty of every person, firm or corporation with a
knowledge of the facts to notify the health officer or other legally
constituted authority at once of the occurrence of any of the above afflictions
in persons living or employed in or about a place where milk is produced,
handled or sold. Milk and milk derivatives that have been exposed shall not be
shipped into or sold or offered for sale in the municipality.
   (H)   Grade A Milk: It shall be unlawful to offer for sale any milk labeled
"Grade A Milk" unless the same has been produced and transported in compliance
with the statutes of the state of Illinois relating thereto.
   (I)   Pasteurization Required: It shall be unlawful to sell, or offer for
sale for human consumption any milk or milk products which have not been
produced and pasteurized in the manner required by statute.
   (J)   Deliveries To Quarantined Premises: Milk may be delivered to
quarantined premises, provided that there is no contact of any kind between the
inmates and contents of the quarantined premises and the delivery agent.
No milk receptacles shall be taken from such premises during the period of
quarantine; and before taken away for use, such receptacles shall be thoroughly
sealed and sterilized.
   (K)   Containers: No milk except skimmed milk, buttermilk or sour milk,
shall be peddled or sold at retail in quantities of less than one gallon except
in containers bearing the true name of the article, the name and address of the
producer, dealer or distributor and the net volume of the contents in
accordance with the Illinois dairy statute, and no person shall sell milk or
cream in any bottle or container other than those bearing the seller's name or
to which he has acquired title as required by law.
   (L)   Inspection: The health officer shall conduct periodic inspections of
all milk distribution plants, dairies, vehicles and equipment used in the sale
or distribution of milk as well as of the milk itself. Such inspections shall
be made every quarter and as often as the said health officer deems necessary.
The inspector may in his discretion in lieu of inspection, accept the
certificate of inspection of any other municipality having equal or more rigid
requirements than provided by this section. The licensee shall pay the cost of
all bacteriological inspections and tests necessary. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-7: RESTAURANTS:
   (A)   Annual License Fee: The annual license fee for such licenses shall be
computed on a square footage basis. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (B)   Definitions; Purpose: The purpose of these regulations is to ensure
that all foods served in the village are served in a safe and healthful manner.
   CRITICAL VIOLATION: A violation requiring immediate correction.
   EMPLOYEE: Any individual having supervisory or management duties, and any
other person working in a food service establishment.
   FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any place where food or drink is prepared or
served to the public either for consumption on the premises or to be carried
off the premises.
   HEALTH INSPECTOR: Any individual employed by the village to conduct
inspections who has obtained a food service sanitation manager certificate
issued by the Illinois department of public health.
   HEALTH OFFICER: The person employed by the village to make health
inspections and to enforce the health regulations of the village and the
Illinois department of public health and who has obtained a food service
sanitation manager certificate issued by the Illinois department of public
health.
   (C)   Inspection Of Food Service Establishments:
      1.   All establishments must pass an initial building and health
inspection prior to the issuance of a business license.
      2.   In addition to the initial inspection required under subsection (C)1
of this section, food service establishments will be required to have
additional annual inspections based on their relative risk for causing food
borne illnesses. Assignment of risk (high, medium or low) will be based on
criteria established by the Illinois department of public health program
standards (77 Illinois administrative code 615.310). The inspection schedule
will be as follows:
         (a)   High risk: Three (3) inspections per calendar year.
         (b)   Medium risk: Two (2) inspections per calendar year.
         (c)   Low risk: One inspection per calendar year.
   Risk level of each establishment will be reviewed and verified annually by
the health officer. The health officer is authorized to adopt reasonable
inspection procedures at least as stringent as those outlined in the Illinois
department of public health food service sanitation code (77 Illinois
administrative code 750) and the retail food store sanitation code (77 Illinois
administrative code 760).
      3.   In the event of a temporary food service establishment, it is
intended that all food be prepared on the premises of the food service
establishment and delivered to the place of service in an approved manner at
appropriate temperatures. All temporary food service establishments are subject
to inspection by the health officer or health inspector.
      4.   An inspection will also be conducted upon receipt of a complaint or
at such time as the health officer/health inspector has reason to believe a
health violation has occurred. If an establishment fails to remedy all
violations identified during the inspection at the time of the designated
reinspection, an additional fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) will be assessed. If
the establishment has rectified all problems identified by the first
reinspection, no fee will be assessed.
      5.   In the event further reinspections are required, an additional one
hundred dollar ($100.00) fee will be assessed for each reinspection. All
reinspection fees are payable before the next reinspection date. If critical
violations are found by the health officer/health inspector, a recommendation
may be made to the village president or president pro tempore to close the
establishment until such violations are corrected and the establishment
successfully passes a subsequent inspection and all fees are paid.
      6.   If the food service establishment fails to comply with the
regulations set forth in subsections (C)4 and (C)5 of this section, the health
officer/health inspector will advise the village president or president pro
tempore, who may then revoke or suspend said establishment's business license.
(Ord. 1510, 6-27-2001)
   (D)   Posting Of Inspection Report: One copy of the inspection report shall
be posted by the health officer upon an inside wall of the restaurant, and said
inspection report shall not be defaced or removed by any person except the
health officer. Another copy of the inspection report shall be filed with the
records of the health department and with the village clerk.
      The person operating the restaurant shall, upon request of the health
officer, permit access to all parts of the establishment and shall permit
copying any or all records of food purchased.
   (E)   Toilet Facilities: Every restaurant shall be provided with adequate
and conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees, conforming with
the ordinances of the municipality. In restaurants hereafter constructed,
toilet rooms shall not open directly into any room in which food, drink or
utensils are handled or stored. The doors of all toilet rooms shall be self-
closing. Toilet rooms shall be kept in a clean condition, in good repair and
well lighted and ventilated. Hand washing signs shall be posted in each toilet
room used by employees.
   (F)   Water Supply: Running water under pressure shall be easily accessible
to all rooms in which food is prepared or utensils are washed, and the water
supply shall be adequate, and of a safe, sanitary quality.
   (G)   Construction Of Utensils And Equipment: All multiuse utensils and all
show and display cases or windows, counters, shelves, tables, refrigerating
equipment, sinks and other equipment or utensils used in connection with the
operation of a restaurant shall be so constructed as to be easily cleaned and
shall be kept in good repair. Utensils containing or plated with cadmium or
lead shall not be used; provided that solder containing lead may be used for
jointing.
   (H)   Cleaning And Bactericidal Treatment Of Utensils And Equipment:
      1.   All equipment, including display cases or windows, counters,
shelves, tables, refrigerators, stove hoods and sinks, shall be kept clean and
free from dust, dirt, insects and other contaminating material. All cloths used
by waiters, chefs and other employees shall be clean. Single service containers
shall be used only once.
      2.   All multiuse eating and drinking utensils shall be thoroughly
cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved bactericidal process after
each usage. All multiuse utensils used in the preparation or serving of food
and drink shall be thoroughly cleaned and effectively subjected to an approved
process immediately following the day's operation. Drying cloths, if used,
shall be clean and shall be used for no other purpose.
      3.   No article, polish or other substance containing any cyanide
preparation or other poisonous material shall be used for the cleaning or
polishing of utensils.
   (I)   Storage And Handling Of Utensils And Equipment: After bactericidal
treatment, utensils shall be stored in a clean, dry place protected from flies,
dust and other contamination, and shall be handled in such a manner as to
prevent contamination as far as practical. Single service utensils shall be
purchased only in containers, shall be stored therein in a clean, dry place
until used and shall be handled in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (J)   Refrigeration: All readily perishable food and drink shall be kept at
forty one degrees Fahrenheit (41°F) or below, except when being prepared or
served. Wastewater from refrigeration equipment shall be properly disposed of.
(Ord. 1439, 6-10-1998)
   (K)   Wholesomeness Of Food And Drink: All food and drink shall be clean,
wholesome, free from spoilage, and be prepared as to be safe for human
consumption. All milk, fluid milk products, ice cream and other frozen desserts
served shall be from approved sources. Milk and fluid milk products shall be
served in the individual containers which they were received from the
distributor or from a bulk container equipped with an approved dispensing
device; provided, that this requirement shall not apply to cream, which may be
served from the original bottle or from a dispenser approved for such service.
All oysters, clams and mussels shall be from approved sources, and if shucked
shall be kept until used in the containers in which they were placed at the
shucking plant.
   (L)   Storage, Display And Serving Of Food And Drink: All food and drink
shall be stored, displayed and served as to be protected from dust, flies,
vermin, depredation and pollution by rodents, unnecessary handling, droplet
infection, overhead leakage and other contamination. No animals or fowl shall
be kept or allowed in any room in which food or drink is prepared or stored.
All means necessary for the elimination of flies, roaches and rodents shall be
used. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-8: WHOLESALE PROVISION DEALER:
   (A)   Definition: A "wholesale provision dealer" is a person, firm or
corporation who or which engages in the business of buying and selling at
wholesale any meat, poultry, fish, butter, cheese, lard, vegetables, fruit,
flour, meal or other provisions in the municipality.
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-3-9: GENERAL CONDITIONS:
   (A)   Premises: All premises and vehicles used by any licensee under this
chapter shall be maintained so as to comply with the following regulations:
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
      1.   Effective measures intended to minimize the presence of rodents,
flies, roaches and other insects on the premises shall be utilized. Copies of
pest control service records shall be available to the health officer upon
request. (Ord. 1510, 6-27-2001)
      2.   Be adequately lighted and ventilated to ensure a free circulation of
fresh air.
      3.   Be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
      4.   Shall not have any living or sleeping quarters contained within the
area used for the business or occupation.
      5.   Shall have adequate toilet and lavatory facilities for employees.
Lavatory facilities shall have both hot and cold running water with approved
sanitary towels. The use of a common towel is prohibited.
      6.   All garbage and trash shall be kept in commercially manufactured
receptacles.
   (B)   Employees: Employees of licensees under this chapter shall comply with
the following regulations:
      1.   Keep themselves clean, both as to person and clothing.
      2.   Not be afflicted with or be a carrier of any infectious or
contagious disease. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (C)   State Statutes: All licensees under this chapter shall comply with
state statutes, regulations, orders, rules or codes, including, but not limited
to, food service sanitation code and retail food service sanitation code of the
Illinois department of public health regulating the licensee's business or
occupation or public health. If such state statutes, codes, rules, regulations
or orders are more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter, the
provisions of the state shall prevail. (Ord. 1439, 6-10-1998)
   (D)   Inspections: In addition to the information required on the business
license application, all food service establishments must be under the
supervision of a certified food sanitation manager as outlined in the Illinois
department of public health food sanitation code. The health officer shall be
provided with copies of all food service sanitation certificates issued by the
Illinois department of public health at the time of application for business
license and/or renewal. Failure to comply with this requirement may result in
the nonissuance of the business license.
Upon the loss of a certified food service manager, the food service
establishment must notify the health officer within three (3) days. Food
service establishments not in compliance because of employee turnover or other
loss of certified personnel shall comply with the terms and provisions as soon
as possible but no longer than three (3) months from the date of loss and shall
include a copy of the food service sanitation certificate for any new or
replacement employee, within seven (7) days of date of hire, if certified or
seven (7) days from date of certification if not certified. Failure to comply
with this requirement may result in revocation of said establishment's business
license. (Ord. 1510, 6-27-2001)
CHAPTER 4
OTHER BUSINESSES (EXCEPT ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES)
SECTION:
5-4-1: General Provisions
5-4-2: Barbershops And Beauty Shops
5-4-3: Dry Cleaners
5-4-4: Ice Dealers
5-4-5: Pet Shops And Veterinary Hospitals
5-4-6: Lumberyards
5-4-7: Machine Shops
5-4-8: Paint Stores
5-4-9: Parking Lots
5-4-10: Public Garage
5-4-11: Condition Of All Licensed Premises
5-4-12: Auctioneers
5-4-13: Auto Courts And Motels (Rep. by Ord. 1683, 3-11-2009)
5-4-14: Building Contractors
5-4-15: Expressmen, Draymen And Movers
5-4-16: Foreign Fire Insurance Companies
5-4-17: Handbills
5-4-18: Hospitals
5-4-19: Hotels, Motels, Hotel Clubs, Motel Clubs And Rooming Houses
5-4-20: House Movers
5-4-21: Fees, Standards
5-4-22: Insurance Brokers
5-4-23: Junk Dealers 1  (Rep. by Ord. 1861, 2-12-2014)
5-4-24: Itinerant Merchants; Peddlers And Hawkers
5-4-25: Nursing Homes
5-4-26: Outdoor Advertising
5-4-27: Pawnbrokers And Junk Dealers
5-4-28: Fuel Dealers And Bulk Storage Of Petroleum Products
5-4-29: Real Estate Brokers
5-4-30: Scavengers
5-4-31: Service Stations
5-4-32: Solicitors
5-4-33: Taxicabs
5-4-34: Tobacco Products, Retail Sale
5-4-35: Towing Vehicles
5-4-36: Vending Machines
5-4-37: Garage Sales
5-4-38: Daycare Centers
5-4-39: Billboards
5-4-40: Medical Cannabis Dispensing Organization
5-4-41: Adult Use Cannabis Businesses
5-4-42: Collection Bins
5-4-43: Private Event Venues
5-4-44: Regulation Of Buses, Livery Services
 
Notes
1 1. See section 5-4-27 of this chapter.
5-4-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Licenses based on square footage are as follows:
      Air conditioning stores.
      Banks.
      Barbershops.
      Beauty shops.
      Car washes.
      Coal dealers.
      Currency exchanges.
      Dry cleaners.
      Florists.
      Heating stores.
      Ice dealers.
      Laundries.
      Loan agencies.
      Lumberyards.
      Machine shops.
      Merchants, occupations or businesses, not otherwise specifically listed
submitting applications for a license.
      Paint stores.
      Public garages.
      Savings and loan associations.
      Secondhand stores.
      Undertakers. (Ord. 832, 6-11-1975)
   (B)   Licenses other than square foot basis are as follows:
      Auctioneers.
      Building contractors.
      Expressmen, draymen and movers.
      Foreign fire insurance companies.
      Garage sales.
      Handbills.
      Hospitals.
      Hotels, motels, hotel clubs, motel clubs and rooming houses.
      House movers.
      Ice dealers.
      Insurance brokers.
      Junk dealers.
      Nursing homes.
      Outdoor advertisers.
      Pawnbrokers.
      Peddlers or hawkers.
      Pet shops and veterinary hospitals.
      Petroleum products, fuel dealers and bulk storage.
      Real estate brokers.
      Scavengers.
      Service stations.
      Solicitors.
      Taxicabs.
      Tobacco, retail sale of.
      Towing vehicles.
      Vending machines. (Ord. 1683, 3-11-2009; amd. Ord. 1962, 8-23-2017)
5-4-2: BARBERSHOPS AND BEAUTY SHOPS:
   (A)   Sanitation: It shall be unlawful to use in any such establishment any
implements, tools or equipment upon any person after the same has been used
upon a person afflicted with any skin or scalp disease without first
sterilizing said tool, implement or equipment.
      It shall be unlawful to use any towel on any person after same has been
used, without first having such towel sterilized and cleaned.
   (B)   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the Health Officer to inspect
said establishments as often as necessary to ensure compliance with the above
provisions. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-3: DRY CLEANERS:
   (A)   Machines: Any machine used in a dry cleaning business shall be
completely enclosed by a cabinet and shall be vented with intake at the top and
the outlet at or near the bottom of such machine. Groups of machines may be
entirely enclosed or supported on all open sides by an enclosure topped with a
hood vented as provided for each individual machine.
   The exhaust system must maintain a minimum flow of one hundred (100) cubic
feet per minute face velocity through the loading door whenever the door is
open.
   The discharge stack for the machines and for the room in which the machines
are located shall extend at least two feet (2') above the level of any window
which can be opened located within fifty feet (50') of the outlet of the stack,
and shall be at least fifty feet (50') away from any fresh air intake leading
to any premises.
   The machines must be so constructed as to prevent the loading door from
being opened during the normal cycle of operation. Each machine shall be
equipped with a transparent door or port to allow visual examination of the
status of the cleaning cycle.
   Any connection of such machine with the water supply system must be equipped
with an air gap or vacuum breaker in the line upstream from the condenser; with
no control valves downstream from such gap or breaker. Wastewater shall be
discharged through an air gap.
   The room in which such machine is installed shall be ventilated so that
there shall be a minimum flow of air per machine from the area to which the
public is admitted, of at least five hundred (500) cubic feet per minute in a
room where there are no more than three (3) machines installed; four hundred
(400) cubic feet per minute where there are no more than eight (8) machines
installed; three hundred seventy five (375) cubic feet per minute where there
are no more than sixteen (16) machines installed; and three hundred sixty (360)
cubic feet per minute where there are more than seventeen (17) machines
installed. For this purpose, each cleaning cell shall be considered as one
machine.
   Each machine must be so designed and constructed as to prevent the leakage
of liquids, gas or vapors.
   (B)   Operation Regulations: No such automatic dry cleaning machine shall be
operated unless all the equipment described in the foregoing subsection is
properly installed and in good operating working condition.
   No establishment for which a license is required under this chapter shall be
open for business, and it shall be unlawful to admit the public or customers
into the room where such machines are located unless there is on duty in the
establishment at all times a competent person in charge of the establishment,
and in charge of the operation of such machines. There shall be warning signs
posted in places of easy observation warning of the dangers in the event
leakage of liquids, gas or vapor occurs. It shall be unlawful to permit any
residue containing solvent to flow into the sewer system of the municipality;
tightly covered metal containers may be used for temporary storage of such
waste outside the building. Such containers shall bear labels indicating the
contents and dangers involved in handling, and shall be locked if in an
unenclosed place.
   At least one legible sign shall be maintained in a place available to
customers giving the name, address and phone number of the owner of the
establishment, and the service department or agency responsible for the proper
maintenance of the machine.
   (C)   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the chief of police or other
official designated by the president and board of trustees to inspect or cause
to be inspected every establishment licensed under this section, at least once
every six (6) months. Any violations of this or other ordinances relating to
dry cleaners, premises and/or flammable liquids shall be reported to the
president and board of trustees.
   (D)   Fire Hazard: The chief of the fire department shall have the right to
enter any building or premises situated in the village and occupied by any dry
cleaning establishment, in order to examine the same and to determine whether
or not said building and premises, or any material, chemical or compound kept
therein, or used thereon, or any article or fabric dry cleaned, dyed, spotted
or finished, as received, used, kept, maintained or stored on said premises or
building conforms to the fire ordinances and regulations of the village or
constitutes a fire hazard within the village. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-4: ICE DEALERS:
All ice sold for human consumption shall be clean and packaged in such a manner
as to avoid contamination. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-5: PET SHOPS AND VETERINARY HOSPITALS:
   (A)   Definitions:
   PET SHOP: Shall be construed to include any establishment that offers to
sell, exchange, or offers for adoption with or without charge or donation dogs,
cats, birds, fish or other animals customarily obtained as pets.
   VETERINARY HOSPITAL: Any institution used for the harboring or reception for
care and treatment of dogs, cats or other animals operated by a licensed
veterinarian or veterinarians under the state of Illinois veterinary medicine
and surgery practice act of 2004.
   (B)   License Required: No person or persons shall engage in the business of
operating a pet shop or veterinary hospital without first obtaining a village
business license and complying with all applicable ordinances.
   (C)   Application For License: Application for license to operate a pet shop
or veterinary hospital shall be made in writing to the village clerk stating
the location of the premises and the number and types of animals proposed to be
kept on the premises. The building superintendent and/or village health officer
shall make all appropriate inspections of said premises to ascertain whether
they are fit and suitable for the housing and care of animals and to assure
that all ordinances are complied with.
   (D)   License Fee: The annual license fee for each pet shop or veterinary
hospital shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00).
   (E)   Veterinary Hospitals: The operation and staffing of all veterinary
hospitals shall be in accordance with the state of Illinois veterinary medicine
and surgery practice act of 2004.
   (F)   Running At Large Prohibited: No dogs or cats shall be permitted to
stray or be taken outside the limits of the pet shop or veterinary hospital
unless leashed in accordance with section 6-2-6 of this code relative to
animals.
   (G)   Inspection Of Premises: The village health officer and/or building
superintendent shall periodically inspect each such place of business to
determine compliance of the provisions of this chapter.
   (H)   Sanitation: All premises and equipment related to pet shops and
veterinary hospitals shall be kept clean and sanitary at all times. The
buildings and pens shall be washed and disinfected and kept in a sanitary
condition subject to inspection by the building superintendent and/or health
officer. All animals shall be humanely treated, with sufficient quantities of
wholesome food and water, and any animal having any disease shall be properly
isolated and treated.
   (I)   Compliance: All other requirements relative to the health, safety and
humane treatment of animals as outlined in title 6, chapter 2, of this code
relative to animals are hereby complied with. (Ord. 1585, 2-11-2004)
5-4-6: LUMBERYARDS:
   (A)   Fire Limits: No lumberyard shall be established or licensed within the
fire limits of the village 1 .
   (B)   Fire Apparatus: It shall be the duty of every person, firm or
corporation owning or operating a lumberyard to have the same equipped with
sufficient firefighting apparatus to handle any small fires which may start
therein and to prevent their spreading.
   (C)   Piling Lumber: It shall be unlawful to pile any lumber in a lumberyard
in such a way that the lumber is hanging over or in danger of falling onto any
adjoining property, street, alley or public way.
   (D)   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect every
lumberyard established in the municipality, to cause such inspections to be
made at least once every six (6) months to ensure compliance with this section.
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
 
Notes
1 1. See sections 4-14-4 and 7-1-1 of this code.
5-4-7: MACHINE SHOPS:
   (A)   Definition: The term "machine shop" as used in this section shall be
construed to mean and include every workshop in which machines are made or
metal parts thereof are repaired, or where parts of machines or tools,
implements, gears, dies, screws, or other metal articles are cut, filed, shaped
or repaired by means of a lathe or other machinery, or where machines are
issued in the process of the business.
   (B)   Sanitary Requirements: No building, structure or part thereof used for
or in connection with any machine shop shall be so used as to endanger the
health or property of the employees or of the public; the owner, lessee,
tenant, occupant or manager of any machine shop shall cause all floors and
other surfaces around or beneath any machine or workbench to be kept in good
order and repair and shall have suitable and convenient sanitary receptacles
for receiving waste and cloths used in and about machine shops for the purpose
of cleaning machines or parts of machines thereof or which are intended for any
other use. No person suffering from any contagious or infectious disease shall
be employed in or about any machine where cutting compound is used. All such
cutting compound or fluid shall be kept free from infectious or harmful matter.
   (C)   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to make or cause
to be made such inspections of the premises as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-8: PAINT STORES:
It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect the premises of paint stores
to determine if combustible materials are being stored in accordance with the
fire regulations of the village. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-9: PARKING LOTS:
No parking space shall be provided for motor vehicles in a parking lot, where a
fee is charged for such parking, within ten feet (10') of any building or
structure used for housing accommodations unless the wall facing such parking
space is constructed of fireproof materials and unless the windows in such
wall, if any, are equipped with reinforced fire resistant glass. (Ord. 633B,
12-14-1966)
5-4-10: PUBLIC GARAGE:
   (A)   Applications: Applications shall state the location of the garage and
the number of cars which can be accommodated therein.
   (B)   License Fee: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square
footage basis.
   (C)   Smoking: It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke or light a
cigarette, cigar or pipe in any public garage.
   (D)   Premises; Building: It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any
public garage in a frame building, or in any building or structure used for
school, church or theater purposes, or in any building which does not conform
to the requirements of the building ordinance. The premises of every garage
must be kept clean and free from flammable wastes.
   (E)   Location Restrictions: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate,
maintain or conduct a public garage within three hundred feet (300') of any
church, school or hospital in the municipality.
   (F)   Changing Identification Marks: It shall be unlawful for any person to
change the identification marks on the engine of any car or automobile in any
public garage. And, it shall be unlawful to change the license tags on such,
excepting in accordance with the register of motor vehicles kept by the
secretary of state of Illinois.
   (G)   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to make or cause
to be made such inspections of public garages as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section. Any police officer shall be
permitted at any reasonable time to view every car stored or kept in any public
garage, and it shall be unlawful to hinder any such inspection or to conceal
any motor car or motor vehicle from such inspection. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-11: CONDITION OF ALL LICENSED PREMISES:
   (A)   Fire Inspections: The premises of business licensed under the
provisions of subsection
5-4-1(A) of this chapter, shall be inspected periodically by the chief of the
fire department to ensure that premises are maintained so that fire exits and
other means of ingress and egress to the premises are not blocked so as to
hinder egress from the premises. The chief of the fire department shall also
determine that fire extinguishers and the general condition of the premises are
maintained in accordance with the fire regulations of the village.
   (B)   Building Inspections: The premises of business licensed under the
provisions of subsection
5-4-1(A) of this chapter shall be inspected periodically by the building
inspector to ensure that the premises have not become in an unsafe condition
for the public or employees of the licensee. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-12: AUCTIONEERS:
   (A)   Fees: The annual license fee shall be computed on a square footage
basis. A daily license fee shall be ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Investigations: The chief of police, or any other officer designated
by the village president, shall investigate the character of every applicant
for an auctioneer's license, and no such license shall be issued to any person
who is not of good character.
   (C)   Employees: Every person, licensed as an auctioneer, may designate not
to exceed two (2) employees who may be authorized by him to conduct auctions.
The names of employees so designated must be given to the village clerk, and an
auctioneer to permit an auction to be conducted by an unlicensed employee.
   (D)   Auctions On Streets: No person shall sell or attempt to sell or offer
for sale at public auction, any goods, chattels, or personal or real property
of any kind upon the public streets or sidewalks of the municipality.
   (E)   Exemptions: Nothing in this section shall apply to any public auction
or sale made or conducted by a public officer by virtue of any judicial order
or process or by virtue of any power or authority contained in a mortgage or
trust deed. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-13: AUTO COURTS AND MOTELS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1683, 3-11-2009)
5-4-14: BUILDING CONTRACTORS:
   (A)   General Contractor: A general contractor is engaging in the business
of contracting with one or more trade contractors to perform the service of the
trade contractor. The general contractor's annual license fee shall be three
hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (B)   Trade Contractors: Any person doing business as a trade contractor
shall be construed as engaged in the business of a contractor. They shall not
be engaged with one or more other contractors. The annual license fee shall be
one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1810, 11-14-2012)
   (C)   Regulations: It shall be the duty of all building contractors to
comply with all ordinances relating to the construction of building or other
structures, to the construction of streets or sidewalk pavements and all laws
or ordinances pertaining to or regulating the activities engaged in. (Ord.
633B, 12-14-1966)
   (D)   Bond: All contractors who are licensed under the provisions of this
section to do business must file and keep in force during the license period a
bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with sureties to be
approved by the board of trustees. Said bond must require the principal and
surety to bind themselves firmly unto the village as obligee in the penal sum
of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The condition of the obligation is to
indemnify the village and hold it harmless from any loss, damage, claim or
liability arising out of or resulting from the conduct or operation of such
business or the doing or failure to do any act in connection therewith. The
principal shall faithfully comply with the provisions of all laws or ordinances
regulating the business for which the license or permit is issued. (Ord. 1437,
6-10-1998)
   (E)   Insurance Required: All contractors shall furnish to the village an
insurance certificate issued by an insurance company authorized to do business
in the state providing for public liability coverage of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. Demolition contractors are
required to carry a minimum of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) worth of
coverage. Asbestos removal contractors are required to carry a minimum of two
million dollars ($2,000,000.00) worth of coverage. All insurance policies must
name the village of Midlothian, its agents, employees, officers and officials
as named insureds. (Ord. 1810, 11-14-2012)
5-4-15: EXPRESSMEN, DRAYMEN AND MOVERS:
The annual license fee for expressmen, draymen and movers shall be fifty
dollars ($50.00) plus thirty dollars ($30.00) for each truck used in said
business. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
5-4-16: FOREIGN FIRE INSURANCE COMPANIES:
   (A)   License Required: It shall be unlawful for any corporation or
association not incorporated under the laws of the state to engage in effecting
fire insurance in the municipality or to transact any business of fire
insurance in the municipality without fully complying with the provisions of
this section.
   (B)   Fee: Any such corporation or association shall pay to the treasurer of
the village, for the maintenance, use and benefit of the fire department
thereof, a sum of money equal to two percent (2%) of the gross receipts each
year received from premiums by any and all agents of any such corporation or
association or received as premiums in any way for fire insurance policies on
any property in the municipality. Such payments shall be made for the year
ending July 1 of each year.
   (C)   Reports: Each person acting as representative for or on behalf of any
such company or association shall, on or before July 15 of each year, render to
the village treasurer a full, true and just account, verified by oath, of all
premiums which have been received by him on behalf of the company or
association during the year ending the preceding July 1 on such fire insurance
policies.
   (D)   Time Of Payment: All payments under the provisions of this section
shall be made on or before July 15 following the termination of the year for
which such payments are due. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-17: HANDBILLS:
   (A)   Street Distribution Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation to distribute indiscriminately to the public, any cards,
circulars, handbills, samples of merchandise, or any advertising matter
whatsoever on any public street or sidewalk or other public place in the
municipality.
   (B)   House To House Distribution: It shall be unlawful to distribute
indiscriminately to the public by leaving at stores, offices, houses or
residences in the municipality, any cards, circulars, samples of merchandise,
handbills or any advertising matter whatsoever without first having secured a
permit therefor. Provided that this section shall not be construed to apply to
the sale of articles by licensed peddlers.
   (C)   License; Application: Applications for such licenses shall be made to
the village clerk, and shall contain a statement of the nature of the article,
cards or advertisements to be distributed and the name of the applicant and the
name of the manufacturer or distributor of such article or service advertised.
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (D)   Fee: The fee for such licenses shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per day.
No such license shall be issued to any but a person of good character. The
chief of police shall make or cause to be made an investigation into the
character of each applicant and shall report the results thereof to the village
clerk before any such license shall be issued.
The license so obtained shall not entitle the licensee to conduct any other
business without an additional license. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
5-4-18: HOSPITALS:
   (A)   Hospital Defined: For the purpose of this section, a "hospital" is
hereby defined to mean any institution or place used for the harboring or the
reception, care and treatment (including treatments known as rest cure,
physical culture, hydropathic massage and all other forms of drugless
treatment) of two (2) or more persons suffering from or afflicted with any
mental or physical disease, ailment, sickness, bodily injury, alcohol or drug
addiction; or any institution or place for the reception and care, temporary or
continuous of one or more women during pregnancy while awaiting confinement,
during confinement or for one month or less after confinement, while recovering
therefrom. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (B)   License Fee: The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
plus two dollars ($2.00) per bed. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (C)   Application: Any person, firm, association or corporation desiring
such license shall make written application to the president and board of
trustees in which application shall be stated the location or proposed location
of the hospital, the purpose for which it is or is intended to be built,
opened, conducted or maintained; the accommodations or proposed accommodations
for the inmates thereof; the nature and kind of treatment given or proposed to
be given therein; the name and address of the chief physician, surgeon or
attending chief physician or surgeon; or board of physicians or surgeons; and
the owners or proposed owners thereof.
   (D)   Location Of Contagious Disease Institutions: It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, association or corporation to build, construct, maintain,
operate, conduct or manage any hospital, sanitarium, rest home or any other
institution, building or place for the reception, care and treatment of any
person or persons known to be afflicted with any disease of a contagious,
infectious, tuberculous, epidemic or communicable character whatsoever within a
distance of one-half (1/2) mile of any residence or other building within the
corporate limits of the municipality, used in part or as a whole for residence
purposes or human habitation, subject also to all the foregoing provisions of
this section.
   (E)   Inspection: Each hospital shall at all reasonable times be open to the
inspection of the health officer or the village president or any member of the
board of trustees or any person designated by the village president to make
such inspection. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-19: HOTELS, MOTELS, HOTEL CLUBS, MOTEL CLUBS AND ROOMING HOUSES:
   (A)   Definition Of Hotel, Motel, Hotel Club, Motel Club And Rooming House:
A place where a room or rooms are leased, rented, or furnished to the public
for any period of time and which charges a fee, rate, or other amount for the
provision of such room.
   (B)   License Fee: The annual license fee shall be as set forth in section
5-1-5 of this title.
   (C)   Condition Of Premises: All premises used for hotel, motel, hotel club,
motel club or rooming house purposes shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and all portions of such premises that are open for use by all
guests, patrons or by the public shall be kept lighted at all times they are
open. All such premises shall be kept heated between October 1 and May 1 to a
temperature of not less than sixty eight degrees (68o) between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and to a temperature of
not less than sixty degrees (60o) at all other hours.
   (D)   Sanitary Facilities: Water closets and lavatories shall be available
to all guests using any hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or rooming house
and there shall be one bathroom equipped with water closets, shower or tub, and
lavatory facilities for each room on the premises.
   (E)   Exits: No building shall be used for a hotel, motel, hotel club, motel
club or rooming house unless there are at least two (2) exits to the outdoors
from such premises. It shall be unlawful to block or permit the blocking of any
exit from any premises used for a hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or
rooming house.
   (F)   Compliance With Laws: Each hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or
rooming house is required to comply with all village fire codes, health codes,
building codes, plumbing codes, electrical codes, and all other codes relating
to the health and safety of guests or patrons. Furthermore, each hotel, motel,
hotel club, motel club or rooming house shall comply with all state and federal
laws regarding the health and safety of such guests or patrons of such hotel,
motel, hotel club, motel club or rooming house.
   (G)   Other Regulations: It shall be unlawful to knowingly permit any
fugitive from justice to stay in any hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or
rooming house. Each hotel, motel, hotel club, or motel club shall keep or cause
to be kept the register of guests as required by state law, and each operator
of a rooming house shall keep a list of all persons staying therein. Such
register or list shall be available for inspection by any member of the police
department at any time.
   (H)   Inspections: It shall be the duty of the fire chief to inspect or
cause to be inspected every hotel, motel, hotel club, motel club or rooming
house operated in the municipality as frequently as may be necessary to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 1683, 3-11-2009)
5-4-20: HOUSE MOVERS:
   (A)   Fee: The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord.
912, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Bond: Every licensee under the provisions of this section shall file
with the clerk a bond in the sum of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) with
sureties to be approved by the president and board of trustees conditioned to
indemnify the municipality for any loss, damage or expense occasioned by it, by
any act or failure of the licensee, or by any failure of the licensee to comply
with the ordinances of the municipality relating to the business of house
moving or moving houses.
   (C)   Deposit; Insurance: In addition to compliance with the foregoing, no
permit shall be issued for moving a building until the mover deposits one
hundred dollars ($100.00) in cash with the clerk to cover the cost of repairing
any damage to village property in connection with such moving, and show
evidence of being covered by a public liability insurance policy in an amount
of not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00).
   (D)   Planking Street: The pavement of any street, alley or sidewalk on or
along which any house is moved shall be protected by two inch (2") planks along
the route. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-21: FEES, STANDARDS:
   (A)   Fees: The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
first location or vehicle and an additional thirty dollars ($30.00) for each
additional location or vehicle used. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Standards: All ice sold or offered for sale in the municipality shall
be free from harmful materials, if such ice is sold or offered for sale for
domestic use. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-22: INSURANCE BROKERS:
The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
5-4-23: JUNK DEALERS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 1861, 2-12-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 5-4-27 of this chapter.
5-4-24: ITINERANT MERCHANTS; PEDDLERS AND HAWKERS:
   (A)   Itinerant Merchants:
      1.   Definition: A vendor or merchant who sells commodities or goods from
private premises, but remains at one place for that purpose for temporary
periods only.
      2.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to do business in the village
as an itinerant merchant without first having secured a license therefor, as
hereinafter provided:
         (a)   The applicant must provide the village with a notarized
affidavit from the owner and business licensee of the premises he is requesting
to operate from. Said affidavit must give the applicant permission to operate
and state when and where he is to operate from and what products are to be
sold. The affidavit must acknowledge that the owner and business licensee shall
be held responsible along with the itinerant merchant for any violations of the
village or state statutes.
         (b)   The property to be used must be properly zoned for the use
requested.
         (c)   The applicant must operate and sell out of a permanent
structure, which structure must be approved by the village authorities. No
cars, trucks, vans or temporary stands are to be used.
         (d)   The applicant must fill out an application form, in duplicate,
to be furnished by the village clerk. The clerk shall retain the original of
the application, and, upon deposit by the applicant of the sum of fifteen
dollars ($15.00), plus the required license fees, shall forward the duplicate
to the police department. The police department shall conduct an investigation
to determine if the applicant is of good moral character. The police department
shall have a period of ten (10) days to conduct this investigation. If it is
determined by the police department that the applicant is of good moral
character, it shall approve the application. If the police department shall
determine that the applicant is not of good moral character, then the
application shall be refused and the license fee shall be returned to the
applicant. The fifteen dollars ($15.00) will be retained by the village. The
application shall set forth the product to be sold and the place intended to be
occupied or used for the business and the number of employees. The applicant
must provide the village with his sales tax number and must show that he issues
receipts showing his sales address in Midlothian, Illinois.
         (e)   The village shall issue an identity badge for the employees. The
identity badge shall be worn upon the person of the itinerant merchant in such
place as to be clearly visible to the public in general. Said badges are to be
returned immediately after use.
      3.   License Fee: The fee for said license shall be eighty five dollars
($85.00) for the first day and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
consecutive day thereafter with a maximum number of days to operate to be seven
(7) consecutive days. The times of operation shall be between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M. (Ord. 943A, 1-10-1979)
   (B)   Peddlers And Hawkers:
      1.   Definition: A peddler or a hawker is one who sells tangible
commodities from residence to residence or business to business, or any
combination of same. His sales are not made from one established spot. (Ord.
1419, 7-9-1997)
      2.   License Required: It shall be unlawful to do business in the village
as a peddler or hawker without having first secured a license therefor as
hereinafter provided.
         (a)   Applications for such licenses shall be made to the village
clerk and shall state thereon the description and number of vehicles, if any,
intended to be operated, the kind of merchandise to be peddled, the permanent
address of the peddler and the number of employees to be used.
         (b)   The applicant must fill out an application form, in duplicate,
to be furnished by the village clerk. The clerk shall retain the original of
the application, and, upon deposit by the applicant of the sum of fifteen
dollars ($15.00), plus the required license fee, shall forward the duplicate to
the police department. The police department shall conduct an investigation to
determine if the applicant is of good moral character. The police department
shall have a period of ten (10) days to conduct this investigation. If it is
determined by the police department that the applicant is of good moral
character, it shall approve the application. If the police department shall
determine that the applicant is not of good moral character, then the
application shall be refused and the license fee shall be returned to the
applicant. The fifteen dollars ($15.00) will be retained by the village. The
applicant must provide the village with their sales tax number and must show
that they issue receipts showing their sales address in Midlothian, Illinois.
         (c)   The village shall issue identity badges for the employees. The
identity badge shall be worn upon the person of the peddler or hawker in such
place as to be clearly visible to the public in general. Said badges are to be
returned immediately after use.
      3.   License Fee: The fee for said license shall be eighty five dollars
($85.00) for the first day and twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each
consecutive day thereafter with a maximum number of days to operate to be seven
(7) consecutive days. The times of operation shall be between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) P.M.
   (C)   Fraud: Any licensed peddler, hawker or itinerant merchant who shall be
guilty of any fraud, cheating or misrepresentation, whether through himself, or
through an employee, while acting as a peddler, hawker or itinerant merchant in
the village, or who shall barter, sell or peddle any goods, merchandise or
wares other than those specified in his application for a license, shall be
determined guilty of a violation of this section. The owner and business
licensee where the itinerant merchant operates shall also be held accountable
for any violations. (Ord. 943A, 1-10-1979)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes
for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 943A, 1-10-1979; amd.
Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
5-4-25: NURSING HOMES:
   (A)   Definition: For the purpose of this section, a "nursing home" is
hereby defined to mean any institution, place or family used for the reception
or care, for a longer period than twenty four (24) hours, of three (3) or more
children or infants apart from their parents. A home is further defined to mean
any institution used for the reception or care of persons who are dependent or
not capable of properly caring for themselves, and shall be understood to
include homes for aged or infirm, orphan asylums, refuges and shelters and also
boarding homes caring for three (3) or more women with their children when such
children are less than fourteen (14) years of age. Such establishments shall be
classed as a commercial or business use.
   (B)   Application: The applications shall conform to the general provisions
of this code relating to applications for licenses and shall state the location
or proposed location of the home, the purpose for which it is to be opened,
conducted or maintained, the accommodations for the inmates thereof, the nature
and kind of care, instruction or benefits given or proposed to be given
therein, the names and addresses of the officials and/or board of officials
conducting, managing or maintaining said home, the name and address of the
chief physician, surgeon or attending physician or surgeon, or the names and
addresses of the board of physicians or surgeons attending therein if there is
such a board.
   (C)   Inspection: It shall be the duty of the health officer, upon
presentation of such application, to make or cause to be made strict inquiry
into the facts set out in such application and if upon inquiry and inspection
he shall find that such home complies with all ordinances and statutes relating
thereto, he shall recommend to the president and board of trustees that a
license be issued. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (D)   License Fee: The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
plus four dollars ($4.00) per bed. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (E)   Accommodations For Inmates; Regulations As To Sanitation: In every
such home each room occupied or to be occupied by inmates shall be of such
dimensions as shall give each inmate not less than four hundred (400) cubic
feet of air space. Every such room shall have at least one window connecting
with the external air for each four (4) beds. Said windows shall be of such
dimensions as shall secure to each inmate at least one thousand five hundred
(1,500) cubic feet of fresh air per hour by natural ventilation, or in case
said window shall not secure one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of
fresh air per hour by natural ventilation, then each room shall, in addition
thereto, be fitted with such appliances for ventilation as shall secure to each
inmate in said room at least one thousand five hundred (1,500) cubic feet of
fresh air per hour. Each bed shall have at least forty (40) square feet of
floor space, and in every room or dormitory containing more than one bed, the
beds shall be so arranged as to leave a passageway of not less than two feet
(2') horizontally on all sides of each bed.
Each ward or wing in said home shall have running water furnished in one or
more places, either in said ward or convenient thereto so that the same be
adequate and convenient to the occupants thereof. The plumbing, water closets,
bathrooms and other sanitary appliances and equipment shall be constructed in
accordance with the village ordinance relating thereto. The floor of the cellar
or basement in the building used as a home shall be properly cemented so as to
be watertight.
The halls of each floor shall be open to the external air with suitable
windows, and shall have no room or other obstruction at either end thereof,
unless sufficient light and ventilation is otherwise provided for such halls,
and the building as a whole shall be provided with adequate and proper fire
escapes, stairways or inclines for exit.
All homes, including the culinary department, dining rooms, laundry,
laboratory, morgue and postmortem rooms connected with the same shall be
equipped from May 15 to November 15 with doors, screens and other appliances
necessary for the exclusion of flies. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-26: OUTDOOR ADVERTISING:
   (A)   Definition: The term "outdoor advertiser" as used in this section
shall mean and is hereby defined to mean any person, firm or corporation
engaged in the business of placing, posting or painting any sign,
advertisement, notice of display in one or more places for the purpose of
outdoor advertising so that the resultant display is visible from any street,
alley, sidewalk or other public place.
   (B)   Applications: Applications shall be accompanied by a list of all
places, including billboards or natural structures, on which it is intended to
place signs or advertisements. This list shall be added to from time to time by
the licensee as a right to post or place advertisements or signs on additional
places as required. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (C)   License Fee: The annual license fee shall be seventy dollars ($70.00)
for each billboard or poster panel maintained in the municipality. (Ord. 912,
4-12-1978)
   (D)   Consent Of Owner: It shall be unlawful to post any advertisements on
any premises in the municipality without the consent of the owner of such
premises. Such consents must be in writing, and must be filed with the clerk.
   (E)   Refuse: It shall be unlawful for any person, engaged in outdoor
advertising to permit any refuse resulting from this work to accumulate
anywhere in the municipality, excepting by placing it in properly established
refuse receptacles. It shall be unlawful to permit any loose or flapping or
combustible materials to hang from or to be attached to any billboard or
signboard or other place used for display or advertising purposes. All refuse
resulting from the operation of this business must be carefully gathered up and
properly disposed of.
   (F)   Weeds And Materials At Base Of Billboards: It shall be the duty of
every outdoor advertiser to keep all grass and weeds, and other growths, except
trees and ornamental shrubbery, cut down so that the same shall not grow to a
height greater than ten inches (10") within six feet (6') of any billboard or
signboard used by him; provided that this obligation shall extend only to
property controlled by the advertiser.
   (G)   Unlawful Advertising: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to post or display any advertisement of an obscene or immoral
character, or any advertisement of any unlawful gathering, or advertisement of
unlawful sales.
   (H)   Disfiguring Signs: It shall be unlawful to mutilate or disfigure in
any way any lawful sign or advertisements in the municipality.
   (I)   Name Of Advertiser: It shall be unlawful for any outdoor advertiser to
carry on his business unless the name of such advertiser is attached, displayed
or printed on all billboards or signboards used by him, or on any notice,
placard, or advertisement posted by him, in such lettering as to be visible
from a distance of at least five feet (5') from the notice of advertisement.
   (J)   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not be construed to
apply to the posting of signs or notices by order of any court or by any public
officer in the performance of his duties. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-27: PAWNBROKERS AND JUNK DEALERS:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the following meanings:
   INDIVIDUALLY IDENTIFIABLE ARTICLES: Articles that are individually
identifiable by a serial number or other applied numbers, letters,
characteristics or markings or other unique features that serve to distinguish
it from any other similar article and can be used to establish ownership of the
article.
   JUNK DEALER: Every owner, operator or employee engaged in the business of
the purchase, sale, trade or barter of secondhand articles, including, but not
limited to, recyclable materials, scrap metal, electronics, video game systems,
video games, video game accessories, jewelry, valuable and/or precious metals
and stones, or household goods, shall be deemed to be a junk dealer, whether
such dealer operates from a fixed storefront business or is conducting business
on a temporary, short term basis from a nonfixed location. Persons selling
personal property belonging to them or family members on a temporary basis from
their own residential property in the form of a properly permitted garage sale
or yard sale shall not be considered a precious metals dealer and are exempt
from reporting requirements required by this section. This definition shall
include "cash for gold" stores or consignment shops.
   JUNK/SCRAP COLLECTION VEHICLE: A motor vehicle used for the commercial pick
up or transportation of junk/scrap metal. A personal motor vehicle used to
transport junk/scrap belonging to the owner of that vehicle, which owner is not
in the business of junk/scrap collection, or family members, friends or
neighbors of the vehicle owner, to a junk/scrap yard is not considered to be a
junk/scrap collection vehicle, and does not need to be licensed as such.
   LEADSONLINE: A computerized records management system designed to record
transactions between pawnshops and precious metals dealers and their customers
and transmit said transactions electronically to law enforcement agencies.
   LICENSEE: The owner, operator and all volunteers or employees of a business
licensed under this section.
   PAWNBROKER: Every owner, operator, volunteer and/or employee engaged in the
business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other
things advanced to the pawner or pledger shall be deemed to be a pawnbroker.
Moreover, every owner, operator, volunteer and/or employee in a "pawnshop" as
defined by this code shall further be defined as a pawnbroker.
   PRECIOUS METALS: Articles consisting primarily of the elements of gold
(chemical symbol Au), silver (chemical symbol Ag), platinum (chemical symbol
Pt) or palladium (chemical symbol Pd) but not including articles merely plated
with these metals or articles similar in color to these metals but not actually
consisting of them.
   (B)   Exemptions: This section shall not apply to businesses or charitable
organizations that accept donated goods for resale and to precious metal
dealers that are purchasing precious metals solely at home sales nor shall it
apply to the sale or purchase of aluminum cans.
   (C)   Electronic Reporting Of Transactions: Every pawnbroker or junk dealer
shall operate and maintain a computer system with internet access and
photographic or video capability sufficient for the electronic reporting
requirement described in this section. Any failure or malfunction of such
equipment on the part of the licensee shall not exempt the licensee from the
recording/reporting requirements. The licensee shall immediately notify the
designated individual in the police department of any such failure or
malfunction, and shall have such resolved as soon as practicable. Failure by
the licensee to resolve any failure or malfunction of equipment in a reasonable
amount of time will lead to the license suspension or revocation proceedings as
defined in this section.
   (D)   Record Of Transactions: Every pawnbroker or junk dealer doing business
in the village shall report/upload to LeadsOnline, the below listed information
for each and every transaction conducted on a daily basis, by the end of each
business day. All information shall be recorded in the English language.
A transaction shall consist of all articles brought into a pawnbroker or junk
dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or pawn by a customer and includes the
sale of articles by a pawnbroker or junk dealer to another customer. Articles
brought into a pawnbroker or junk dealer for sale, barter, trade, pledge or
pawn at different times on the same date by the same customer shall be
considered as separate transactions. Each transaction is to be recorded
individually.
During each transaction, the pawnbroker or junk dealer shall require each
customer to show a valid form of identification which the pawnbroker or junk
dealer shall verify belongs to the customer. The identification must be a
passport, driver's license or identification card issued by a government entity
and must include a photograph of the customer. If, however, a customer does not
have a passport, driver's license or identification card issued by a
governmental entity with a photograph, then a pawnbroker or precious metals
dealer must require that two (2) forms of identification be shown and at least
one of these forms of identification must include the customer's home address.
In addition, if the customer does not have an identification form issued by a
governmental entity containing a photograph of the customer, the pawnbroker or
precious metals dealer shall photograph the customer in color and record the
customer's name, address, date of birth and social security number. The
licensee shall further keep a digital photograph or scanned image of the
identification which is provided by the customer.
Records of each transaction shall contain the name, address and date of birth
of each customer, a description of each item taken in or sold by the pawnbroker
or junk dealer, the date and time of the purchase and/or sale, as well as any
individual identifiable numbers such as model, brand, serial number, or applied
numbers or letters. A digital photograph or video of each item shall be taken
by the licensee of each item purchased, taken in barter, trade or pawned.
Licensees shall maintain records of all transactions for three (3) years
following the transaction.
   (E)   Issuance Of Signed Receipt: Every pawnbroker shall, at the time of
making any advancement or loan, deliver to the customer a receipt signed by him
containing an accurate account and description, in the English language, of all
the goods, articles or other things pawned or pledged, the amount of money,
value or thing thereon, the time of pledging the same, the rate of interest to
be paid on such loan and the name and residence address of the customer making
the pawn or pledge.
Every pawnbroker and/or junk dealer shall at the time of purchasing precious
metals from any customer, issue said customer a receipt containing the
description and weight of the items purchased and the amount of money paid for
said items.
   (F)   Employment Of Persons Under Sixteen: Pawnbrokers or junk dealers shall
not permit any person under the age of sixteen (16) years to make purchases or
take pledges in pawn for him.
   (G)   Junk Dealer Not To Act As Pawnbroker: Unless they have a pawnbroker
license, junk dealers shall neither receive any article nor thing by way of
pledge or pawn nor loan or advance any sum of money on the security of any
article or thing.
   (H)   Waiting Periods: No articles received on deposit or pledge by any
pawnbroker shall be permitted to be redeemed or removed from the place of
business for a time period of five (5) calendar days after the issuance of the
signed receipt. No articles pawned or pledged shall be sold or disposed of by
any pawnbroker within six (6) months from the time the customer defaulted on
the payment of interest on the money so advanced by the pawnbroker, unless
pursuant to the written consent of the customer.
No pawnbroker or junk dealer shall expose for sale, sell, trade, barter, melt,
crush/compact, destroy, alter or otherwise dispose of, any article that is
individually identifiable within fourteen (14) days of the time of purchasing
or receiving the same or until the same has been in or upon the premises where
the same are offered, exposed, traded, bartered or sold, for at least seven (7)
days, unless the article consists primarily of precious metal(s). Due to
fluctuations in the prices of precious metals and security concerns associated
with the accumulation of large amounts of precious metals, there shall be no
waiting period for such articles, even if they are individually identifiable.
There shall be no waiting period for coins, paper money or other
nonindividually identifiable articles.
   (I)   Prohibited Transactions: No pawnbroker or junk dealer, in the course
of conducting his business, shall receive any articles for pawn, pledge,
advancement of money, loan, resale, or personal use from customers who meet any
of the following criteria:
      1.   Are under eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Appear to be intoxicated or under the influence of drugs or alcohol;
      3.   Are known to the pawnbroker or junk dealer to have been convicted of
theft, residential burglary, burglary, home invasion, vehicular intrusion,
armed robbery, robbery or electronic fencing under the laws of the state of
Illinois or the equivalent of such laws of any other state. A peace officer may
provide such criminal conviction information to a pawnbroker or precious metals
dealer, and a pawnbroker or precious metals dealer shall also access the
LeadsOnline "no buy" list prior to making a transaction to ensure that the
prospective pawner/seller has not been convicted of any such crime;
      4.   Brings such articles to the premises in a shopping cart;
      5.   Presents a serial numbered article from which the serial number has
been removed or obliterated.
In the event that any of the above enumerated customers shall attempt to
conduct a prohibited transaction, a representative of that business shall
notify the police department of the incident while the customer is still
present in the business if safe to do so, or otherwise as soon as the customer
has left the business.
   (J)   Report Of False/Fictitious/Forged/Altered ID Card: In the event that a
person seeking to sell or pawn items to a licensed pawnbroker or junk dealer,
presents the licensee with what appears to be a false form of identification,
the licensee shall contact the police department as soon as it is safe to do so
and report the incident.
   (K)   Report Of Lost Or Stolen Articles To Police: Every pawnbroker or junk
dealer who shall receive or be in possession of any goods, articles or things
under circumstances which he or she believes have been lost or stolen, or which
have been alleged or supposed to have been lost or stolen shall immediately
notify the police department of such receipt and, forthwith on demand, exhibit
the same to any member of the police department.
   (L)   Return Of Stolen Property: When any person is found to be the owner of
stolen property which has been pawned or purchased by a pawnshop or junk
dealer, such property shall be returned to the owner thereof without the
payment of the money advanced by the pawnbroker or the junk dealer, which was
paid by the pawnshop or the precious metals dealer thereon or any costs or
charges of any kind which the pawnbroker or junk dealer may have placed upon
the same.
   (M)   Inspection Of Premises By Police: The chief of police or any officer
designated by him shall have general supervision over all pawnbrokers and junk
dealers, and shall also have power to inspect their respective places of
business and all articles or things kept therein, whenever he shall deem it
necessary to do so.
   (N)   Hours Of Operation: No business licensed under this section shall
purchase or accept goods, articles or things whatsoever, from any person
outside of posted business hours.
   (O)   Solicitation Of Articles: No person licensed under this section shall
be permitted to solicit business of any nature upon any street or public
highway in the village.
   (P)   License Requirement: In addition to any license which may be required
by the state of Illinois:
      1.   No person shall engage in, carry on or conduct the business of a
pawnbroker or junk dealer unless the business is licensed as such by the
village.
      2.   A pawnbroker license and junk dealer license are separate from each
other, and the license shall state for which it is.
      3.   A pawnbroker license shall entitle the licensee to engage in the
purchase, sale, trade or barter of secondhand articles in addition to the
business of receiving property in pledge or as security for money or other
things but shall not entitle the licensee to the use of a junk/scrap collection
vehicle.
      4.   A junk dealer license will entitle the licensee to engage in the
purchase, sale, trade or barter of secondhand articles and the use of one junk/
scrap collection vehicle, but shall not entitle the licensee to engage in the
business of a pawnbroker.
      5.   Neither a pawnbroker nor a junk dealer license is transferable.
      6.   A license shall only be issued to the actual owner, operator or
manager of the business for which the license is sought.
      7.   Should a pawnbroker or junk dealer own multiple businesses or have
multiple locations within the village where activities which are regulated by
this chapter take place, he must secure a separate license for each business
and/or location.
   (Q)   Fees: The annual fee for a pawnbroker's license and/or a junk dealer's
license shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   (R)   Application: Any person desiring a license as a pawnbroker or junk
dealer shall make application in writing to the clerk, setting out in the
application the full name and residence of the applicant, if an individual, and
if a corporation, the name and residence of each of its officers. Such
application shall also set out the location at which it is intended or desired
to conduct such business, and such other information as the clerk or his
designee shall from time to time deem appropriate. The chief of police or his
designee shall investigate each applicant for these licenses. This person shall
report the findings to the clerk who shall determine whether the person has a
history of past criminal conduct or criminal associations that would make it
not in the best interests of the village of Midlothian to issue a license to
the applicant to engage in such business.
   (S)   Penalties: In addition to revocation and/or suspension of the business
license, any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of
this section shall be subject to, at a minimum, a fine of not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00). (Ord. 1861, 2-12-2014)
5-4-28: FUEL DEALERS AND BULK STORAGE OF PETROLEUM PRODUCTS:
   (A)   Fees: The annual license fee for a fuel dealer or the bulk storage of
petroleum products shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first location and
vehicle and an additional thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional location
or vehicle. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Application: An application for said license shall be made in
conformity with the general requirements of this chapter relating to
applications for licenses. In addition such application shall state whether the
applicant uses or proposes to use storage facilities in connection with the
business of fuel dealer and if so, the location, place or premises where such
storage facilities are located or to be located, and capacity, and the number
of vehicles, if any, to be used in connection with said business.
The building inspector and inspector of the bureau of fire prevention shall
investigate such application and the matters and things therein stated.
   (C)   Emblems For Vehicles: Said licensee shall obtain from the village
clerk, at the time of the issuance and delivery of a license hereunder, as many
serial number license emblems or stickers as is required, allotting one such
emblem or sticker to each vehicle used by said licensee in connection with said
business, which emblems or stickers shall have plainly imprinted or stamped
thereon the words "Licensed Fuel Dealer's Vehicle, Village of Midlothian".
Similar additional emblems or stickers shall be issued and delivered to said
licensee upon the payment of the required license fee therefor for each vehicle
that may be added to said licensee's equipment and used in connection with said
business at any time during the current year for which said license was issued.
The licensee shall place or cause to be placed such emblem or sticker plainly
exposed to public view upon the inside of the windshield of such vehicle.
   (D)   Special Regulations: All places of business of fuel dealers or the
bulk storage of petroleum products shall be kept in a clean condition free from
accumulations of rags, wastepaper and other combustible waste materials.
Smoking shall be prohibited thereon. All such premises and all vehicles used in
connection with the business shall be inspected by an inspector of the bureau
of fire prevention at least once every year.
It shall be unlawful for any licensee to refuel any fuel storage container or
tank used in connection with an oil burning heater, boiler or furnace unless
such storage container or tank is equipped with an automatic or return vent
pipe or unless the fill pipe of such storage container or tank is equipped with
a screw or automatic cap. It shall be the duty of every licensee after filling
or refilling any fuel storage container or tank to replace the screw cap on
such fill tank, or if equipped with an automatic cap, to see to it that said
fill cap is properly closed. (Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-29: REAL ESTATE BROKERS:
   (A)   Definition: For the purpose of this chapter, a "real estate broker" is
defined as any person, association, copartnership or corporation, who, as an
agent, for a consideration, sells or offers for sale, buys or offers to buy, or
negotiates the purchase or sale or exchange of real estate, or who leases, or
offers to lease, or rents or offers for rent, any real estate or negotiates
leases, thereof, or of the improvement therein; for another or others; or who
employs any person as a real estate salesman to perform any of the above acts.
   (B)   Signs: It shall be unlawful for any "real estate broker" as defined in
subsection (A) of this section, to erect or maintain any sign on any real
estate without first having obtained a village real estate broker's license.
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
   (C)   Fee: The fee for a real estate broker's license shall be the sum of
fifty dollars ($50.00) per annum. No license shall be issued for a sum less
than the full amount of the annual license fee. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (D)   Revocation: The president shall have the power to revoke a license
issued under this chapter, whenever a licensee, directly or indirectly, shall
in the president's judgment be guilty of:
      1.   Making any substantial misrepresentation, or engaging in untruthful
advertising, or
      2.   Making any false promises or other representations of a character
likely to influence, persuade, or induce action contrary to the best interest
of the village and preservation of property values in the village, or
      3.   Pursuing a continued and flagrant course of misrepresentation or the
making of false promises through agents or salesmen or advertising or
otherwise, or
      4.   Any misleading or untruthful advertising, or using any trade name or
insignia of membership in any real estate organization of which the licensee is
not a member, or
      5.   Acting for more than one part in a transaction without the knowledge
of all parties for whom he acts, or
      6.   Failure to furnish copies upon request of all documents relating to
a real estate transaction to all parties executing the same, or
      7.   Paying a commission or valuable consideration to any person for acts
or services performed in violation of this chapter, or
      8.   Having demonstrated unworthiness or incompetency to act as a real
estate broker in such manner as to endanger the interest of the public, or
      9.   Employing any person as a salesman on a purely temporary or single
deal basis as a means of evading the law regarding payment of commissions or
any of the provisions of this chapter, or
      10.   Of displaying a "for rent" or "for sale" sign on any property
without the written consent of an owner or his duly authorized agent, or
advertising that any property is for sale or for rent in a newspaper or other
publication without the consent of the owner or his authorized agent, or
      11.   Failing, within a reasonable time, to provide information requested
by the village president as a result of a protest or informal complaint to the
village, which would indicate a violation of this section, or
      12.   Disregarding or violating any provision of this section, or
      13.   Any other conduct, whether of the same or different character from
that hereinbefore specified which constitutes dishonest dealing. (Ord. 663B,
12-14-1966)
5-4-30: SCAVENGERS:
   (A)   License Fees: The annual license fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00), plus fifty dollars ($50.00) for each truck over one truck used in
the business. (Ord. 996, 3-11-1981)
   (B)   Vehicles: Any vehicle used by such scavenger in his business shall be
watertight, and equipped with airtight covers for such portions as are used for
the transportation of refuse. It shall be unlawful for any such vehicle to be
driven over or through any street in the municipality during or on a Sunday.
   (C)   Disposal: It shall be unlawful for any scavenger to dispose of or
store any refuse in any place in the municipality limits or within one mile
thereof, excepting with the permission of the president and board of trustees.
(Ord. 663B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-31: SERVICE STATIONS:
   (A)   Fees: The annual license fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) plus ten
dollars ($10.00) per nozzle. (Ord. 1107, 11-13-1985)
   (B)   Definition: A "service station" is any place of business where
gasoline or any highly volatile fuels for motor vehicles or internal combustion
engines are sold or offered for sale.
   (C)   Fire Extinguishers: Each service station shall be equipped with at
least one chemical fire extinguisher suitable for oil or gasoline fires, kept
in serviceable condition.
   (D)   Nonbusiness Filling Stations: Any person maintaining or operating any
storage tank for gasoline for the use of automobiles of the owner, lessee,
employees or agents of such person, shall comply with all of the provisions of
this section other than the requirement for the payment of a fee.
   (E)   Bulk Sales Prohibited: No motor fuels shall be dispensed at any
service station except into the fuel tanks of motor vehicles; provided,
however, that individual sales up to five (5) gallons may be made in metal
receptacles when painted red and labeled in full conformity with the Illinois
red can gasoline law.
   (F)   Safety Regulations:
      1.   No gasoline, naphtha or other flammable liquids shall be kept inside
a service station except in original sealed containers.
      2.   No person other than the service station owner or an authorized
employee shall use or operate any motor fuel dispensing equipment at any
service station.
      3.   No motor vehicle shall be serviced until the ignition has been
turned off.
      4.   No open lights or flames shall be permitted except within a stove in
the station building.
      5.   Premises must be kept clean and neat, free from rubbish or trash.
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-32: SOLICITORS:
   (A)   Definition And License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person
to engage in any commercial business as a solicitor without securing a license
as herein provided. Solicitor is defined as a person who enters upon
residential or business premises without the previous consent of the occupant
for the purpose of selling or taking orders to sell any goods, services or to
acquire information for any commercial business purpose.
   (B)   License Fee: There is hereby imposed a license fee of ten dollars
($10.00) per day per person soliciting in the Village.
   (C)   Application For License: All applicants for licenses required by this
section shall file a written application with the Village Clerk. The
application shall be signed by the applicant if an individual, by a partner if
a partnership or by a duly authorized signatory if a corporation. Applications
shall be made on forms available in the Office of the Village Clerk.
      1.   Investigation: Upon receipt of an application for a license required
by this section, the Village Clerk shall request the Chief of Police to
investigate the applicant. The Chief of Police is limited to ten (10) days to
conduct this investigation.
      2.   Reasons For Disapproval Of Applications: The Village Clerk shall
approve the application unless the investigation discloses tangible evidence
that the conduct of the applicant's business would pose a substantial threat to
the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. In particular, tangible
evidence of any of the following will constitute a valid reason for disapproval
of an application:
         (a)   The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving moral
turpitude;
         (b)   The applicant has made willful misstatements in the application;
         (c)   The applicant has committed prior violations of ordinances
pertaining to commercial business conduct and/or this section;
         (d)   The applicant has committed prior fraudulent acts; and/or
         (e)   The applicant has a record of continual breaches of solicited
contracts.
   (D)   Identification Badge: Upon issuance of a license under this section an
identification badge with the name of the authorized solicitor and the
expiration date of the license in large bold font shall be issued. The badge
shall be worn in such place as to be clearly visible to the public in general
and contain the words "Licensed Solicitor" and the number of the license.
   (E)   Six Month Limitation: In no case shall any license for soliciting be
valid for more than a six (6) month period.
   (F)   Exceptions To Section: The provisions of this section shall not apply
to officers or employees of the Village, County, State or Federal government or
any subdivision thereof when on official business or to political, religious or
other constitutionally protected speech.
   (G)   Revocation: Any permit may be revoked by the Village President or the
Chief of Police because of any violation by the solicitor of this section or of
any other provision of this Code, or any State or Federal law, or whenever the
applicant shall cease to possess the qualifications and character required in
this section for the original registration.
   (H)   Nonprofit Organizations; Blanket Permits And Waivers: Nonprofit
organizations may secure, by formal letter addressed to the Village Clerk, a
blanket permit approved by the Village Board upon a finding the non-profit
benefits the health, education, safety or quality of life of residents of the
Village. Having determined the eligibility of the non-profit under this
paragraph the Village Board may waive the requirements of this section or parts
thereof for the non-profit organization. If no waiver is granted, the nonprofit
organization must comply fully with this section. A nonprofit organization
shall be registered with the State Attorney General before any permit is
granted to the organization under this section.
   (I)   Prohibited Solicitation:
      1.   Hours Of Operation: No person, while conducting the activities of a
solicitor, whether licensed or unlicensed, shall enter upon any premises, knock
on doors or otherwise disturb persons in their premises between the hours of
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M., except when having made
a prior appointment with the person being solicited.
      2.   Notice Regulating Soliciting: No person shall solicit at residences
or businesses within the Village if a "NO SOLICITORS" sign has been posted on
the residence or business in accordance with this section. Every person seeking
to secure the protection provided by this section shall post a notice, no
smaller than approximately three inches (3") by four inches (4") in size, on or
near the main entrance door to the residence or business, stating "NO
SOLICITORS". For purposes of uniformity, the notices shall be provided by the
Village Clerk's Office, at no cost, to persons requesting the notices. The
notice, so exhibited, shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of
the determination by the occupant of the residence or business to prohibit
soliciting at that residence or business.
      3.   Duty To Abide: Every solicitor, entering upon residential or
business premises in the Village shall first examine the entrance area thereof
to determine if a notice as set forth in subsection (I)2 of this section is
posted. If so, he or she, whether licensed or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises. Any solicitor who has gained entrance to
any residence or business, whether invited or not, shall immediately and
peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant
thereof. (Ord. 1962, 8-23-2017)
5-4-33: TAXICABS:
   (A)   Application And Fee: Applications shall specify the number of vehicles
owned and operated by the applicant. The annual fee is fifty dollars ($50.00)
per vehicle. (Ord. 912, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Cab Stands: No vehicle of any kind shall stand upon or be parked upon
or make use of any public taxi or hack stand in the Municipality unless the
owner thereof has obtained a license as provided in the preceding subsection.
   (C)   Bond Required: No such license shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation unless the applicant has secured the bond provided by statute.
   (D)   Age Of Applicant: No such vehicle license shall be issued to any
person under twenty one (21) years of age.
   (E)   Register: It shall be the duty of the Village Clerk to keep a register
of the names of persons to whom such license is granted or transferred, the
date when issued or transferred, the number of the license and the description
of the vehicle or vehicles licensed.
   (F)   Revocation Of License: The Village Board may revoke any license issued
hereunder for violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this section or for a violation of any State of Illinois or Village Traffic
Ordinance. In such an event the fee paid for the unexpired term of such license
shall not be refunded.
If any taxicab licensed hereunder shall become unsafe for the transportation of
passengers or unsightly in appearance, the license for said taxicab may be
suspended by the Chief of Police until said vehicle is put in fit condition for
public use.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect every vehicle licensed
hereunder a sufficient number of times each year to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this section.
   (G)   Name Of Vehicle: Every vehicle licensed as aforesaid shall bear on the
outside thereof, in a conspicuous place, the name of the owner thereof, in
letters not less than two inches (2") high, which letters shall be of a color
in contrast to the color of the vehicle, and shall be properly proportioned and
legible.
   (H)   Rates Of Fare: The price or rates of fare to be asked or demanded by
the operator or owner of any such vehicle shall not exceed the maximum that may
be set by ordinance.
The distance to which the above rates apply shall be determined by the nearest
traveled route from the point where the passenger enters the vehicle to the
point where the passenger shall alight therefrom.
There shall be affixed on the inside of each vehicle in a conspicuous place and
in such manner that the same may be easily read by any person riding in such
vehicle, a card upon which shall be printed in plain, legible type, the rates
of fare provided for in this section.
Any passenger shall be allowed to have conveyed upon any of the vehicles
aforesaid, without charge, his ordinary traveling baggage; provided that
ordinary hand baggage shall not be construed to mean trunks or sample cases.
Upon request of any passenger the driver of such vehicle shall give the person
requesting the same a receipt for the amount of the fare demanded and paid.
   (I)   Penalty For Overcharge: The owner, driver or operator of any vehicle
licensed as aforesaid, who may have demanded and received any fare in excess of
what is provided for in this section shall return the excess received, and in
addition, be liable to a penalty of five dollars ($5.00) and may have his
license revoked.
   (J)   Advance Payment: Every such owner, operator or driver shall have the
right to demand in advance his fare of the person or persons so employing him
or entering his vehicle, and may refuse to convey any person who shall not
comply with said command.
   (K)   Refusal To Carry Passengers: No owner, operator or driver of any
vehicle licensed as aforesaid, shall refuse to convey in said municipality, any
person with or without hand baggage as aforesaid, when applied to for that
purpose; or having undertaken to convey such person, shall omit or neglect to
do so, under penalty of ten dollars ($10.00) for each offense.
   (L)   Parking On Streets: No person in charge of any public taxi or vehicle
carrying passengers for hire shall permit the same, except when receiving or
discharging passengers or when instructed by their passengers to do so, to
stand on any street, avenue or alley in said municipality for any period longer
than five (5) minutes, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
   (M)   Soliciting Trade: It shall be unlawful for the owner, operator or
driver of any such vehicle licensed hereunder to solicit by word, gesture or
otherwise, the patronage of any person at any railroad station, or upon any
public street in the Municipality, and it shall be unlawful to stand or be upon
the platform of any railroad until the expiration of three (3) minutes after
the departure of such train, except to assist persons who have indicated a
desire to patronize the vehicle in his charge. Whoever shall be guilty of any
of the offenses mentioned in this section shall be fined not less than five
dollars ($5.00) nor more than twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each offense.
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-34: TOBACCO PRODUCTS, RETAIL SALE:
   (A)   Definition: Tobacco product(s) shall mean tobacco or any electronic
device used to consume tobacco or product that is made from or derived from
tobacco, or that contains nicotine, that is intended for human consumption
whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any
other means.
   (B)   Fee: The annual license fee for tobacco products shall be one hundred
dollars ($100.00). The license so obtained shall not entitle the licensee to
conduct any other business without an additional license.
   (C)   Age Restriction: It shall be unlawful to sell tobacco products to any
person under twenty one (21) years of age. (Ord. 2030, 6-26-2019)
5-4-35: TOWING VEHICLES:
   (A)   Fee: Applications shall specify the number of vehicles owned and
operated by the applicant. The annual fee is fifty dollars ($50.00) for the
first vehicle and thirty dollars ($30.00) for each additional vehicle. (Ord.
912, 4-12-1978)
   (B)   Location: No vehicle of any kind shall stand upon or be parked upon
any service station, garage, private or public property unless the owner has
obtained a license as provided in the preceding section.
   (C)   Bond Required: No such license shall be issued to any person, firm or
corporation unless the applicant has secured the bond provided by statute.
   (D)   Age Of Applicant: No such vehicle license shall be issued to any
person under twenty one (21) years of age.
   (E)   Village Clerk To Keep Record: It shall be the duty of the Village
Clerk to keep a register of the names of persons to whom such license is
granted or transferred, the date of issue or transfer, the number of the
license and the description of the vehicle or vehicles licensed.
   (F)   Revocation Of License: The Village Board may revoke any license issued
hereunder for violation of or failure to comply with any of the provisions of
this section or for a violation of any State of Illinois or Village Traffic
Ordinance. In such event the fee paid for the unexpired term of such license
shall not be refunded:
If any tow vehicle licensed hereunder becomes unsafe for towing or unsightly in
appearance, the license for said vehicle may be suspended by the Chief of
Police until said vehicle is put in safe condition for towing service.
It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to inspect every vehicle licensed
hereunder twice each year to ensure compliance with the provisions of this
section.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tow or allow to be towed any motor
vehicle into the corporate limits of the Village for the purpose of storage.
(Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966)
5-4-36: VENDING MACHINES:
   (A)   Application: Applications shall be made in writing to the Village
Clerk and shall state the full name of the applicant and the number of said
machines for which said applicant desires a license. Such application shall be
accompanied by evidence that the applicant, if an individual, or the person or
persons in charge of the business, if a firm or corporation, is or are
responsible persons of good character and reputation. The owner of the business
license is responsible for full compliance with this section.
   (B)   Fees: The annual fees for such licenses shall be:
 
Regular vending machines (food or articles) $ 50.00
Cigarette vending machines                  100.00
Nonprofit vending machines                  25.00
All other vending machines                  50.00
 
   (C)   License: The Village Clerk shall issue to the applicant a license for
the operation of such machines which shall be posted in a conspicuous place
upon each machine so licensed. Each license issued shall be for a period of one
calendar year.
   (D)   Inspection And Analysis: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police
and the Village Health Officer, and they are hereby authorized and empowered to
inspect and examine all food or drink being offered for sale by means of said
automatic vending machines for the purpose of ascertaining whether the laws of
the State and of the Village in relation to sales from said vending machines
are complied with, and that said food and drink so offered for sale has been
kept fresh, clean and wholesome; and it shall be the duty of all persons, firms
or corporations operating said vending machines upon the demand of the Chief of
Police or of the Health Officer to furnish to him/her for his/her inspection
samples of all said food and drink, which samples may be analyzed by or under
the direction of said Chief of Police or the Health Officer; and a record of
such analysis shall be made and kept in his/her office for the inspection of
the public. (Ord. 1336, 11-9-1994)
   (E)   Cigarette Vending Machines: No person, firm, corporation or
association holding a business license under this section shall permit persons
under twenty one (21) years of age to operate any cigarette vending machine.
All machines shall have a sticker attached to the front which says:
      THE SALE OR THE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY
ONE YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW.
      (Ord. 1390, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2030, 6-26-2019)
      The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background,
said letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 1390, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-
1-1996)
   (F)   Penalty: Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by
State Statutes for each offense, and each day that the violation continues
shall be regarded as constituting a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. 1336,
11-9-1994; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
5-4-37: GARAGE SALES:
   (A)   Fees: No "garage sale" shall be held in the Village without obtaining
a permit from the Village Clerk. Each permit shall cost five dollars ($5.00).
   (B)   Defined: A "garage sale" shall consist of any sale of two (2) or more
items conducted on residential property, including, but not limited to, sales
from garages, decks, driveways, yards, basements or homes. This would not
include any sale of personal property which is included in a sale of real
estate.
   (C)   Time: Two permits may be issued in a calendar year to a family living
on the same residential property; and the length of any "garage sale" shall be
three (3) days and must be conducted only between the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M.
   (D)   Display and sale of goods is permitted only between the hours of eight
o'clock (8:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. No sales may be conducted on a
sidewalk or public right-of- way nor shall any public sidewalk, street or
public right-of-way be obstructed as a result of a garage sale or other similar
sale.
   (E)   No garage sale signage shall be placed on public property. Signs and
banners advertising the garage sale or giving directions to the location of the
sale may not be attached to any utility pole, traffic control device, tree or
placed anywhere within the public right-of-way, including the sidewalk, berm,
parkway or street anywhere within the Village.
   (F)   The supervising resident owner or lease holder of the property where
the sale is located shall be presumed to be the person placing or causing the
placement of signs or advertising. Any signage which violates this rule may be
removed by any person and discarded in any lawful manner.
   (G)   Penalty: Anyone holding a garage sale without a permit or who violates
any provisions of this section shall be fined in a sum not to exceed the
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by State Statutes. (Ord. 773, 2-14-
1973; amd. Ord. 912, 4-12-1978; Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995; Ord. 2120, 4-12-2023)
5-4-38: DAYCARE CENTERS:
   (A)   Definition: "Daycare center" is any childcare facility receiving
children for daytime care during all or part of a day. The term "daycare
center" includes, but is not limited to, facilities commonly called "childcare
centers", "day nurseries", "nursery schools", "kindergartens", "play groups"
and "centers or workshops for the mentally or physically handicapped" with or
without State educational purposes. The term does not include: 1) kindergartens
or nursery schools or other daytime programs operated by public or private
elementary school systems or secondary level school units or institutions of
higher learning; 2) facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or
service, or other similar facility, where transient children are cared for
temporarily while parents or custodians of the children are occupied on the
premises, or are in the immediate vicinity and readily available; 3) any type
of daycare center that is conducted on Federal government premises; or 4)
special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instructions and
similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic
charitable and governmental organizations.
   (B)   Plant And Equipment: The physical facilities provided both indoors and
outdoors shall protect the health and safety of children.
      1.   The building housing a center shall be approved prior to occupancy
and license renewal by the Illinois Department of Public Health and the Office
of the State Fire Marshal or local agencies authorized by those State agencies
to conduct inspections on their behalf. In addition, local licensing shall be
subject to inspection and approval in accordance with the regulations of the
Village building, health and fire authorities.
      2.   The building or portion of the building to which children from the
center have access shall be used only for a program of childcare during the
hours that the center is in operation. This shall not be construed to mean that
the space used for the program cannot be shared by other groups or persons when
the children enrolled are not present.
      3.   There shall be a posted emergency plan for evacuation, and monthly
fire drills shall be conducted at the center for the purpose of removing
children from the center as quickly as possible. Records shall be maintained of
the dates and times fire drills are conducted.
      4.   In facilities established after the effective date hereof, infants
and toddlers shall be housed and cared for at ground level. Travel distance
between any point in a room used for infants and toddlers and an exit
discharging directly outside shall not exceed one hundred fifty feet (150').
         (a)   The program shall be modified, as needed, when there are adverse
environmental conditions caused by weather, heating or cooling difficulties, or
other such problems.
   (C)   Indoor Space:
      1.   There shall be sufficient indoor space to conduct the program.
         (a)   There shall be a minimum of thirty five (35) square feet of
activity area per child in centers for normal children two (2) years of age and
older. This space is exclusive of exit passages and fire escapes, which must be
clear. This space is also exclusive of administrative space, storage areas,
bathrooms, kitchen, space required for equipment that is not used for direct
activities with children and gymnasiums or other areas used exclusively for
large muscle activity or active sports.
         (b)   During nap time, there shall be at least two feet (2') of space
on at least two (2) sides between cots.
         (c)   Storage space shall be provided for cots, bedding, and other
equipment.
         (d)   One room, no matter how large, shall accommodate only one group,
except that room dividers or program equipment at least three feet six inches
(3'6") in height may be used to define and separate the space for each group of
children up to age five (5).
      Gymnasiums and similar sized areas may accommodate two (2) groups,
without dividers, when used for large muscle activity and active sports.
            (1)   A group shall be as defined and set forth by Illinois
department of children and family services licensing standards.
         (e)   All rooms or spaces accommodating more than one group shall be
provided with an acoustical ceiling or its equivalent in carpeting or wall
covering. If carpeting is used to control noise, it shall not be required in
water play, painting, and similar areas.
      2.   Indoor space shall provide a safe, comfortable environment for the
children.
         (a)   Adjustable window shades, drapes, or venetian blinds shall be
provided.
         (b)   The floors and floor coverings shall be washable and free from
drafts, splinters, and dampness.
         (c)   Toxic paints or finishes shall not be used on walls, window
sills, beds, toys or any other equipment, materials or furnishings which may be
used by children or within their reach. Peeling or damaged paint or plaster
shall be repaired promptly to protect children from possible hazards.
         (d)   Any thermal hazards (radiators, hot water pipes, steam pipes,
heaters) in the space occupied by children shall be out of the reach of
children or be separated from the space by partitions, screens or other means.
         (e)   Sharp scissors, knives, matches, lighters, flammable liquids,
drugs, power tools, cleaning supplies and any other such items which might be
harmful to children shall be kept in areas inaccessible to children.
         (f)   The facility shall be well ventilated, and shall maintain a
temperature of not less than sixty eight degrees Fahrenheit (68°F) and not more
than seventy four degrees Fahrenheit (74°F) measured three feet (3') above the
floor. Relative humidity shall be maintained at between thirty five percent
(35%) and sixty percent (60%).
         (g)   Areas where children read, paint or participate in other
activities requiring close eye work shall be provided with a minimum of fifty
(50) foot-candles measured two feet (2') above the floor. Artificial light
sources shall be protected from hazards of breakage by installation of covers
or shields. Other areas may be provided with foot-candles of varying intensity,
depending on the usage; the average foot-candles for the entire classroom area
shall be at least thirty (30) foot-candles measured two feet (2') above the
floor.
   (D)   Outdoor Space: A safe outdoor space shall provide the following unless
the Illinois department of children and family services has approved
alternative facilities:
      1.   The outdoor play area shall accommodate twenty five percent (25%) of
the licensed capacity at any one time.
      2.   There shall be a minimum of seventy five (75) square feet of safe
outdoor play area per child for the total number of children using the area at
any one time.
      3.   Play space shall be safely enclosed or otherwise protected from
traffic and other hazards by a fence built in accordance with the village code.
      4.   Protective surface, such as, but not limited to, grass, pea gravel,
and mulching shall be provided in areas where climbing apparatus is used.
      5.   There shall be provided a surface that is suitable for children's
wheeled vehicles and pull toys.
      6.   Play areas shall be well drained and maintained in a safe, clean and
sanitary manner.
      7.   There shall be open and sheltered areas to permit children to enjoy
activities in either sun or shade and to protect them from excessive exposure.
      8.   If an area not connected with the facility, such as a public park or
playground, is used for play or recreation, the children shall be closely
supervised both during play and while traveling to and from the area.
   (E)   Toilets And Lavatories: Toilets and lavatories shall be readily
accessible to the children.
      1.   If toilets and lavatories are not child sized, safe steps shall be
provided, such as a platform.
      2.   Hot and cold running water shall be provided.
      3.   Mild soap and individual towels shall be available and used. Towels
may be disposable. Disposable towels and refuse shall be disposed of properly
in covered receptacles.
      4.   Hot water supplied to lavatories, bathing facilities, and other
plumbing fixtures used by children shall be tempered or thermostatically
controlled to less than one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F).
      5.   The following ratios of lavatories and toilet facilities shall be
provided:
Number Of Children In Daycare Facility Toilets Lavatories
Number Of Children In Daycare Facility Toilets Lavatories
1 to 10                                1       1
11 to 25                               2       2
26 to 50                               3       3
51 to 75                               4       4
76 to 100                              5       5
101 to 125                             6       6
126 to 150                             7       7
151 to 175                             8       8
 
      6.   Toilet and hand washing areas for school age children shall provide
for privacy.
      7.   Toilets shall be within close proximity to the children's activity
areas. If this is not possible in existing facilities, an adult shall accompany
children four (4) years of age and younger.
      8.   Toilet and lavatories shall be readily accessible to the staff.
      9.   Kitchen sinks used for food preparation shall neither be used as
hand washing lavatories, nor included in the total number of hand washing
lavatories.
   (F)   Ill Child: Space shall be provided for a child who becomes ill at the
center. Such space shall be ventilated and heated; equipped with a cot and
materials that can be easily sanitized; and shall be within sight and hearing
of an adult.
   (G)   Safe Water: A safe and sanitary water supply shall be maintained from
an approved public water supply.
   (H)   Pools: Swimming and wading pools shall be safety maintained and
supervised in accordance with the Illinois department of children and family
services licensing regulations.
   (I)   Food Service: Kitchen areas shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   All food service facilities in daycare centers must have personnel
certified in food service handling by the Illinois department of public health.
      2.   The center shall conform to all applicable food service rules and
regulations.
      3.   The kitchen facilities shall be adequately separated from other
daycare areas.
      4.   If children are in a kitchen, they should be under close
supervision. The stoves are to be equipped with safety devices on the burners
and all handles on pots and pans are to be turned so that a child cannot reach
them from the floor level.
      5.   Children should not be allowed to play or sleep in the kitchen.
      6.   Facilities serving meals must be provided with a refrigeration unit,
a commercial grade three (3) compartment sink with dual integral drain board or
portable dish table, or dish machine. If a dish machine is used, it must be
able to acquire sanitization.
      7.   A hand washing sink must be supplied with dispensed soap and
disposable towels. This sink should be used exclusively for hand washing.
      8.   All installations of plumbing must be in accordance with state and
village code for food service.
   (J)   Solid Waste Management:
      1.   All garbage and refuse within the center shall be collected daily
and stored in a manner that will not permit the transmission of disease, create
a nuisance or fire hazards, or provide harborage for insects, rodents or other
pests.
      2.   An adequate number of covered, durable, watertight, insect/
rodentproof garbage and refuse containers shall be provided for use.
      3.   Garbage and refuse containers used to discard diapering supplies,
food products or disposable meal service supplies shall be cleaned daily with a
germicidal solution unless plastic liners are used and disposed of daily.
   (K)   Insect And Rodent Control: Insect and rodent control shall be
maintained.
      1.   All outside doors, operable windows, and other openings shall be
screened. Doors with operable self-closing devices do not have to be screened.
      2.   Chemicals for insect and rodent control shall not be applied in
areas accessible to children when children are present in the facility.
   (L)   Housekeeping: The facility shall be cleaned daily and kept in a
sanitary condition at all times.
      1.   The facility shall provide necessary cleaning and maintenance
equipment.
      2.   Toys, table tops, furniture, and other similar equipment used by
children shall be washed when they become soiled or contaminated with matter
such as food, body secretions, or excrement.
      3.   Cleaning equipment, cleaning agents, aerosol cans, and other
hazardous chemical substances shall be stored in a space designated solely for
this purpose and shall be inaccessible to children.
      4.   Exit areas shall be kept clear of equipment and debris at all times.
      5.   There shall be no smoking in food preparation areas or in childcare
areas when children are present.
      6.   Major cleaning shall not be done while children are present.
      7.   Water tables and toys used in water tables shall be emptied daily
and cleaned with a mild germicidal solution before being air dried.
   (M)   Bedding: Facilities shall provide a separate crib, bed, or cot and
individual sheets and other bedding.
      1.   Cots, cribs, or beds used by children in a daycare facility may be
used for other children at night if separate sets of clean sheets and other
bedding are provided to each user.
      2.   Clean sheets and blankets shall be provided at least once a week or
as frequently as needed when wet or soiled.
      3.   Waterproof mattress covers or undersheets for cribs, beds, or canvas
cots shall be provided for all children who are bedwetters.
      4.   Each cot, bed, or crib shall be identified with the name of the
child.
      5.   Bed linens shall be tightly fitted and washable.
   (N)   Repair: Facilities and equipment shall be kept in safe repair so as
not to expose children to hazardous situations.
      1.   Any interior or exterior painted surface including walls, floors,
ceilings, equipment, toys, furnishings and cribs shall be maintained in good
order, free of lead paint.
      2.   Electrical outlets within the reach of children up to age five (5)
shall be covered or otherwise shockproof.
   (O)   Furnishings: Furnishings and equipment shall be durable, safe and
scaled to the size of the children.
      1.   Child size chairs shall be provided for preschool children.
      2.   Tables shall be of appropriate height and of a size to accommodate
comfortably a small group of not more than eight (8) to ten (10) children.
      3.   Individual lockers, cubicles, or separate hooks and shelves shall be
provided for the children's personal belongings.
      4.   Low, open shelves for play materials and books shall be provided and
within easy reach of the children.
      5.   Storage for surplus toys and supplies not currently in use shall be
provided.
      6.   A cot must be provided for each preschool age child in an all day
program. Floor pillows, sofas, carpet, beanbag chairs, or padded chairs shall
be provided for school age children for lounging or resting.
      7.   A first aid kit and a chart or handbook of first aid instructions
shall be available for staff use. The first aid kit shall consist of Band-Aids,
sterile bandages, sterile compresses, adhesive tape, scissors, mild soap,
magnifying glass with needles and tweezers for removing splinters.
      8.   Edges of all furnishings should be rounded and smooth.
      9.   All furnishings should be designed, constructed and maintained in
such a manner to be easily cleanable and/or sanitized.
      10.   An operable telephone shall be on the premises, easily accessible
for use in an emergency and other communications.
      11.   A list of emergency telephone numbers, such as the fire department,
police department, and emergency medical treatment shall be posted next to the
telephone.
      12.   Facilities operating on two (2) or more floors shall have intercom
service or other means of formal communications between floors.
   (P)   Night Care Centers Defined: "Night care center" means a facility in
which children are received for periodic care during the night when a single
parent, or both parents, are absent from home because of employment, emergency
or other reasonable circumstance, and the children are in need of supervision
during sleeping hours. A facility may be licensed for either daycare or
nighttime care, or both if circumstances permit, and whether the same children
are served according to the work shifts of their parents or other
circumstances.
      1.   A center receiving children for night care shall comply with
standards for all daycare centers except when inconsistent with the special
requirements prescribed in the Illinois department of children and family
services licensing standards.
   (Q)   License And Fees:
      1.   In addition to the usual application procedure provided by chapter 1
of this title, an applicant must provide proof that they have applied to the
state for a state license as a daycare center. The village inspection shall be
made after proper application is made and fees paid, but no village license
shall be issued until the applicant shall provide proof they have received the
appropriate state permit or license and until the applicant has been approved
by all appropriate village authorities.
      2.   The license fee shall be computed on the square footage area basis,
and the fees shall be computed as follows:
Square Feet License Fee
Square Feet     License Fee
1,500 or less   $ 75.00
1,500 to 3,000  105.00
3,000 to 4,500  145.00
4,500 to 6,000  185.00
6,000 to 8,000  225.00
8,000 to 10,000 275.00
10,000 and over 325.00
 
In computing square footage, there shall be included the entire building floor
area and any adjacent storage or display area.
   (R)   Inspection: Inspection of the daycare center will be made on a
semiannual basis by the village health officer. Inspections by other village
departments and/or officials will be made as deemed necessary for compliance
with fire, safety and building requirements of the village.
   (S)   Revocation Or Suspension Of Business License For Daycare Center: Any
business license for a daycare center may be revoked or suspended by the
village when the license holder fails to comply with this section, requirement
or any applicable state statute, village ordinance, county ordinance or
regulation or any rules, regulations or licensing standard of the Illinois
department of children and family services or any other appropriate state
agency, or in the event a permanent license is not issued by the Illinois
department of children and family services after a permit period of six (6)
months, or if the license from the Illinois department of children and family
services is revoked or suspended at any time. Prior to such suspension or
revocation by the village, the holder of said license shall be given the
opportunity for a hearing before the village board of health. (Ord. 1059, 1-25-
1984)
5-4-39: BILLBOARDS:
Any individual, company or other entity which owns, manages and/or maintains a
billboard, as that term is defined under the Midlothian village zoning
ordinance, shall obtain a business license on an annual basis to operate any
such billboards within the village. Such fee shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) each year due on or before January 1 of each calendar year. (Ord.
1714, 12-23-2009)
5-4-40: MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION:
   (A)   Definition: A "medical cannabis dispensing organization" is a facility
operated by an organization or business that is registered by the department of
financial and professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a
registered cultivation center for the purpose of dispensing cannabis,
paraphernalia or related supplies and educational material to registered
qualifying patients.
   (B)   License Fee: The license fee for a medical cannabis dispensing
organization shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) annually.
   (C)   Requirements: Each medical cannabis dispensing organization shall be
required to maintain its proper licensure through the state of Illinois to
operate and shall otherwise follow all applicable state laws and local
ordinances.
   (D)   Limitations:
      1.   A medical cannabis dispensing organization may not be located within
one thousand feet (1,000') of the property line of a preexisting public or
private preschool or elementary or secondary school or daycare center, daycare
home, group daycare home, part day childcare facility or park. A registered
dispensing organization may not be located in a house, apartment, condominium,
or an area zoned for residential use.
      2.   Each medical cannabis dispensing organization shall adopt all
necessary security measures as required by state law and regulation.
      3.   No medical cannabis dispensing organization shall be located in the
same building, office complex or structure as any medical physician.
      4.   No medical cannabis dispensing organization shall erect or place any
signage on its premises or in the lot surrounding its premises: a) depicting a
marijuana leaf and/or plant or b) that use the words cannabis, marijuana, pot,
dope or any other slang term for cannabis.
      5.   Any medical cannabis dispensing organization is only authorized to
be open for business to the public and to fill prescriptions during the hours
of eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. through nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. Monday through
Sunday. (Ord. 1859, 1-22-2014)
5-4-41: ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESSES:
   (A)   Definitions:
 
                                        An adult use cannabis cultivation
ADULT USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             center, craft grower, processing
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, infuser organization,
                                        dispensing organization or transporting
                                        organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
                                        of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ADULT USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
ORGANIZATION:                           seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-
                                        0027), as it may be amended from time-
                                        to-time, and regulations promulgated
                                        thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
 
   (B)   License Fee: The businesses defined in paragraph A of this section
shall be permitted in the Village of Midlothian as provided for in the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act and this section. The Village of Midlothian business
license fee for adult use cannabis businesses shall be one thousand dollars
($1000.00) annually.
   (C)   Requirements: Every adult use cannabis business shall be required to
maintain its proper licensure through the state of Illinois to operate and
shall otherwise follow all applicable state laws and local ordinances.
   (D)   Limit on Licenses: There shall be a limit of three (3) adult use
cannabis business licenses other than for an adult use cannabis dispensary
organization, issued within the village. There shall be a limit of one (1)
adult use cannabis dispensary organization license within the village.
   (E)   Location, Hours Restrictions:
      1.   No adult use cannabis business shall be located in any zoning
district except as approved by special use as provided for in sections
11-6-2A and
11-7-2 of the Village Code and in compliance with the location restrictions in
this paragraph (E).
      2.   No adult use cannabis business shall be located within five hundred
feet (500') of a preexisting daycare center, preschool, elementary school, or
high school as measured from the building containing the daycare center,
preschool, elementary school, or high school to the building containing the
adult use cannabis business.
      3.   No adult use cannabis business shall be located within seventy-five
feet (75') of a preexisting park or residence as measured from the property
line of the park or residence and the building of the adult use cannabis
business.
      4.   No adult use cannabis business shall be located within one hundred
feet (100') of a preexisting church as measured from the building where church
services are held and the building containing the adult use cannabis business.
      5.   No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall stand about or
loiter within fifty feet (50') of the entrance way of an adult use cannabis
business for the purpose of purchasing, soliciting another to purchase,
possessing or gaining visual access to cannabis or cannabis products. Any
person found in violation of this paragraph shall be subject to a fine of not
less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars
($500.00).
      6.   The permitted hours of operation for adult use cannabis businesses
shall be between the hours of eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and nine o’clock (9:00)
p.m. Monday through Sunday. (Ord. 2044, 12-18-2019; amd. Ord. - -, 10-14- 2020)
5-4-42: COLLECTION BINS:
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section only, the following
definitions shall apply, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
 
                      Any bin, box, truck, or other container placed outdoors
                      for the collection of clothes or other items as
COLLECTION BIN:       donations; provided that a collection bin shall not
                      include any bin, box or other small container used solely
                      for the purpose of collecting money.
SUPERINTENDENT:       The Village of Midlothian Building Superintendent.
                      A person who maintains an office or residence in the
                      village and who is designated, in writing, by the owner
                      or lessee of the real property on which the collection
DESIGNATED AGENT:     bin will be located: (i) to submit the letter required in
                      subsection (c)(4) of this section; (ii) for service of
                      process; and (iii) to take remedial action and respond to
                      any violation of this section.
                      A person authorized as an agent of the operator who: (i)
                      is designated for service of process; (ii) is authorized
LOCAL CONTACT PERSON: by the operator to take remedial action and respond to
                      any violation of this code; and (iii) maintains a
                      residence or office located in the city.
OPERATOR:             Any person who installs or maintains a collection bin.
                      As applied to a building or land and shall include any
OWNER:                part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant
                      or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or
                      land.
 
   (B)   Permit Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to install or
maintain any collection bin outdoors on private or public property in the
village without first obtaining a permit from the Building Department. The
Superintendent is authorized to issue permits for the installation and
maintenance of collection bins on private property in accordance with this
Section. No more than one (1) bin is permitted on each property within the
Village. Collection Bins on public property shall only be permitted by
Resolution of the Board of Trustees of the Village of Midlothian under
conditions set forth in said Resolution.
   (C)   Application Requirements. An application for a permit shall be made by
an Operator to the Building Department and shall include the following:
      1.   The operator’s name and address, telephone number and email address,
the postal address and tax PIN of the lot on which the proposed collection bin
will be located, and the name and address, and telephone number and email
address of the Owner and Local Contact Person, if different from the
Operator’s. The Operator shall also indicate whether the Operator is a non-for-
profit or for-profit organization/corporation.
      2.   A survey indicating: (i) the position of all permanent structures,
including but not limited to, buildings and driveways located within the lot;
(ii) the location of all streets, alleys, fire hydrants, light poles and
traffic control signs adjacent to the lot; (iii) the lot lines; and (iv) the
location of the proposed collection bin. The site map shall be legible and
include a key to any symbols.
      3.   A statement indicating the scheduled times for removal of the
contents of the collection bin.
      4.   A letter signed by the Operator, or his designated agent, setting
forth the Owner’s permission to locate the collection bin on the lot, if such
collection bin will, or will not be installed or maintained by the owner or
lessee;
      5.   Pictures of the proposed site;
      6.   The name, address, email address and 24-hour telephone number of the
Local Contact Person;
      7.   The address of the website required in subsection (g) herein below;
and
      8.   Any other information reasonably required by the Superintendent.
   (D)   Restrictions. No permit shall be issued for a collection bin:
      1.   On any lot which is not located in Business Districts B-1, B-2 or
B3, or the Office/Limited Industrial District (O/I), as these Districts are
defined in Section
11-4-1 of the Village Code of the Village of Midlothian;
      2.   On any vacant lot in Districts B-1, B-2, B-3 or O/I, or on any lot
on which is located a vacant building; and
      3.   On any lot which is located in Residential Districts R-1, R-2, R-3,
R-4 or R-5, as these Districts are defined in Section
11-4-1 of the Village of Midlothian Municipal Code.
   (E)   Basis for Denial. The Superintendent shall deny or revoke a permit
issued under this section if:
      1.   The granting of the permit would create a nuisance in the
surrounding area;
      2.   The location of the collection bin would interfere with or impede
the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or ingress or egress from any
surrounding building or lot;
      3.   The location of the collection bin would impede or interfere with
site lines or the use of any pole, traffic signs or signals, hydrants,
mailboxes or other objects located near the site of the proposed collection
bin;
      4.   The Operator makes any false statements, submits any false
information or misrepresents any information required under this section; or
      5.   For any reason set forth in subsection (D) herein above.
   (F)   Conditions of Permit. It shall be the duty of the permit holder,
Operator and Owner to:
      1.   Maintain the collection bin in good condition and repair;
      2.   Use a collection bin of sufficient size to prevent any overflow or
accumulation of clothes or other donated items outside of the collection bin;
      3.   Cause to be removed at his own cost and expense all contents of the
collection bin. The removal shall be of such frequency to prevent the overflow
and accumulation of clothes or other donated items outside of the collection
bin and shall be in accordance with the provisions of this Code. The schedule
of removal of the items shall be posted on the collection bin;
      4.   To ensure that the collection bin is only being used by the Operator
listed on the permit, the name of the Operator, Operator’s website and permit
number shall be posted on the collection bin;
      5.   Post on the collection bin the name and telephone number of the
local contact person to contact in case of any emergency; and
      6.   Maintain a website which lists the address of each collection bin
installed or maintained by the operator and a map indicating the locations of
such collection bins within the village. The website shall be updated weekly
and be accessible to the public.
      7.   Failure to adhere to any conditions imposed in the permit may result
in revocation of the permit.
   (G)   Nuisance Prohibited. No collection bin shall be placed so as to
constitute a nuisance to an adjacent property or the occupants thereof.
   (H)   Nuisance Declared. A collection bin found in any of the following
conditions is hereby declared to be a public nuisance:
      1.   That is in poor condition or in a state of disrepair;
      2.   Clothes or other donated items permitted to accumulate outside of
the collection bin;
      3.   Contains items as a result of a failure to empty the bin pursuant to
a scheduled removal;
      4.   Contains garbage, refuse, or emits a malodorous smell.
   (I)    Emergency Abatement. In the event that the Superintendent determines
that any activity in violation of this section has created, or is creating, an
imminent and substantial threat to the environment or the public’s health,
safety, or welfare, then the Superintendent shall order the Owner, Operator or
Local Contact Person to abate the threat in the manner and within a time frame
prescribed by the Superintendent. In the event that any person fails to abate
such threat in accordance with the order of the Superintendent, or if the
Owner, Operator or Local Contact Person is unknown or cannot with due diligence
be found, the Superintendent may proceed to control, remove, dispose or
otherwise abate the threat.
   (J)   Non-emergency Abatement. If the Superintendent determines that any
activity in violation of this section has not created, or is not creating, an
imminent and substantial threat to the public’s health, safety or welfare, the
Superintendent shall post on the collection bin a written notice to the
Operator (with a copy to the Owner) to abate the nuisance in the manner
prescribed by the Superintendent and within thirty-six (36) hours from the
posting issue date of the notice. The Superintendent shall also attempt to
notify the Local Contact Person to abate said nuisance. If any person fails to
abate such nuisance in accordance with such Superintendent’s notice to abate,
or if the Owner is unknown or cannot with due diligence be found, the
Superintendent may proceed to control, remove, dispose or otherwise abate the
nuisance.
   (K)   Permit Term, Fee. A permit issued pursuant to this section shall be
for a term commencing on the date indicated on the face of the permit and shall
be valid for one (1) year. The permit fee shall be $200.00 per collection bin.
The permit shall expire on the date indicated on the face of the permit.
   (L)   Upon the determination that a person has violated a provision of this
Section or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the Superintendent or
his designees may institute an ordinance violation procedure by issuing a
citation or notice of violation accordance with the requirements of Section
4-20-1 et. seq. of the Village Code of the Village of Midlothian. A copy of the
citation or notice of violation, which has been properly served, will be
forwarded to the Code Violation Court for hearing; provided however, that
revocation of the permit by the Superintendent shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter
5-1-11 of the Village Code of the Village of Midlothian.
   (M)   The Superintendent is authorized to adopt such rules and regulations
as the Superintendent deems expedient for the proper administration and
enforcement of this section. The rules and regulations may include, but not be
limited to, provisions regulating the size and location of the collection bins
on the lots. The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Building
Department.
   (N)   Revocation, Debarment. An operator whose permit under this section is
revoked for any cause shall not be granted another permit under this Section,
under the same or different name, and shall be barred from receiving a permit
for a period of two years from the date of revocation.
   (O)   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject
to the fines and fees set forth in the Village Code of the Village of
Midlothian. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate and
distinct offense.
   (P)   In addition to any other penalties imposed in this section, any person
who knowingly makes any false statement, submits any false information or
misrepresents any information required under this section shall be subject to
the fines and fees set forth in the Village Code of the Village of Midlothian.
It shall be a cause for revocation of a permit if an applicant has made any
false statements, submits any false information or misrepresents any
information required under this section.
   (Q)   Joint and Several Liability. It shall be the duty of every Owner on
which is located a collection bin to ensure that such collection bin has a
valid permit and is in compliance with this section. Any collection bin
installed or maintained in violation of this section shall be removed by the
Operator or the Owner of the lot on which the collection bin is located. The
owner and operator shall be jointly and severally liable for any violation of
this section. (Ord. 2083, 10-13-2021)
5-4-43: PRIVATE EVENT VENUES:
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this Section only, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
                          Any indoor or outdoor event defined as any private party, including but not limited
                          to, a wedding reception, funeral luncheon, bar mitzvah, bat mitzvah, communion/
                          confirmation party, quinceanera, birthday party, anniversary party, family party,
                          company holiday party or other company or private event where food and alcoholic
                          liquor may be served; and where no cover charge, no door entry fee, no admission
                          fee, no minimum purchase requirement, no membership fee or any form of donation or
                          other fee or charge is imposed on, or collected from attendees for the privilege of
                          attending the Event or for the privilege of entering the Event Venue where the
EVENT (“Event”):      Event is being held. All such Events shall:
                          a)   Be by invitation only;
                          b)   Be limited to a definite number of invitees pursuant to the Event Venue’s
                          certificate of occupancy, as determined by the Midlothian Fire Department.
                          c)   Be private and not open to, or advertised to, the general public.
                          d)   Be for primary purpose and emphasis of the Event itself and for its
                          participants or beneficiaries, and not on the consumption of alcohol or any
                          entertainment provided.
                          e)   Does not include activities requiring adult use registration and
                          certification, as defined and regulated in Village Code 5-20 and Village Code 11-10
                          All Events shall require an Event Permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to
                          arrange for, host, conduct business for, or schedule an Event at an Event Venue
                          without first obtaining an Event Permit from the Building Department. The
                          Superintendent is authorized to issue an Event Permit, which shall be valid for one
EVENT PERMIT:             single Event, and on the date, start and end times and at the Event Venue location
                          specified on the Event Permit application. An Event Permit application must be made
                          at least thirty (30) days before any Event is held. Event Permit fees are set forth
                          on the Fee Schedule. The Event Permit shall expire at Midnight on the day of the
                          Event.
                          Any individual, company, corporation, or not- for-profit organization which rents
EVENT SPONSOR (“Event   an Event Venue and organizes and conducts an Event, and who is primarily
Sponsor”):              responsible for arranging to obtain the Event Venue and subsidiary services which
                          attendees and participating vendors may require for the Event. The Event Sponsor
                          shall be at least 21 years of age.
                          A caterer that holds a valid retail food establishment license. Any Licensed
LICENSED CATERER          Caterer that also holds a valid “Caterer Off-Premises” liquor license issued by the
(“Licensed Caterer”): State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission shall be permitted to serve alcoholic
                          liquor (by Basset-trained servers only) as an incidental part of food service at an
                          Event for which the Licensed Caterer was hired.
                          Any real property, in whole or in part, located in a commercial or industrial/
                          office zone, that is operated by the Venue Owner (as defined herein below) as a
                          Banquet or Private Event space, for the temporary production of indoor and outdoor
PRIVATE EVENT VENUE       events, for a period not to exceed one (1) calendar day, and may include the
(“Event Venue”):      consumption of food and alcoholic liquor on the premises, which may be provided to
                          attendees at no charge or for a fee. All Event Venues shall require a Special Use
                          permit (see Village Code 11-6 or 11-7). An Event Venue shall not be operated as a
                          bar or restaurant.
PROPERTY OWNER (“PropertThe party who holds title to the real property where the Event Venue is located.
Owner”):
SUPERINTENDENT            The Village of Midlothian Building Superintendent.
(“Superintendent”):
                          The owner of the business which is operating an “event business” in the Event Venue
                          space, and who may be either the Property Owner, or lessee of the Event Venue space
VENUE OWNER (“Venue     having a leasehold interest in the Event Venue. All Venue Owners are required to
Owner”):                (a) apply for a Midlothian Business License regardless if they are also the
                          Property Owner, and (b) apply for a liquor license if they intend to allow
                          alcoholic liquor to be served. The Venue Owner shall be at least 21 years of age.
 
   (B)   Business License Requirement; Special Use Requirement; Liquor License
Requirement.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any Venue Owner to operate an Event Venue
without first obtaining a Midlothian Business License (Village Code 5-1) from
the Building Department and a Special Use permit (Village Code 11-6 or 11-7).
Any Venue Owner who intends to allow alcoholic liquor to be served (regardless
of if served for free or for a fee), shall obtain a liquor license (Village
Code 5-6).
      2.   Every business license and liquor license issued pursuant to this
Code shall be framed and posted in a conspicuous place at the Event Venue.
      3.   No transfer of ownership shall be allowed on any business license or
liquor license issued under this Code. It is a condition of this Code that
license-holder information be kept current. It is the responsibility of the
Venue Owner to report any change in required.
   (C)   Event Permit Application Requirements:
      1.   An application for an Event Permit shall be made by the Event
Sponsor to the Building Department and shall include the following information
and attachments:
         a.   Event Venue name, Postal address, tax PIN, plaza or building name
(if applicable).
         b.   Event Sponsor name, address, mobile telephone number, email
address, website address.
         c.   Venue Owner name, address, mobile telephone number, email
address, website address.
         d.   Event Venue Management (if applicable) company name, Property
Manager name, address, mobile telephone number, email address, website address.
         e.   Description of Event, including date, starting and ending times
(all Event Permits expire at Midnight on the date of the Event), estimated
attendance (which shall not exceed the maximum occupancy determined by the
Midlothian Fire Department), type of food service (I.E. - cooking on site in an
approved commercial kitchen or catered), alcoholic liquor service, and
entertainment (as applicable), indoor or outdoor (if outdoor and a tent is
required, an additional tent permit application is required).
         f.   Food Service/Caterer name, address mobile telephone number, email
address, copy of retail food establishment license and “Caterer Off-Premises”
liquor license (if applicable).
         g.   BASSET-trained Servers (if alcoholic liquor is being served):
provide name, address, mobile telephone number, email address and proof of
BASSET training for all individuals serving alcoholic liquor.
         h.   Proof of adequate parking, pursuant the Village Code 11-12.
         i.   License Fee. See Village Fee Schedule.
         j.   A signed statement from the Event Sponsor, confirming that the
Event Sponsor will be on site at the Event Venue during the entire Event, and
that the Event Sponsor will not bring in or allow any outside alcoholic liquor
to be brought into the Event Venue by the Event attendees or vendors, other
than a Licensed Caterer.
         k.   A signed statement from the Venue Owner, confirming that the
Event Sponsor has permission to host the Event, and will not permit the Event
Sponsor or attendees to bring in any outside alcoholic liquor into the Event
Venue.
         l.   Any other information reasonably required by the Superintendent.
      2   Event Permit Application documentation required:
         a.   Venue Owner’s certificate of liability insurance.
         b.   Event Venue Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Midlothian
Fire Department.
         c.   Event Venue floor plan layout for the Event. The diagram shall
also specify location of sanitation area, alcoholic liquor service area, and
exiting diagram.
         d.   Any other information reasonably required by the Superintendent.
   (D)   Restrictions.
      1.   Event Venues shall be located only in Business Districts B-1, B-2 or
B3, or Office/Limited Industrial District O/I, as these Districts are defined
in Section 11-4 of the Village Code. Event Venues shall not be permitted in any
residential district.
      2.   All Event Venues require a Special Use permitting Events pursuant to
Village Code 11-6 or 11-7.
      3.   The Venue Owner and Event Sponsor are at least twenty-one (21) years
of age.
      4.   All alcoholic liquor shall be:
         a.   Provided by the Venue Owner, or
         b.   Provided by a Licensed Caterer holding a valid “Caterer Off-
Premise” liquor license, and hired specifically to provide food and alcoholic
liquor service for the Event, and
         c.   served only by BASSET-trained servers.
Event Sponsors, vendors, caterers with no liquor license and attendees are not
permitted to bring any alcoholic liquor into the Event Venue. No “BYOB” events
are permitted.
      5.   Cooking in the Event Space shall not be permitted except:
         a.   If in a commercial kitchen within the Event Space, which has been
inspected and approved by the Building Department and Health Department, and
         b.   By a party holding a valid retail food establishment license
      6.   The Venue Owner and/or Event Sponsor have not had an Event Permit,
business license, liquor license or a Special Use issued under this Code
revoked for cause at any time during the last four years.
   (E)   Basis For Denial. The Building Superintendent shall deny an Event
Permit Application or revoke an Event Permit issued under this Ordinance if:
      1.   The granting of the Event Permit would create a nuisance in the
surrounding area;
      2.   The Venue Owner or Event Sponsor makes any false statements, submits
any false information or misrepresents any information required in subsections
(B) and (C) herein above; or
      3.   For violations of any restrictions set forth in subsection (D)
herein above.
   (F)   Conditions Of Event Permit. It shall be the duty and responsibility of
the Venue Owner and Event Sponsor to:
      1.   Be present at all times during the Event and be responsible for
ensuring compliance with all applicable rules and regulations and for accepting
all notices of violations of the Event Permit or license suspension or
revocation and closure orders.
      2.   Post exit diagrams, drawn to scale, in a conspicuous place at all
entrances to and exits from the Event Venue identifying all means of egress
from the Event Venue, including the location of all available exits and, if
applicable, all floor-by-floor corridors, stairways, evacuation routes, areas
of rescue assisting and elevator lobbies. Exits, exit paths and areas of refuge
may be inspected by the Village for each Event. Each diagram shall measure not
less than 11 inches in width by 17 inches in height, and shall be made of
durable material, illuminated and substantially secured to a wall or partition.
      3.   Post Certificate of Occupancy issued by the Midlothian Fire
Department in a conspicuous place and ensure compliance of the maximum
occupancy of persons at an Event.
      4.   Post placards, reflecting the current floor plan for the Event
Venue, in accordance with the requirements of Village Code.
      5.   Post the Venue Owner’s business license and liquor license in a
conspicuous place and make available proof of Basset Training for all servers.
      6.   Maintain sanitary conditions in any area where food for the Event is
prepared, served, or stored, or where glasses or utensils used in the service
of alcoholic liquor and other beverages are kept and cleaned.
      7.   Provide and maintain in sanitary condition proper and sufficient
toilet facilities, consisting of water closets or chemical closets equipped
with a sink (indoors) or hand sanitizer-gel-dispensers (for outdoor use only),
for use by persons attending the Event.
      8.   Provide security for all Events that serve alcoholic liquor
regardless of the number of attendees, and security for all Events having
greater than 100 persons in attendance.
      9.   If food is to be provided at any Event, the Venue Owner or Event
Sponsor shall hold a valid retail food establishment license, or arrangements
are made for food service by a Licensed Caterer holding a valid retail food
establishment license.
      10.   The Venue Owner shall schedule the Building Department and Fire
Department, pursuant to a coordinated inspection schedule, to conduct an
inspection of the Event Venue at least once during the 12-month period to
determine that the Event Venue complies with all applicable life safety
requirements of the Village Code necessary to ensure the safety of public
assembly units. If, within the preceding 12-month period, the Event Venue was
inspected either by the Building Department or Fire Department in connection
with a permit inspection, periodic inspection, code compliance inspection or
Certificate of Occupancy inspection, such inspection shall be deemed to meet
the inspection requirement herein. The Building Department and Fire Department
are authorized to conduct such additional inspections as they deem necessary to
maintain health and safety.
      11.   Provide sufficient drinking water, vended water or bottled water as
required pursuant to the FDA, IDPH, Village Code and any other State of
Illinois or Federal Law requirements.
      12.   If the Event Sponsor or Venue Owner wish to erect a tent for any
Event, the tent(s) must be NFPA compliant, include occupancy ratings, and not
exceed the maximum number of persons. Tents must also comply with all other
provisions of the Village Code, including obtaining a Special Use Tent permit
as required.
      13.   The requirements set forth in this section shall apply to every
principal officer of the Event Sponsor and Venue Owner.
   (G)   Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any Venue Owner or Event
Sponsor under this Code to do the following:
      1.   To exceed the Event Venue’s occupancy, as set forth on the posted
occupancy placards.
      2.   To conduct or allow any activity at an Event which is defined and
regulated under Village Code 5-20 (Massage Establishments) and Village Code 11-
10 (Sexually Orientated Businesses).
      3.   To conduct any activity in the Event Venue without obtaining a
Special Use under Village Code 11-6 or 11-7.
      4.   To sell or provide alcoholic liquor after 12:00 midnight and before
12:00 noon.
      5.   To see or provide alcoholic liquor or present amusements outside of
the areas designated on the business license application and Event Venue’s site
plan.
      6.   To permit any Event to be held before 9:00 a.m. on Saturday or 11:00
a.m. on Sunday.
      7.   To permit any Event to be held or continue after 12:00 midnight.
      8.   To conduct or permit any form of gambling within the Event Venue.
      9.   To permit any patron, guest, invitee, attendee or Event sponsor of
any Event to bring alcoholic liquor into the Event Venue.
      10.   To permit any patron, guest, invitee or attendee of any Event to
leave the boundary of the Event Venue, other than those locations designated in
the approved Event Venue site plan.
      11.   The prohibitions set forth in this section shall apply to every
principal officer of the Event Sponsor and Venue Owner.
   (H)   Business License, Event Permit Suspension Or Revocation.
      1.   The Village may at any time suspend or revoke any Venue Owner’s
business license or Event Sponsor’s Event Permit if the Event is operating in
violation of this Code or any other applicable law, or if such suspension or
revocation is necessary to preserve the health or safety of the public.
      2.   At the time of the suspension or revocation, notice of the
suspension or revocation with the reasons therefor shall be mailed, emailed, or
hand-delivered to or served upon the Event Sponsor, Venue Owner, Licensed
Caterer hired for the Event and any person designated by the Event Sponsor or
Venue Owner.
      3.   Unless the business license will expire by its own terms before a
hearing can be reasonably scheduled, no such suspension or revocation shall
take effect until the Event Sponsor and/or Venue Owner have been given notice
and an opportunity to be heard in accordance with rules and regulations
promulgated by the Village Title 5, Chapter 1, Section
5-1-11 regarding suspension or revocation of licenses or permits.
      4.   If necessary to prevent an immediate threat to the health or safety
of the public, the Village shall order the Venue Owner, Event Sponsor or
Licensed Caterer hired for the Event to cease operation of the Event pending
the outcome of the hearing.
   (I)   Violation, Penalty, And Liability.
      1.   Upon the determination that a person has violated a provision of
this Code or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder, the Superintendent
or his designees may institute an ordinance violation procedure by issuing a
citation or notice of violation accordance with the requirements of Section
4-20-1 et. seq. of the Village Code of the Village of Midlothian. A copy of the
citation or notice of violation, which has been properly served, will be
forwarded to the Code Violation Court for hearing; provided however, that
revocation of the Event Permit by the Superintendent shall be in accordance
with the requirements of Chapter
5-1-11 of the Village Code of the Village of Midlothian.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any person violating any
of the requirements of this Code shall be subject to a fine of not more than
$750 for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense to which a separate fine shall apply.
      3.   If alcoholic liquor is sold, stored, handled, prepared, transported
or served at an Event by anyone other than the Venue Owner, Licensed Caterer
hired for the Event or a basset-trained server, the Venue Owner, Event Sponsor,
Licensed Caterer and non-basset-trained server shall be jointly and severally
liable for any violation of this Code or Village Ordinances or the Illinois
Liquor Control Act that occurs at such Event.
   (J)   Revocation, Debarment. It shall be a violation of this Code and cause
for revocation of an Event Permit if an Event Sponsor or Venue Owner has made
any false statements, submits any false information or misrepresents any
information required under this Code. An Event Sponsor or Venue Owner whose
Event Permit is revoked for any cause shall not be granted another Event Permit
under this Code, under the same or different name, and shall be barred from
receiving an Event Permit for a period of two years from the date of
revocation.
   (K)   Joint And Several Liability.
      1.   It shall be the duty of every Venue Owner or Event Sponsor hosting
an Event to have a valid Event Permit and be in compliance with this Code. Any
Event held in violation of this Code shall be closed down/suspended subject to
all of the remedies under Village Code. The Venue Owner and Event Sponsor shall
be jointly and severally liable for any violation of this Code.
      2.   For any Venue Owner or Event Sponsor other than a natural person,
the requirements, duties and obligations of this Code shall apply to every
principal officer of the Venue Owner or Event Sponsor. (Ord. 2112, 1-18-2023)
5-4-44: REGULATION OF BUSES, LIVERY SERVICES:
   (A)   Definitions: The terms used in this Section
5-4-44 shall be defined as follows:
 
                             A request for approval to make a bus stop in the
                             Village of Midlothian on a form to be provided by
APPLICATION:                 the Chief of Police of the Village's Police
                             Department that meets all of the requirements of
                             this Section
                             5-4-44.
                             A written notice or permit signed by the Chief of
APPROVAL:                    Police which approves an application submitted in
                             accordance with this Section
                             5-4-44(D).
                             Any type of motor vehicle that is designed to
BUS:                         carry, or is actually carrying, more than six (6)
                             individuals excluding the driver.
                             Any transportation service intended to transport
LIVERY SERVICE:              or shuttle people for distances of more than fifty
                             (50) miles and shall not include ride-share
                             services.
CHIEF:                       The Chief of Police of the Village's Police
                             Department.
                             A bus or livery service that operates trips
                             involving dropping off passengers in the Village
                             on a predictable and recurring basis, following a
REGULARLY SCHEDULED SERVICE: schedule that is published in advance and
                             available to the general public, and provides
                             service to locations at the specific request of
                             the passengers in exchange for paying a fare.
                             Any location in the Village of Midlothian where
                             individuals are dropped off by a bus or livery
                             service that originated from a location outside of
UNSCHEDULED DROP OFFS:       the Village of Midlothian not providing regularly
                             scheduled service or not operating pursuant to the
                             written approval of the Chief pursuant to this
                             Section.
 
   (B)   No Unscheduled Drop Offs: It shall be a violation of this Section for
the owner, operator, or driver of any bus or livery service to make an
unscheduled stop for the purpose of dropping off passengers in the Village of
Midlothian.
   (C)   Application: The owner, operator, or driver of any bus or livery
service that is not providing Regularly Scheduled Service that desires to make
a bus stop to drop off passengers in the Village of Midlothian shall file an
application with the Chief using a form to be prepared and provided by the
Chief. The completed application and all required information shall be
submitted to the Chief at least five (5) calendar days prior to the proposed
drop-off date. The application shall include the following information:
      1.   The full name, address, and telephone numbers of the owner,
operator, and driver of the bus. The mobile phone number of the driver of the
bus shall also be provided.
      2.   The full name, address, mobile and landline phone numbers of the
entity(ies) or individual(s) that have either directed, paid for, or financed
the transportation of persons to be dropped off in the Village of Midlothian by
bus.
      3.   The full name of all persons that are proposed to be dropped off in
the Village of Midlothian, and a signed Declaration of Notice and Intent to be
dropped off in the Village.
      4.   The name, address, and location in the Village of Midlothian where
the Applicant requests to drop off passengers.
      5.   The date, time, and location the applicant proposes to drop off
passengers in the Village of Midlothian, which shall be between the hours of
eight o’clock (8:00) a.m. and five o’clock (5:00) p.m. Monday through Friday,
excluding holidays.
      6.   The full name, address, phone numbers, and emails of the entities or
individuals who shall be present in the Village of Midlothian to meet and
receive the passengers.
      7.   A detailed plan identifying how the passengers will be temporarily
or permanently cared for, sheltered, and provided with food and water after
drop off in the Village of Midlothian. This plan shall include full names,
addresses, phone numbers, and emails for all persons who will be present at the
time and date of the drop off responsible for the shelter, food, care, and
feeding of the passengers. The plan shall be signed by the person(s) or entity
(ies) responsible for such passenger care and at least two (2) individuals who
will be present to receive and assist the passengers upon their arrival.
      8.   The person(s) or entity(ies) to receive the passengers shall each
sign the application to certify that they will be responsible for providing the
care and other actions detailed in the plan.
   (D)   Application Approval: Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this
Section the Chief shall review the application and information contained
therein to verify the truth and authenticity of the application. If the
application is incomplete or the contents therein cannot be verified, the Chief
shall, in writing, advise the Applicant of the additional information or
verification needed. If within four (4) calendar days after receiving the
application, or within four (4) calendar days after receiving additional
information or verification, the Chief, provided the application is complete
and verified, shall inform the Applicant that the application is approved for
the stated location and time. The Chief shall further provide a telephone
number to the Applicant or driver to coordinate the arrival of the bus in the
Village of Midlothian.
   (E)   Violations and Penalties: It shall be a violation of this Section for
any individual or entity to violate any of the terms and requirements of this
Section or engage in any of the following:
      1.   To submit an application that is false or untrue in any manner.
      2.   For any entity or person to fail in the care, shelter, and providing
food and water of any passengers dropped off in the Village of Midlothian, or
to fail to implement or perform all of the terms of a detailed plan approved in
an application.
      3.   To make any Unscheduled Drop Offs within the Village of Midlothian,
initiating any transportation in the Village of Midlothian that requires the
approval of an application without obtaining an application as required by this
Section.
      4.   To intentionally deceive or provide false representations regarding
shelter, transportation, food, or employment to any passenger dropped off in
the Village. The violation of this paragraph shall constitute a separate,
distinct, and additional offense under this section.
      5.   Penalties: Any person found guilty of violating, disobeying,
omitting, neglecting, or refusing to comply with, or resisting or opposing the
enforcement of, any provisions of this Section
5-4-44, upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not less than
seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each such offense. A separate and
distinct offense shall be regarded as committed each day upon which such
violation shall exist after notification thereof. The Village at its discretion
may enforce this Section through the Village's Administrative Adjudication
system pursuant to Village Code Chapter 11, Section
6-11-1 or by seeking monetary and injunctive relief in the Circuit Court of
Cook County or any other Court having jurisdiction over the violator.
   (F)   Seizure and Impoundment of Bus/Livery Vehicle: Whenever a police
officer or other authorized code enforcement officer has reason to believe that
a violation of this Section has occurred, the bus/livery vehicle involved
therein is subject to seizure and impoundment in addition to any other monetary
penalty or other remedy that may be pursued by the Village. The officer shall,
in exercising such discretion, provide for the towing of the bus/livery vehicle
to a facility approved by the Village. Upon the towing of a bus/livery vehicle,
the officer shall notify, or make a reasonable attempt to notify, the owner of
record, lessee, person claiming ownership or lessee status, or any person who
is found to be in control of the said vehicle at the time of the alleged
violation, of the fact of the seizure and of the vehicle owner's right to
request an administrative hearing pursuant to Chapter 11, Section
6-11-3 of the Village Code. The additional administrative costs involved in
impounding a bus shall be recovered by setting the Administrative Tow Fee
imposed pursuant to Section 12-15-27 of the Village Code for a seized and
impounded bus at one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). The
Administrative Tow Fee imposed on other vehicles shall be seven hundred and
fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (G)   Administrative Tow Hearing: Tow hearings for bus/livery vehicle towing
and impoundment shall be conducted pursuant to Section
6-11-1 of the Village Code.
   (H)   Storage Fee, Disposition of Unclaimed Bus/Livery Vehicle: Any bus or
livery vehicle impounded may accrue a storage fee not to exceed fifty dollars
($50.00) per day. Any unclaimed bus or livery vehicle that is not reclaimed or
subject to judicial review within sixty (60) days after the Administrative
Hearing Officer issues a final written decision, shall be deemed abandoned and
disposed of as an unclaimed vehicle as provided by law. (Ord. 2135, 12-27-2023)
CHAPTER 5
OCCUPATION TAXES
SECTION:
5-5-1: Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax And Home Rule Municipal
Service Occupation Tax
5-5-2: Municipal Cannabis Retailers’ Occupation Tax
5-5-3: Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax And Municipal Grocery
Service Occupation Tax
5-5-1: HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND HOME RULE MUNICIPAL
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the
business of selling tangible personal property, other than an item of tangible
personal property titled or registered with an agency of this state's
government, at retail in the village at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect; and a tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in
the village in the business of making sales of service, at the rate of one
percent (1%) of the selling price of all tangible personal property transferred
by such serviceman as an incident to a sale of service. This "home rule
municipal retailers' occupation tax" and this "home rule municipal service
occupation tax" shall not be applicable to the sales of food for human
consumption which is to be consumed off the premises where it is sold (other
than alcoholic beverages, soft drinks, and food that has been prepared for
immediate consumption) and prescription and nonprescription medicines, drugs,
medical appliances and insulin, urine testing materials, syringes and needles
used by diabetics.
The imposition of these home rule taxes is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of sections 8-11-1 and 8-11-5, respectively, of the Illinois
municipal code 1 .
   (B)   Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer: The taxes hereby
imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident thereto,
shall be collected and enforced by the department of revenue of the state of
Illinois. The department of revenue shall have full power to administer and
enforce the provisions of this section.
   (C)   Clerk To File Ordinance With The Illinois Department Of Revenue: The
clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of the ordinance codified
herein with the Illinois department of revenue.
   (D)   Effective Date: This section shall take effect on July 1 next
following the adoption and filing of the ordinance codified herein with the
department of revenue. (Ord. 1865-1, 4-3-2014)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1, 8-11-5.
5-5-2: MUNICIPAL CANNABIS RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Tax imposed; Rate:
      (1)   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of
selling cannabis, other than cannabis purchased under the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act, at retail in the Village of Midlothian at
the rate of two percent (2%) of the gross receipts from these sales made in the
course of that business.
      (2)   The imposition of this tax is in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 8-11-23, of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-23) which
limits this tax to three percent (3%) of gross receipts and provides the tax
shall only be imposed in one-quarter percent (¼%) intervals.
   (B)   Collection Of Tax By Retailers:
      (1)   The tax imposed by this section shall be remitted by such retailer
to the Illinois Department of Revenue (Department). Any tax required to be
collected pursuant to or as authorized by this section and any such tax
collected by such retailer and required to be remitted to the Department shall
constitute a debt owed by the retailer to the State. Retailers may reimburse
themselves for their seller's tax liability hereunder by separately stating
that tax as an additional charge, which charge may be stated in combination, in
a single amount, with any State tax that sellers are required to collect.
       (2)   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be
assessed as an incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the
Department. The Department shall have full power to administer and enforce the
provisions of this Title. (Ord. 2068, 11-4-2020)
5-5-3: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX AND MUNICIPAL GROCERY
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX:
   (A)   Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed: A tax is hereby
imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling groceries at retail
in this municipality at the rate of one percent (1%) of the gross receipts from
such sales made in the course of such business while this section is in effect.
The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to the provisions
of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (B)   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax: A tax is hereby imposed upon
all persons engaged in this municipality in the business of making sales of
service, who, as an incident to making those sales of service, transfer
groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be
the same rate identified in subsection (A), above. The imposition of this tax
is in accordance with and subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the
Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-24).
   (C)   Illinois Department Of Revenue To Administer Both Taxes: The taxes
hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an incident
thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue of the
State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this section.
   (D)   Clerk To File Ordinance With Illinois Department Of Revenue: As
required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-
24), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this Ordinance
with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before April 1, 2025.
   (E)   Effective Date: The taxes imposed by this section shall take effect on
the later of: (i) January 1, 2026; (ii) the first day of July next following
the adoption and filing of this Ordinance with the Department of Revenue, if
filed on or before the preceding April 1; or, (iii) the first day of January
next following the adoption and filing of this Ordinance with the Department of
Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding October 1. (Ord. 2162, 2-12-2025)
CHAPTER 6
LIQUOR REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-6-1: Definitions
5-6-2: License Required
5-6-3: Application For License
5-6-4: Application Process Completion
5-6-5: Restrictions On Issuance Of Licenses
5-6-6: Classification; Endorsements, Fees
5-6-7: Temporary Permits, Complementary Service
5-6-8: Classification Descriptions And Restrictions
5-6-9: Number Of Licenses Limited
5-6-10: License Record To Be Kept
5-6-11: Transfer Of License
5-6-12: Change Of Location
5-6-13: Renewal Of License
5-6-14: Licensed Business Standards Training
5-6-15: Sales To Persons Under Twenty One (21), Intoxicated, Or In Possession
Of A Firearm
5-6-16: Proof Of Age, Fraudulent Identification And Possession By Minors
5-6-17: Violations; Penalty, Suspension And Revocation Grounds
5-6-18: Closing Hours
5-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following terms as used in this
chapter shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them.
ALCOHOLIC     Any spirits, wine, beer, ale, gelatins, frozen beverages or other liquid
LIQUOR:       containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, which
              is fit for beverage purposes.
              A venue whose primary purpose is to host private parties, such as wedding
              receptions, private religious celebrations, birthday parties, baby showers,
              anniversary parties, company holiday parties or other company or private event:
              1.   Which is a pre-arranged event held pursuant to a written contract.
              2.   Where no cover charge, no door entry fee, no admission fee, no minimum
              purchase requirement, no membership fee or any form of donation or other fee or
              charge is imposed on, or collected from, attendees for the privilege of attending
BANQUET,      the event or for the privilege of entering the establishment or portion of the
PRIVATE EVENT establishment where the event is being held;
SPACE:        3.   That is by invitation only;
              4.   That is limited to a finite number of invitees;
              5.   That is not open to the general public;
              6.   Where the primary emphasis of the private event is on the event itself or on
              its participants or beneficiaries and not on the consumption of alcohol or any
              entertainment provided; and
              7.   That does not include activities requiring adult use registration and
              certification.
BASSET:       Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education and Training.
              A beverage obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or concoction of
BEER:         barley or other grain, malt and hops in water, and includes, among other things,
              beer, ale, stout, lager beer, porter, hard seltzers, hard ciders and the like.
COMMERCIAL    Any sale, offering for sale, service or promotion of alcoholic liquors for a
USE:          commercial use or profit.
COMMISSIONER: The Local Liquor Control Commissioner of the Village of Midlothian under 235 ILCS
              5/4-2 of the Illinois Liquor Control Act.
              Buildings and facilities owned and operated by a corporation or association of
COUNTRY CLUB: persons for social and recreational golf and or racquet sport purposes, but not
              operated for a profit.
              Any place with a capacity of more than one hundred twenty five (125) persons that
ENTERTAINMENT provides live or televised entertainment which shall include but not be limited
VENUE:        to live music, disc jockeys, performance artists, fashion shows, comedy shows,
              athletic competitions, bingo and trivia games.
              Any temporary amusement, holiday celebration, or planned temporary aggregation of
FESTIVAL      attractions, amusements, including public entertainment, the sale of food or
EVENT:        beverage, the sale of souvenirs, art, crafts or other merchandise or similar
              attractions.
              A lodge or local chapter or corresponding unit of any fraternal order or other
              association of a kindred nature which is national or statewide in organization or
              character, or any body, the membership of which is comprised of persons who have
              served in the military, or naval services of the United States, and which is
              organized under the "general act for profit corporation act" of the state and
FRATERNAL OR  which has been in active and continuous existence for at least three (3) years
VETERANS      prior to the date of which application for license is filed and which in good
CLUB:         faith maintains a membership roll during said three (3) year period and has, at
              the time application is filed, more than fifty (50) members with dues, paid to
              date, and which is the owner, licensee, or occupant of an establishment operated
              solely for objects of a national or statewide, social, patriotic, recreational,
              or benevolent purpose or the like, but not for pecuniary gain or profit, and the
              property as well as the advantages of which belong to all the members thereof.
              Any place of business licensed to offer lodging rooms or suites for lease or rent
HOTEL:        to the public for any period of time and which charges a fee, rate, or other
              amount for the provision of such room or suite.
              For the purposes of this chapter, means any building, structure or real property
PREMISES:     on which any legal entity enumerated in section
              5-6-3 of this chapter or person is licensed or permitted to conduct business.
REGULATED     The sale, commercial use or consumption on the public way of alcoholic liquor
LIQUOR, USE:  including any regulated use as defined under the Illinois Liquor Control Act.
              Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as
              a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly
RESTAURANT:   served, without sleeping accommodations, such space being provided with adequate
              and sanitary kitchen and dining room equipment and having employed therein a
              sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable food
              for its guests.
SALON:        A business in which the primary service is providing licensed hair styling,
              manicures or pedicures to its customers.
SINGLE        An alcoholic liquor beverage that contains no more than twelve (12) ounces of
SERVING:      beer or five (5) ounces of wine or one and one half (1.5) ounces of distilled
              spirits.
VILLAGE       For the purposes of this chapter a village enforcement officer shall mean police
ENFORCEMENT   officer, firefighter, building department officer and the village liquor
OFFICERS:     commissioner. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
 
5-6-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, offer for sale at retail, serve or
consume in the village any regulated alcoholic liquor without having a liquor
license or permit or in violation of the terms of such license. No person,
group of persons, partnership, or corporation, limited liability company or any
other entity shall sell or offer for sale at retail, draw, pour, mix, dispense
or otherwise serve any regulated alcoholic liquors within the village without
first having obtained a liquor license or permit as herein provided. Each
separate place of business or location wherein liquor shall be sold or offered
for sale, drawn, poured, mixed, dispensed or otherwise served, regardless of
whether there is any type of compensation, shall have a separate license. No
video gaming terminals. activities or operations are permitted within the
village, except pursuant to the issuance of a liquor license pursuant to one of
the liquor license categories under this code which specifically authorizes
such video gaming terminals and operations on the premises of the particular
business or establishment involved, provided however that such prohibition
shall not apply to fraternal and veteran establishments as defined in the
Illinois Video Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/5). Every person or legal entity engaged
in the regulated use of alcoholic liquor in the village shall obtain the
appropriate liquor license authorizing the service of the specific type and
character of alcoholic liquor and the specific type of business or activity at
which it may be provided. The fee to be paid for such licenses shall be as set
forth in section
5-6-6 of this code.
   (B)   Except for certain temporary village permits and conditional licenses
provided in
5-6-4 of this chapter, there shall be no service of alcoholic liquor by the
licensee until the licensee has obtained a liquor license required by the
state. If the state suspends or revokes the state license for any reason, said
suspension or revocation shall be deemed to apply to the local liquor license
in the Village of Midlothian.
   (C)   All licenses and permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
displayed in a prominent place that is visible to patrons.
   (D)   Exceptions; the provisions of this Chapter do not apply to:
      1.   Alcohol used in the manufacture of denatured alcohol produced in
accordance with act of Congress and regulations promulgated thereunder;
      2.   Flavoring extracts and syrups and food products;
      3.   Patent and proprietary medicines or medicinal, antiseptic, culinary
and toilet preparations;
      4.   Scientific, industrial and chemical products not made for human
consumption.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit any of the following
from using or possessing alcoholic liquor in a strictly professional practice
by:
      1.   A duly licensed practicing physician or dentist.
      2.   Hospitals or like institutions in the treatment of bona fide
patients of that institution.
      3.   Drugstores employing a licensed pharmacist in the lawful filling of
prescriptions.
      4.   The authorized representative of any house of worship dispensing
less than three (3) fluid ounces of wine per individual for the purpose of
conducting any bona fide rite or religious ceremony typically conducted by that
house of worship on its premises. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-3: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   (A)   Application for a local liquor license shall be made to the
Commissioner. The application shall be on forms provided by the Commissioner.
The forms shall require all information necessary to enable the Commissioner,
Village Clerk and Village Departments to make an informed evaluation of the
qualifications of the applicant and regulated use. Only fully completed forms
may be considered. Each application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
application fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and the applicable
license fee(s) as set forth in section
5-6-6 of this code.
   (B)   The licensee shall provide written notice to the Commissioner of any
change in any information set forth in the application within thirty (30) days
of the change.
   (C)   Before a license may be issued to any applicant, background checks
(which shall include the submission of fingerprints to appropriate agencies)
shall be performed with respect to the key individuals owning and/or operating
the licensed business. At a minimum, the local manager or managers and the
persons functioning as the chief operating officer and chief financial officer
shall be subject to such background checks. An investigation will be performed
to enable the Commissioner to ascertain whether the issuance of a license will
comply with all applicable regulations of the Village and the Illinois Liquor
Control Act. The Commissioner may accept the fingerprints from another
jurisdiction for persons not residing or working within fifty (50) miles of the
Village. A reasonable fee may be charged by the police department for each
person required to be fingerprinted. For purposes of this subsection, the
Commissioner may require such documentation as he or she deems appropriate to
determine who must be fingerprinted. The Commissioner's decision as to
fingerprinting shall be final. Background checks may be conducted but are not
required for temporary permits at the discretion of the commissioner.
   (D)   No license shall be issued unless a signed statement by the applicant,
owner, and the on-site manager of the business has been provided to the
Commissioner stating said applicant, owner and manager has read Title 5,
Chapter 6 of the Village Code entitled Liquor Regulations.
   (E)   No license shall be issued unless the applicant has provided the
following information:
      1.   In the case of a co-partnership, the date of the formation of the
partnership; in the case of an Illinois corporation, the date of its
incorporation; in the case of a limited liability company the date of its
organization in Illinois under the Limited Liability Company Act; or in the
case of a foreign corporation, the state where it was incorporated and the date
of it becoming qualified under the Business Corporation Act of 1983 to transact
business in the State of Illinois.
      2.   Every application for a license, whether for a new license or for a
renewal of an existing license, where the real estate title of the premises is
in a trust, shall be accompanied by the sworn affidavit of the land trustee or
a beneficiary of the trust, disclosing the names, residence addresses and
beneficial interests of each beneficiary of the land trust.
      3.   Whether or not the applicant intends to manage and conduct the
business in person, and if not, the name of the manager or agent who is to
conduct the business on the premises for which the license is sought.
      4.   A statement that the applicant may be required to, and shall require
all officers, agents and employees of the applicant to, testify (subject to
constitutional limitations) at any hearing that may be called by the village
Local Liquor Control Commissioner, relating, directly or indirectly, to any
events or occurrences of which they may have knowledge arising out of their
position as licensee or as an officer, agent or employee of the licensee and
that the applicant has informed all officers, agents and employees, and has or
will make the same a condition of employment for all employees.
   (F)   By accepting a Village liquor license, the licensee consents to the
service of process and the acceptance of any other document by or on any
employee or agent of the licensee or the posting of the process or document on
any entrance to the licensed premises. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-4: APPLICATION PROCESS COMPLETION:
No license may be issued by the Commissioner until all information and
documentation required in the application has been provided, all of the reports
from the various departments and agencies with respect to background checks
have been completed and all fees have been paid. The Commissioner may, in the
Commissioner's sole discretion, issue a limited license prior to the completion
of a background check under the following circumstances:
   (A)   The limited license shall not exceed ninety (90) days.
   (B)   No information is currently known which would cause the applicant to
be ineligible for a license.
   (C)   The licensee has demonstrated, in writing, that the business will most
likely not survive if the license is not granted immediately.
   (D)   The Commissioner retains the absolute right to revoke the license,
without a hearing, if subsequently discovered information would, in the sole
discretion of the Commissioner, have made the licensee originally ineligible
for the license.
   (E)   The licensee executes a release and hold harmless statement that is
satisfactory to the Village Attorney and absolutely releases and absolves the
Village, its officers and employees from any liability for the refusal of the
Commissioner to subsequently issue a regular license. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-5: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSES:
   (A)   No liquor license may be issued to any of the following:
      1.   A partnership, a sole proprietorship or a corporation that is not
incorporated in Illinois nor qualified and registered in good standing under
the Illinois Business Corporation Act to transact business in Illinois.
      2.   A limited liability company that is neither organized in Illinois
nor qualified under Illinois law to transact business in Illinois. The
limitations in section shall not necessarily apply to a temporary permit.
      3.   A sole proprietorship when the owner is not a full-time resident of
the Village of Midlothian.
   (B)   No liquor license may be issued to any person or legal entity:
      1.   Which does not legally or beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought, or does not have a lease for the full period for which the
license is to be issued.
      2.   Which is a limited liability corporation whose members are
corporations and not natural persons.
      3.   Which is not an owner of at least fifty percent (50%) of the
business to be operated by the licensee. The Commissioner shall have sole
discretion in making such determination.
      4.   At the time of application for renewal of any Village of Midlothian
license, would not have been eligible for such a license upon first
application.
      5.   Which does not hold a valid Village of Midlothian business license
for the premises.
      6.   To which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal wagering stamp
has been issued for the current tax period.
      7.   Not eligible for a state retail liquor dealer's license.
      8.   Which does not designate a manager for the premises with accurate
contact information.
      9.   If a manager, officer, director or five percent (5%) or greater
shareholder or limited liability company member:
         a.   At the time of application for renewal of a liquor license would
not have been eligible for a license upon a first application.
         b.   Is an elected official or employee in a supervisory position with
the Village.
      10.   Which, upon review of the application taken as a whole by the
Commissioner, is deemed by prior actions as indicated from the application or
background check, to be a substantial risk of not abiding by regulations of the
Village or federal or state laws.
      11.   Whose alcohol service operation is run by an independent contractor
unless the independent contractor is also eligible for and obtains a license in
the same category.
      12.   Owes any fees, fines or taxes to the Village.
   (C)   Unless upon due investigation, the Commissioner determines that such
individual has not been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust,
no liquor license shall be issued to any entity when a manager, officer,
director or five percent (5%) or greater member or shareholder:
      1.   Has been found guilty of any offense with regard to the sale or
possession of alcoholic liquor or any felony.
      2.   Has been found guilty of any other crime related to decency, honesty
or good character.
      3.   Has previously had a liquor license revoked in the Village or any
other jurisdiction.
      4.   Has been found guilty of a violation of any Federal or State law
concerning the manufacture or sale or possession of alcoholic liquor.
      5.   Has been found guilty of a gambling offense set forth in the
Illinois Criminal Code or violation of the Illinois Video Gaming Act at the
time of application or renewal.
      6.   A person or legal entity whose licensed location of business is
supervised by a manager or agent unless the manager or agent possesses the same
qualifications required of the licensee.
      7.   A person or legal entity whose liquor or business license
application contains false or misleading statement(s) of material facts that if
truthfully disclosed would have disqualified the applicant for either a liquor
or business license within the village. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-6: CLASSIFICATION; ENDORSEMENTS, FEES:
Liquor licenses shall be designated into the following classifications:
   (A)   Class A - Alcoholic Liquors Full Bar license, which shall authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the specified indoor premises
for less than one hundred twenty five (125) patrons, and not package sales. The
annual fee for such license shall be one thousand eight hundred dollars
($1,800.00).
   (B)   Class B - Beer and Wine license, which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor, commonly known as "beer and wine" for consumption on the
premises. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand two hundred
($1,200.00) per year.
   (C)   Class C - Country Club license which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquors on the property and grounds of a country club including
endorsement uses under subsection (K)1 and (K)2 of this chapter. The annual fee
for such license shall be one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00).
   (D)   Class D - Dine-In Restaurant license, which shall authorize the sale
on the specified premises of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises
only. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand four hundred
dollars ($1,400.00) per year.
   (E)   Class E - Entertainment Venue license, which shall authorize the sale
of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the premises of large live and
televised entertainment venues with a capacity of greater than one hundred
twenty five (125) persons. The annual fee for such license shall be one
thousand eight hundred dollars ($1,800.00) per year.
   (F)   Class F - Fraternal or Veteran's Club licenses, which shall authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquors in fraternal or veteran's club licenses as
hereinbefore defined for consumption on the premises where sold. The annual fee
for such license shall be one thousand four hundred dollars ($1,400.00).
   (G)   Class G - Government licenses, which shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor, by local governmental units, for consumption on the premises,
which premises are operated and duly licensed by such local governmental units
and including outdoor service endorsements under subsection (K)1. The annual
fee for such license shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (H)   Class H - Home delivery which shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor by internet, mail order or telephone sales in sealed original packaged
containers. The annual fee for such license shall be two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00).
   (I)   Class I - Invited Guest/Banquet licenses which shall authorize the
sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises at banquet/private
event space venues. The annual fee for such license shall be one thousand four
hundred dollars ($1,400.00) per year.
   (J)   Class P - Package Sales license, which shall authorize the retail sale
of alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where sold. The
annual fee for such license shall be eight hundred dollars ($800.00).
   (K)   Endorsements - The following activities may be granted to holders of
Village liquor licenses by endorsement application.
      1.   Outdoor service for consumption on the licensed premises for holders
of Class A, B, C, and D.
      2.   Sampling of alcoholic liquor for complimentary consumption on the
licensed premises for holders of Class P licenses.
      3.   The annual fee for each endorsement shall be two hundred and fifty
dollars ($250.00) except for Class C license holders whose license shall
include the endorsements in this section.
   (L)   If a new application is made after April 30, the license fee(s) shall
be prorated according to the number of months left in the year; provided that
no fee(s) shall be reduced by more than fifty percent (50%). The month in which
the application is made shall count as a whole month. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-7: TEMPORARY PERMITS, COMPLEMENTARY SERVICE:
Temporary permits for the sale or complimentary consumption of alcoholic liquor
may be granted for the following uses:
   (A)   Block Party - Allows for the consumption and possession of alcoholic
liquor on the public way within the designated area of a Village Board approved
block party. The fee for such permit shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00).
   (B)   Festival Permit - Allows for the sale of Class A or Class B liquor
license privileges for festivals not to exceed seven (7) days per year. The
annual fee for such permit shall be two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
   (C)   Hotel/Salon/Craft Tasting, Complimentary Service Permit: Allows for
the complimentary, consumption of three (3) single servings of alcoholic liquor
in hotels, and craft tastings and three (3) single servings of beer or wine in
salons. The annual fee for such permit shall be two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00).
   (D)   Wine Tasting permit - Allows the sale of Class B license liquor for
consumption on the premises and packaged beer and wine not to exceed four (4)
hours per event and seven (7) days per year. The annual fee for such permit
shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-8: CLASSIFICATION DESCRIPTIONS AND RESTRICTIONS:
The restrictions on a particular license, permit, or endorsement shall be
binding on the licensee. No premises or activity may be operated in violation
of such restrictions and regulations. The Local Liquor Control Commissioner
may, as a condition to the issuance of any liquor license, impose such
conditions and restrictions upon each license as he or she may deem necessary
to ensure that operation of the liquor establishment shall not be harmful to
the safety, morals, and welfare of the community. The special conditions
imposed upon each liquor license shall be enumerated upon the license, shall be
displayed at all times in a prominent place in the establishment. The failure
to enumerate any required condition upon a license shall not be a defense to a
violation of this chapter. No license shall be granted for any business to
allow patrons to bring their own alcoholic liquor ("BYOB"). No license, permit
or endorsement may be issued and no business shall be operated except in
compliance with the specific classifications of this chapter and the following
descriptions and restrictions:
   (A)   Class A license holders may sell alcoholic liquor for consumption
within indoor premises only unless having been granted the applicable
endorsement under this chapter. No employee, guest or vendor under the age of
twenty one (21) shall be allowed on the licensed premises during hours of
operation unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. Under no
circumstances shall the license holder allow more than one hundred twenty five
(125) patrons on the premises at one time. Premises occupancy limits shall not
be considered to increase the number of patrons in excess of the number stated
in this subsection. The manager or other employee shall commence and maintain
an accurate count of the number of patrons on the premises after ten o'clock
(10:00) P.M. Failure to maintain and produce proof of the said count upon
request by village enforcement officials shall be a violation of this section.
Class A license holders shall maintain an adequate number of security personnel
at all times the premises are open for business. Adequate shall mean sufficient
security to maintain order, to ensure the safety of patrons and the
requirements of this chapter. The license holder shall maintain functioning
video cameras that shall record all areas where liquor is sold on the premises
and parking areas that serve the premises. The recording shall be maintained
for a minimum of thirty (30) days and produced upon request by village
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Class B license holders (Beer and Wine) may sell beer and wine liquor
for consumption within indoor premises only unless having been granted the
applicable endorsement under this chapter. No employee, guest or vendor under
the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed on the licensed premises during
hours of operation unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or unless
the holder of the license has qualified as a restaurant as defined in this
chapter.
   (C)   Class C license holders (County Clubs) may sell or serve alcoholic
liquors for consumption on the property and grounds of a country club,
including service of alcoholic liquor from golf carts, pool decks, racquet
courts and endorsements under this chapter at no additional fee.
   (D)   Class D license holders (Dine in Restaurants) may sell alcoholic
liquor for consumption within indoor premises of a restaurant that complies
with the following conditions:
      1.   The premises shall be primarily devoted to the preparation, cooking
and serving of meals.
      2.   The premises must have a kitchen and dining room and staff and
equipment as deemed adequate by the Village health authority to serve prepared
meals on site.
      3.   The sale of alcoholic liquor may only be made if incidental and
complementary to the service of complete meals, which are served and eaten at
tables or booths; unless the licensed premises has a Bar/Lounge area where
meals may be consumed. The sale of alcoholic liquor may be deemed incidental
and complementary to the ordering and service of complete meals only if such
sale:
         (a)   Is made to a patron who orders a complete meal with the intent
of consuming same immediately on the premises; or
         (b)   Is made to a patron waiting to be seated with the intent of
consuming same immediately on the premises or to a patron who has just
completed consuming a meal on the premises; or
         (c)   No sale of alcoholic liquor shall be made more than thirty (30)
minutes after the kitchen has closed for food service.
         (d)   Any dine in restaurant limiting sales to beer and wine shall be
charged the Class B annual licensing fee.
   (E)   Class E license holders may sell alcoholic liquor for consumption
within indoor premises only unless having been granted the applicable
endorsement under this chapter. No employee, guest or vendor under the age of
twenty one (21) shall be allowed on the licensed premises during hours of
operation unless accompanied by a parent or legal guardian. No class E license
holder shall sell alcoholic liquors in the Village unless they comply with the
following conditions:
      1.   A BASSET trained manager is present at all times the premises are
open for business.
      2.   A functioning electronic identification card reader with the
capacity to authenticate drivers' licenses and state identification cards from
all fifty (50) states, is available on the premises.
      3.   Off street parking sufficient to park fifty (50) vehicles is
available for use on or adjacent to the premises.
      4.   The manager or other employee shall commence and maintain an
accurate count of the number of patrons on the premises after ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M. Failure to maintain and produce proof of the said count upon request
by village enforcement officials shall be a violation of this section.
      5.   Under no circumstances shall the license holder allow more than one
hundred fifty (150) patrons on the premises at one time. Premises occupancy
limits shall not be considered to increase the number of patrons in excess of
the number stated in this paragraph.
      6.   The license holder shall maintain an adequate number of security
personnel at all times the premises are open for business. Adequate shall mean
sufficient security to maintain order, to ensure the safety of patrons and the
requirements of this chapter.
      7.   The license holder shall maintain functioning video cameras that
shall record all areas where liquor is sold on the premises and parking areas
that serve the premises. The recording shall be maintained for a minimum of
thirty (30) days and produced upon request by village enforcement officers.
   (F)   Class F license holders (Fraternal or Veteran's Clubs) may sell or
serve alcoholic liquor for consumption within indoor premises unless having
been granted the applicable endorsement under this chapter. No employee, guest
or vendor under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed on the licensed
premises during hours of operation unless accompanied by a parent or legal
guardian.
   (G)   Class G license holders (Government licenses) which shall authorize
the sale of alcoholic liquor, by local governmental units, for consumption on
the premises, and shall include outdoor sales.
   (H)   Class H license holders (Home delivery) shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor by internet, mail order or telephone sales as provided by the
Illinois Liquor Control Act.
   (I)   Class I (Invited Guest/Banquet licenses) shall authorize the sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption within indoor premises in conjunction with
prepared food at private invited guest/banquet events. This shall allow for the
service of alcoholic liquor at private events with the following conditions:
      1.   The consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be within the indoor
premises and in conjunction with food service pursuant to a contractual
agreement for use of the establishment's facilities.
      2.   Alcoholic liquor shall be served by an adult employee of the license
holder over the age of twenty one (21).
      3.   Consumption of alcoholic liquor at or over a bar shall be permitted,
but all consumption shall be limited to those patrons who are guests invited
specifically to the private event.
      4.   Failure to produce proof of a written contract with an accurate
guest count for the event when requested by village enforcement officers shall
be a violation of this section.
      5.   Prior to any event in which alcoholic liquor is sold, served or
consumed, the license holder shall designate a Basset trained manager who is in
charge of the premises and shall be present at all times during the event.
      6.   Events in which guests are allowed to bring and consume their own
alcoholic liquor "BYOB" shall not be permitted.
   (J)   Class P license holders (Package Sales) may sell packaged alcoholic
liquor in its original packaging but not for consumption on the premises,
unless having been granted the applicable endorsement under this chapter. Class
P licenses shall only issue on premises doing business as a liquor store or
grocery store. A Class P license shall permit the tasting of wine or other
liquor, as an ancillary part of the primary business of selling liquor by
endorsement approval under subsection (K)2(a) of this section. The number of
such tastings may be limited by the Local Liquor Control Commissioner, in his
or her sole discretion.
   (K)   Endorsements: The following activities may be granted to holders of
Village liquor licenses by endorsement application.
      1.   Outdoor Patio Sales: Outdoor sales and consumption on the licensed
premises for holders of Class A, B, C, and D licenses shall be in compliance
with all zoning requirements under the village code and the following
requirements:
         (a)   Outdoor patio licensees shall designate on a site or patio plan
an area immediately adjoining the licensee's indoor establishment, which
contiguous area shall be used for the purposes of the license, and which area
will hereinafter be referred to as "outdoor patio". The outdoor patio may not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the establishment interior occupancy, and shall
have its boundaries clearly marked with the appropriate enclosure as determined
by the Zoning Administrator or designees. The Liquor Commissioner may approve,
in his or her sole and absolute discretion, the location of an outdoor patio
where alcoholic liquor may be served.
         (b)   Outdoor patio plans shall designate a minimum of four (4)
locations on the patio where landscaping trees, shrubs or plants of a minimum
three feet (3') in height shall be planted or placed to provide a visual and
sound barrier on the premises.
         (c)   Any outdoor patio shall have a physical barrier to allow the
visual regulation of ingress and egress to the patio and no patrons shall be
allowed to either enter or exit the licensed patio except by the main entrance
of the premises.
      2.   Sampling: The sampling of alcoholic liquor for complimentary
consumption on the licensed premises for holders of Class P licenses.
         (a)   On premise sampling shall allow a licensee to serve alcoholic
liquor in small and limited amounts, for sampling purposes only and in
conjunction with promotional sales efforts occurring on the licensed premises.
Regulations specific to on premise sampling:
            (1)   The sampling shall be attended and supervised at all times by
an adult over the age over the age of twenty one (21) and may occur only in a
designated liquor sale area on the licensed premises;
            (2)   The actual amount of beer or wine sampled per serving by an
individual may not exceed two (2) ounces and the amount of distilled spirits
shall not exceed one and one half (1.5) ounce.
            (3)   Quantities may not exceed a total of eight (8) ounces of beer
or wine per customer per day or two (2) ounces per customer per day of
distilled spirits.
            (4)   Signs or other materials advertising the availability of
"sampling" may not be visible from the exterior of the licensed premises.
            (5)   The annual fee for each endorsement shall be two hundred and
fifty dollars ($250.00) except for Class C license holders whose license shall
include the endorsements in this section. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-9: NUMBER OF LICENSES LIMITED:
The number of licenses issued in the village at any time shall be limited as
follows:
   (A)   There shall be issued no more than ten (10) Class A licenses.
   (B)   There shall be issued no more than eight (8) Class B licenses.
   (C)   There shall be issued no more than one (1) Class C licenses.
   (D)   There shall be issued no more than eleven (11) Class D licenses.
   (E)   There shall be issued no more than one (1) Class E licenses.
   (F)   There shall be issued no more than one (1) Class F licenses.
   (G)   There shall be issued no more than two (3) Class G licenses.
   (H)   There shall be issued no more than one (1) Class H licenses.
   (I)   There shall be issued no more than one (1) Class I licenses.
   (J)   There shall be issued no more than ten (10) Class J licenses.
   (K)   Without the need or requirement for any further action by the
President and Board of Trustees, when a license is forfeited or revoked or
terminated for any reason, that license is immediately and automatically
eliminated, and the number of licenses from that class is lowered by one. (Ord.
1909, 12-16-2015; amd. Ord. 1956, 2-8-2017; Ord. 2003, 10-10-2018; Ord. 2041,
9-11-2019; Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-10: LICENSE RECORD TO BE KEPT:
   (A)   The Commissioner shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of
all such licenses issued by him or her; and shall furnish the Clerk, Treasurer,
and Chief of Police each with a copy thereof; upon the issuance of any new
license, or the revocation of any old license, the Commissioner shall give
written notice of such action to each of these officers within forty-eight (48)
hours of such action.
   (B)   All applications for licenses shall be kept or cause to be kept on
file with the Commissioner who shall furnish copies of the same to the Village
Clerk. Fees for all licenses shall be paid to the Village Clerk who shall
certify to the Commissioner the names and addresses of all licenses paying fees
to him together with the class of license for which payment is made and
thereupon said shall issue the license provided for in this chapter to all
applicants who have complied with all the requirements of this chapter and
other applicable laws. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-11: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
   (A)   A license shall be purely a personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance unless sooner revoked as in this chapter provided, and
shall not constitute property, nor shall it be alienable or transferable,
voluntarily, or involuntarily, or subject to being encumbered or hypothecated.
Such license shall not descend by the laws of testate or intestate devolution,
but it shall cease upon the death of the licensee; provided, that executors or
administrators of the estate of any deceased licensee, and the trustee of any
insolvent or bankrupt licensee, when such estate consists in part of alcoholic
liquor, may continue the business of the sale or manufacture of alcoholic
liquor under order of the appropriate court, and may exercise the privileges of
the deceased or insolvent or bankrupt licensee after the death of the decedent,
or such insolvency or bankruptcy until the expiration of the license but not
longer than six (6) months after the death, bankruptcy or insolvency of the
licensee. A refund shall be made of that portion of the license fees paid for
any period in which the licensee shall be prevented from operating under the
license in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof; provided, he is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which the renewal
license is sought is suitable for such purpose; and provided further, that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the commissioner from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within his jurisdiction.
   (B)   Any changes in partners; members; officers; directors; persons holding
directly, beneficially, or through any form of indirect or concealed ownership
or control more than five percent (5%) of the stock or ownership interest of
any licensee or premises for which a license has been issued or managers of
establishments licensed under this chapter, shall be reported in writing to the
Commissioner within ten (10) days of the change. All such new individuals shall
meet all the standards of this chapter and must otherwise qualify to hold a
liquor license. All such changes shall be subject to review by the
Commissioner.
   (C)   In the event any licensee shall sell the business or discontinue
operation for a period of more than thirty (30) days (except closing for
remodeling and repairs), or any partnership or corporation or limited liability
company shall be dissolved, the license shall terminate forthwith. However,
other than in the case of the termination of a partnership or the dissolution
of a corporation or limited liability company, a licensee may continue the
license in full force and effect, provided the Local Liquor Control
Commissioner is notified by the licensee within forty (40) days from the date
of the sale of the business or its discontinuance of a desire to maintain the
license, the licensee otherwise complies with all applicable provisions of this
chapter, and the licensee designates a location within the village acceptable
to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner as the address or location of the
license.
   (D)   When any license hereunder has been revoked for any cause, no license
shall be granted to any person, group of persons, partnership, firm, limited
liability company or corporation for the period of twelve (12) months
thereafter of the sale of alcoholic liquor in the premises described in the
revoked license unless a public hearing is held on the matter and a finding is
made by the Commissioner that re-opening a liquor establishment in the same
premises would not pose a threat to the health, safety and welfare of the
community. (Ord. 123, 3-20-1934; amd. Ord. 633B, 12-14-1966; Ord. 2093, 4-20-
2022)
5-6-12: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
A liquor license shall permit the sale of alcoholic liquor only in the premises
described in the application and license. The location may be changed only upon
the written application to make such change approved by the Commissioner. No
change of location shall be permitted unless the proposed new location is a
proper one for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor under the laws of this state
and the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 123, 3-20-1934; amd. Ord. 633B, 12-
14-1966; Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-13: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Failure to pay the license fee in full by April 14 of each year unless extended
by order of the Commissioner.
   (A)   Each license required by this chapter shall terminate on April 30 next
following its issuance. No part of a license fee will be refunded if the
license is revoked by the Liquor Commissioner.
   (B)   Any licensee may renew his or her license at the expiration thereof,
provided he or she is then qualified to receive a license and the premises for
which such renewal license is sought are suitable for such purpose; and
provided, further, that the renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be
construed as vested right which shall in any case prevent the President and
Village Board from decreasing the number of licenses to be issued within its
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Application for renewal of license shall be filed with the Village
Clerk on or before thirty (30) days preceding the expiration thereof. Such
application for renewal shall be made under oath and shall be upon an
application form prepared by the village.
   (D)   The renewal application shall contain a certification that all
information contained in the applicant's prior or initial application is still
true and correct except as indicated otherwise on the renewal application form.
The applicant's initial or prior application must be attached to the renewal
application and the applicant must furnish any additional material in support
of the application as deemed necessary by the city. If the owner or principal
type of business has changed in any respect, a new license will be required.
   (E)   Each application for renewal shall be treated and considered in the
same manner as hereinabove provided for original applications for license.
   (F)   Each application for renewal shall also include renewal supplementary
information as to any changes in the manner or conduct of the licensed business
and signed by a manager of the business reiterating the unchanged information
as the original application.
   (G)   No renewal application for any liquor license shall be granted unless
any fees, fines or other debt owed to the Village are paid in full, including
the application fee required in this chapter. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-14: LICENSED BUSINESS STANDARDS TRAINING:
   (A)   Basset Training Required: All original or renewal applications for
Class A, B, D, E, and F liquor licenses shall be accompanied with proof of
completion of a State certified Beverage Alcohol Sellers and Servers Education
and Training (BASSET) program for all persons who sell or serve alcoholic
beverages, all management personnel working on premises, and anyone whose job
description entails the checking of identification for the purchases of
beverages, pursuant to that license as follows:
      1.   A state certified BASSET training program shall be defined as a
BASSET program licensed by the State of Illinois Liquor Control Commission
(ILCC) as required by 235 ILCS 5/3-12(11.1) and 5/6-27 and IAC title 77,
chapter XVI, section 3500. All licensed BASSET providers shall be required to
have on file all licenses and certificates to prove current qualifications and
provide a certificate of course completion and a card (a picture type ID is
optional), to participants as proof of completion.
      2.   Any new owner, manager, employee, or agent requiring BASSET
training, shall within ninety (90) days from the beginning of their employment
with that licensee, complete an ILCC BASSET approved seller/server training
program and shall until completion of the BASSET program work under the
supervision of a person who has completed BASSET training.
      3.   A photo copy of certificate of completion for all owners, managers,
employees, or agents required by this chapter to have BASSET training shall be
maintained, by the establishment, in manner that will allow inspection, upon
demand, by any designee of both the state or local liquor control authorities.
   (B)   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or for the
storage of liquor for such sale, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, and shall be kept in full compliance with the provisions of this
code regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of goods
for human consumption.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, pour, or mix
any liquor which is represented to be of a certain quantity or kind, a given
brand name, or to be of certain ingredients when it is in fact different from
such representation. It shall be unlawful to add to or water down any liquor
while it is in its original package, or otherwise, except when a customer
orders a drink with water as a mix.
   (D)   No person under the age of twenty one (21) shall be allowed to be in
any establishment holding a Class A, B, E or the location where alcohol is
served for F and D license holders unless that person is accompanied by a
parent or legal guardian.
   (E)   Any business licensed to sell liquor for consumption on the premises
shall make available prepared food, nonalcoholic beverages and coffee for
purchase or no cost for consumption by patrons on the premises.
   (F)   All licensees selling alcoholic liquor to be served and consumed on
the licensed premises are prohibited from engaging in any of the following
practices:
      1.   Selling, offering or delivering to any person or persons any drinks
sold on the basis of two (2) or more drinks for the price of one drink;
      2.   Selling, offering or delivering to any person an unlimited number of
drinks during any set period of time for a fixed price, except at private
functions not open to the public (invited guest/banquet) or full meal and hors
d'oeuvres packages which are open to the public;
      3.   Encouraging or permitting any game or contest which involves
drinking, or the awarding of drinks as prizes on the licensed premises.
      4.   Allowing any of the following: male or female striptease (regardless
of whether the participants strip off all their clothes); modeling for the sale
of swimsuits, undergarments, brassieres and other garments where the
individuals modeling and/or advertising solicit and/or receive any money from a
customer of the licensee during the course of such modeling or wet T-shirt
contests; or any contact sport or contest, including, but not limited to,
wrestling in mud, jello or any other liquid like substance.
      5.   Advertising or promoting in any way, whether within or without the
licensed premises, any of the practices prohibited under this chapter.
      6.   Littering or allowing bar patrons to discard litter on or about the
licensee's property, adjacent business property or residential property.
      7.   Allowing any person to exit the licensed bar premises with open
alcoholic beverage containers or barware of any kind.
      8.   Failing to immediately notify the Midlothian Police Department of an
altercation resulting in a physical assault within or outside the licensed
premises.
      9.   Except for licensees operating as a restaurant, hotel or club, no
licensee shall allow a screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing be
placed in windows or upon the doors of such licensed premises nor inside the
premises, which shall prevent a clear view into the interior of the licensed
premises from the street or sidewalk at all times. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-15: SALES TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY ONE (21), INTOXICATED, OR IN POSSESSION
OF A FIREARM:
It shall be unlawful for of any person to allow the sale, consumption or
possession of any regulated alcoholic liquor to:
   (A)   A person under twenty-one (21) years of age.
   (B)   An intoxicated individual as evidenced by any combination of the
following conditions attributable to the person; a strong odor of alcohol,
slurred speech, bloodshot eyes, inability to stand without swaying or
stumbling, aggressive behavior, loud boisterous behavior, or vomiting.
   (C)   Any individual in possession of a firearm. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-16: PROOF OF AGE, FRAUDULENT IDENTIFICATION AND POSSESSION BY MINORS:
   (A)   For the purpose of preventing the violation of this section, any
licensee, his agent or employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic
beverages to any person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of
identity and of the fact that he or she is over the age of twenty-one (21)
years.
   (B)   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a federal, state or county government, including, a motor
vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal
selective service act, or an identification card issued to a member of the
armed forces. Proof that the defendant-licensee, or his employer or agent,
demanded, was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any
transaction forbidden by this section is competent evidence and may be
considered in any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the
suspension or revocation of any license based thereon.
   (C)   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years alcoholic liquor or any false or fraudulent written,
printed or photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who
sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years
of age evidence of age and identification of any other person is guilty of a
violation of this section.
   (D)   Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee, his agent or employee, any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any
alcoholic beverage, or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity, is guilty of a
violation of this section.
   (E)   No person shall transfer, alter or deface an identification card; use
the identification card of another; carry or use a false or forged
identification card; or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. No person shall purchase, accept delivery, or have possession of
alcoholic liquor in violation of this section. The consumption of alcoholic
liquor by persons under twenty-one (21) years of age is prohibited.
   (F)   Any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years who has any
alcoholic beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in any public
place or in any place open to the public, will be guilty of a violation of this
section.
   (G)   Every Class A, B, D, E, F, I, G and P liquor license holder in the
village where alcoholic liquor is sold shall display at all times, in a
prominent place, a printed card which shall be issued by the Village Clerk and
which shall read substantially as follows:
WARNING TO THOSE UNDER 21 YEARS OF AGE YOU ARE SUBJECT TO A FINE UP TO SEVEN
HUNDRED AND FIFTY DOLLARS AND CRIMINAL PROSECUTION UNDER THE ORDINANCES OF THE
VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN AND LAWS OF THE STATE OF ILLINOIS IF YOU PURCHASE
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS OR MISREPRESENT YOUR AGE FOR THE PURPOSE OF PURCHASING OR
OBTAINING LIQUOR.
   (H)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall excuse or relieve the owner,
proprietor or person in charge of any liquor license or other place in the
village where alcoholic liquor is sold, from the restrictions and requirements
of any other applicable provisions of this code, or of the statutes of the
state.
   (I)   Any holder of a liquor license or any agent or employee of the
licensee, who shall violate the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction, be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the general
penalty regulations of this code, or to the revocation of his retail liquor
license, or to both such penalty and revocation of his license.
   (J)   Any parent or guardian who shall knowingly allow or permit anyone
under the age of twenty-one (21) years, of which he may be the parent or
guardian, to violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
subject to the general penalty provisions of this code. No person under the age
of twenty-one (21) years may legally sell or serve liquor in an establishment
licensed under the village liquor ordinances. (Ord. 976, 5-14-1980; amd. Ord.
2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-17: VIOLATIONS; PENALTY, SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION GROUNDS:
It shall be grounds for immediate suspension and or revocation of any village
liquor license for violation of any requirement or provision of the Illinois
Liquor Control Act or this chapter. The Commissioner is authorized to fine the
licensee up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day per violation and up to
fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) per incident and/or reduce the hours of
sale of alcoholic liquor by the licensee. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
5-6-18: CLOSING HOURS:
It shall be unlawful to sell, consume or provide alcoholic liquor in any
licensed establishment except during the following hours of operation;
   (A)   Class A, B, C, E, F, G and P: Between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and
two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
   (B)   Class D, H and I: Between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock
(12:00) A.M.
   (C)   Temporary Permits/Complimentary Service:
      1.   Block Party: Between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:
00) P.M.
      2.   Festival Permit: Between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and twelve
o'clock (12:00) A.M.
      3.   Hotel, Salon, Craft Tasting, Complimentary Service: Seven o'clock
(7:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 2093, 4-20-2022)
CHAPTER 7
REGULATION OF SALE OF CONSUMER COMMODITIES
SECTION:
5-7-1: Definitions
5-7-2: Price Marking And Display
5-7-3: Exceptions To Price Marking And Display
5-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
CONSUMER COMMODITY: Any article, product or commodity of any kind or class,
which is produced or distributed for sale at retail to the general public.
PERSON: Any individual, association, partnership or corporation.
SELLING PRICE: The price at which a consumer commodity is sold at retail on any
given date. In the case of commodities weighed by retailers, the selling price
shall only be computed by using the price per one pound as the basis for the
sale; provided, that the metric system may be employed where customary. (Ord.
948, 2-14-1979, eff. 4-1-1979)
5-7-2: PRICE MARKING AND DISPLAY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to display for sale any consumer commodity
unless the selling price is accurately stated in a clear and conspicuous
manner. On any prepackaged consumer commodity, except those sold through
vending machines, the selling price shall be marked directly on the package.
The selling price need not be marked directly on the package if the merchant
selling the commodity uses a UPC scanning system which reads the UPC code and
registers the price and item identification on a tape which is given to the
customer and also registers the price on a monitor which the customer can see,
and if the price is marked adjacent to the product on a shelf tag placed on a
price rail or is marked on a display or shelf sign.
On any consumer commodity which is not prepackaged, the selling price shall be
stated on a sign contiguous to the point of display of the consumer commodity
so priced. (Ord. 1268, 9-23-1992)
5-7-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PRICE MARKING AND DISPLAY:
The following items are exempt from the price marking requirements of section
5-7-2 of this chapter:
   (A)   Individual packages of liquor, motor oils, candy, cigars, cigarettes,
razor blades and small packages of commodities displayed at the checkout stand,
at aisle ends directly across from the checkout stands, or at service islands,
may have a selling price indicated by means of individual signs adjacent to
each commodity or by a general sign stating the selling price of a group of
similar commodities such as hosiery, underwear, shirts, bed sheets, spreads,
pillow cases, batteries, paint, and one unit size packages of ice cream
novelties.
Examples: All gum 15 cents per package. 20 W motor oil 75 cents. 10W30 motor
oil 95 cents.
   (B)   Individual cans of frozen fruit juices, envelopes of powdered drinks,
jars of baby foods and continuity or premium offerings may be price marked by
means of individual signs or general signs.
      Examples: All 71/2 ozs. baby food jars, 22 cents.
   (C)   Multipack commodities may be marked with a total selling price for the
complete multipack unit. The price may be on carrying handle attaching the cans
or bottles.
      Examples: Soft drinks, 6 for $1.00.
   (D)   That portion of a display of sale commodities used strictly for
display purposes and not expected to be sold during normal customer response to
advertising may be exempt from selling price marking; provided, that portion is
not directly available to customers.
Example: A section of unpriced packages of canned corn covered with other
packages of canned corn which are marked with a selling price. The amount of a
commodity expected to be sold during a sale period shall be based upon the
individual business' previous sales of the identical or similar commodity at a
comparable price at the same location.
   (E)   Unit pricing of individual packages of cold cuts in delicatessen
departments displayed on rods may be exempt from the unit pricing requirements
of section 5-7-2 of this chapter, provided they are displayed by grouping
specific weight categories such as eight (8) ounces together, and a sign is
clearly and conspicuously displayed advising consumers "All commodities on rods
in this section are grouped by weight category". (Ord. 948, 2-14-1979, eff. 4-
1-1979)
CHAPTER 8
PACKAGING OF FOOD
SECTION:
5-8-1: Definitions
5-8-2: Regulation
5-8-3: Exceptions To Packaging Of Food
5-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
FOOD: Shall also include beverages.
FOOD DEALER: Every person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of
selling food at retail for human consumption.
PACKAGE: A paper bag or other similar material or a cardboard box. (Ord. 949,
2-14-1979)
5-8-2: REGULATION:
It shall be unlawful for any food dealer to sell three (3) or more items of
food to any customer without placing the items sold in a package prior to the
customer leaving the premises where sold. (Ord. 949, 2-14-1979)
5-8-3: EXCEPTIONS TO PACKAGING OF FOOD:
Those items listed in subsections 5-7-3(A) and (C) of this title are exempt
from the requirements of section 5-8-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 949, 2-14-1979)
CHAPTER 9
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
5-9-1: Definitions
5-9-2: Imposition
5-9-3: Mobile Equipment
5-9-4: Exceptions To Tax
5-9-5: Tax In Addition To Other Municipal Taxes
5-9-6: Taxpayer's Report Required
5-9-7: Penalty
5-9-8: Application Of Tax Imposed
5-9-9: Municipal Electric Utility Tax
5-9-10: Municipal Gas Use Tax
5-9-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: The consideration received for the transmission of messages,
the consideration received for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling
gas for use or consumption and not for resale, and the consideration received
for distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or
consumption and not for resale, and for all services rendered in connection
therewith valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including
cash, credit, services and property of every kind and material and for all
services rendered therewith, and shall be determined without any deduction on
account of the cost of transmitting such messages, without any deduction on
account of the cost of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of
materials used, labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever. "Gross
receipts" shall not include that portion of the consideration received for
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity to, or for
the transmission of messages for, business enterprises located within an
enterprise zone to the extent and during the period in which the exemption
authorized by State law is in effect. "Gross receipts" shall not include any
State Gross Receipts Tax or any surcharges imposed pursuant to the Emergency
Telephone System Act of the Illinois Compiled Statutes. The term "gross
receipts" shall not include that portion of the consideration received for
distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas or electricity, or for the
transmission of messages for school districts or units of local government,
including, but not limited to, park districts 1 .
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, municipal corporation or
political subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee, guardian or other
representative appointed by order of any court.
PUBLIC UTILITY: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3-105 of the
Public Utilities Act, as amended, and shall include telecommunications carriers
as defined in section 13-202 of such Act.
TRANSMITTING MESSAGES: In addition to the usual and popular meaning of person
to person communication, shall include the furnishing, for a consideration, of
services or facilities (whether owned or leased), or both, to persons in
connection with the transmission of messages where such persons do not, in
turn, receive any consideration in connection therewith, but shall not include
such furnishing of services or facilities to persons for the transmission of
messages to the extent that any such services or facilities for the
transmission of messages are furnished for a consideration, by such persons to
other persons, for the transmission of messages. (Ord. 1296, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-
1-1993; amd. Ord. 1401, 11-13-1996)
 
Notes
  1. This ordinance 1401 shall be effective as to gross receipts actually paid
  to the taxpayer for services billed on or after January 1, 1997; provided,
1 however, that any amounts due or payable for any tax periods ending prior to
  January 1, 1997, are nevertheless to remain payable as if this ordinance had
  not been adopted.
5-9-2: IMPOSITION:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   (A)   Transmitting Messages: Persons engaged in the business of transmitting
messages by means of electricity or radio magnetic waves, or fiber optics, at
the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross receipts from such business
originating within the corporate limits of the village.
   (B)   Gas: Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of
the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts therefrom.
   (C)   Electricity: Persons engaged in the business of distributing,
supplying, furnishing or selling electricity for use or consumption within the
corporate limits of the village, and not for resale, at the rate of five
percent (5%) of the gross receipts therefrom.
   (D)   Gross Receipts Tax: The tax imposed under this section shall not apply
with respect to gross receipts pertaining to bills for the distribution,
supply, furnishing or sale of electricity where the use or consumption of the
electricity is subject to the tax imposed under section 5-9-9 of this chapter.
   (E)   Overpayment Of Tax And Credit: If a taxpayer under this chapter is
unable to use a credit authorized by this section solely because the tax
imposed by this chapter has been replaced by the tax imposed under section 5-9-
9 of this chapter, then the taxpayer may apply such credit against any tax due
under section 5-9-9 of this chapter.
   (F)   Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in order
to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the village, no person shall
be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under this chapter
unless the persons file a claim for refund or credit within one year after the
date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the village treasurer. (Ord.
1684, 3-25-2009)
5-9-3: MOBILE EQUIPMENT:
In the case of persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages through
the use of mobile equipment, such as cellular phones and paging systems, the
gross receipts from the business shall be deemed to originate within the
village only if the address to which the bills for the service are sent is
within the village corporate limits. If, however, that address is not located
within the village, then the applicable state law shall apply. (Ord. 1296, 6-9-
1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-9-4: EXCEPTIONS TO TAX:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
constitution and statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation
by this state or any political subdivision thereof, nor shall any persons
engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas
or electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages or engaged
in transactions as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions
of the "municipal retailers' occupation tax act" 1 . (Ord. 1296, 6-9-1993, eff.
7-1-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.
5-9-5: TAX IN ADDITION TO OTHER MUNICIPAL TAXES:
The tax under this chapter shall be in addition to the payment of money, or
value of products or services furnished to this village by the taxpayer as
compensation for the use of its streets, alleys or other public places, or
installation and maintenance. (Ord. 1296, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-9-6: TAXPAYER'S REPORT REQUIRED:
   (A)   On or before August 31, 1993, each taxpayer shall make a return to the
village treasurer for the month of July 1993, stating:
      1.   Name.
      2.   Place of business.
      3.   Gross receipts during that month upon the basis of which the tax is
imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   (B)   On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer
shall make a like return to the village treasurer for the month preceding.
   (C)   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village treasurer the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided, that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if the
taxpayer so elects, report and pay an amount based on the total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts. (Ord. 1296, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-9-7: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return or who makes a fraudulent return or who
wilfully violates any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes and in addition shall
be liable in a civil action of the amount of the tax due plus any costs of
collecting same. (Ord. 1296, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-
1995)
5-9-8: APPLICATION OF TAX IMPOSED:
The tax heretofore imposed, pursuant to section 5-9-2 of this chapter, upon
persons engaged in the business of transmitting messages by means of
electricity or radio magnetic waves or fiber optics at the rate of five percent
(5%) of the gross receipts from such business originating within the corporate
limits of the village, shall not be imposed during such time as the tax imposed
by chapter 10 of this title is in effect. In the event the tax imposed by
subsection 5-10-3(A)2 of this title is declared unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid, but the tax provided for in subsection 5-10-3(A)1 of this title
remains in full force and effect, the tax provided for pursuant to this chapter
on business of transmitting messages as aforesaid, shall not be imposed. (Ord.
1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-9-9: MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC UTILITY TAX:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
   EXEMPT PURCHASER: Any school district or units of local government,
including, but not limited to, a park district.
   PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, municipal corporation, the state or any of its political
subdivisions, any state university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent, or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in this state.
   PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for
purposes of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the
use of electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the
Illinois municipal code 1 , directly in the generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
   PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes, within the corporate limits of
the village, electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, other than an exempt
purchaser.
   TAX COLLECTOR: The person delivering electricity to the purchaser.
   VILLAGE: The village of Midlothian.
   (B)   Tax Imposed:
      1.   Pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code 2  and any
and all other applicable authority, a tax is imposed upon the privilege of
using or consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail and used or
consumed within the corporate limits of the village at the following rates,
calculated on a monthly basis for each purchaser:
         (a)   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.560 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (b)   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.367 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (c)   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.330 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (d)   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.321 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (e)   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.312 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (f)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.294 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (g)   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.289 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (h)   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.285 cents per kilowatt hour;
         (i)   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.280 cents per kilowatt hour; and
         (j)   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month; 0.275 cents per kilowatt hour.
      2.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the village, the state or any other political subdivision of the
state.
      3.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall
not be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax
would violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the
constitution of the state.
      4.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after August 1, 1999; and with respect to the use or consumption of electricity
by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to such
customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the public
utilities act 3 , or the first bill issued to such customers on or after
January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner.
   (C)   Collection Of Tax:
      1.   Subject to the provisions of subsection (D) of this section
regarding the delivery of electricity to resellers, the tax imposed under this
chapter shall be collected from purchasers by the person maintaining a place of
business in this state who delivers electricity to such purchasers. This tax
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the person who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser and is recoverable at the same time and in the
same manner as the original charge for delivering the electricity.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected by this chapter, and any tax in
fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by the person
delivering the electricity, provided, that the person delivering electricity
shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of electricity the
charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and provided further, that
if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering supplier shall be
obligated to remit such tax.
      3.   Persons delivering electricity shall collect the tax from the
purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge for delivering the
electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be authorized to add to
such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of the tax they collect
to reimburse them for their expenses incurred in keeping records, billing
customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting the tax and supplying data
to the Village upon request. For purposes of this chapter, any partial payment
of a billed amount not specifically identified by the purchaser shall be deemed
to be for the delivery of electricity.
   (D)   Tax Remittance And Return:
      1.   Every tax collector shall on a monthly basis file a return in a form
prescribed by the Village Treasurer. The return and accompanying remittance
shall be due on or before the last day of the month following the month during
which the tax is collected or is required to be collected under this section.
      2.   If the person delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from
the purchaser or is excused from collecting the tax under this section, then
the purchaser shall file a return in a form prescribed by the Village Treasurer
and pay the tax directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the last day of
the month following the month during which the electricity is used or consumed.
   (E)   Resales:
      1.   Electricity that is delivered to a person in the Village shall be
considered to be for use and consumption by that person unless the person
receiving the electricity has an active resale number issued by the Village
Treasurer and furnishes that number to the person who delivers the electricity,
and certifies to that person that the sale is either entirely or partially
nontaxable as a sale for resale.
      2.   If a person who receives electricity in the Village claims to be an
authorized reseller of electricity, that person shall apply to the Village
Treasurer for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on any purchases of
electricity and shall furnish such additional information as the Village
Treasurer may reasonably require.
      3.   Upon approval of the application the Village Treasurer shall assign
a resale number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
      4.   The Village Treasurer may cancel the resale number of any person if
the person fails to pay any tax payable under this chapter for electricity used
or consumed by the person, or if the number: a) was obtained through
misrepresentation, or b) is no longer necessary because the person has
discontinued making resales.
      5.   (a) If a reseller has acquired electricity partly for use or
consumption and partly for resale, the reseller shall pay the tax imposed by
this section directly to the Village Treasurer on the amount of electricity
that the reseller uses or consumes, and shall collect and remit the tax on the
amount of electricity delivered by the reseller to a purchaser.
         (b)   Any person who delivers electricity to a reseller having an
active resale number and complying with all other conditions of this section
shall be excused from collecting and remitting the tax on any portion of the
electricity delivered to the reseller, provided that the person reports to the
Village Treasurer the total amount of electricity delivered to the reseller,
and such other information that the Village Treasurer may reasonably require.
   (F)   Books And Records: Every tax collector, and every taxpayer required to
pay the tax imposed by this chapter, shall keep accurate books and records of
its business or activity, including contemporaneous books and records denoting
the transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability
under this chapter. The books and records shall be subject to and available for
inspection at all times during business hours of the day.
   (G)   Credits And Refunds: Notwithstanding any other provision of this
section in order to permit sound fiscal planning and budgeting by the Village,
no person shall be entitled to a refund of, or credit for, a tax imposed under
this chapter unless the person files a claim for refund or credit within one
year after the date on which the tax was paid or remitted to the Village
Treasurer. (Ord. 1460, 5-12-1999, eff. 8-1-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
3 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104.
5-9-10: MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX:
   (A)   Short Title: The tax imposed by this section shall be known as the
MUNICIPAL GAS USE TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by
the Village of Midlothian, the State of Illinois, or any other municipal
corporation or political subdivision thereof.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply:
   PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association, joint
stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company, municipal
corporation or political subdivision of this State, or a receiver, trustee,
conservator or other representative appointed by order of any court.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES ACT: The Public Utilities Act 1  as amended.
   PUBLIC UTILITY: A public utility as defined in section 3-105 of the Public
Utilities Act.
   RETAIL PURCHASER: Any person who purchases gas in a sale at retail.
   SALE AT RETAIL: Any sale of gas by a retailer to a person for use or
consumption, and not for resale. For this purpose, the term "retailer" means
any person engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or
selling gas. (Ord. 1998, 8-8-2018)
   (C)   Tax Imposed:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided by this section, a tax is imposed on
the privilege of using or consuming gas in the Village that is purchased in a
sale at retail at the rate of: a) two cents ($0.02) per therm with respect to
all bills issued on or after September 1, 2018 through and including July 31,
2019 and b) two and one-half cents ($0.025) per therm with respect to all bills
issued on or after August 1, 2019; provided, however, that any amounts due or
payable for any tax periods ending prior to August 1, 2019 are nevertheless to
remain payable as if the rate had not been increased for bills issued on or
after August 1, 2019.
      2.   The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of the tax is on
the retail purchaser, and nothing in this section shall be construed to impose
a tax on the occupation of distributing, supplying, furnishing, selling or
transporting gas.
      3.   The retail purchaser shall pay the tax, measured by therms of gas
delivered to the retail purchaser's premises, to the public utility designated
to collect the tax pursuant to subsection (D) of this section on or before the
payment due date of the public utility's bill first reflecting the tax, or
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is delivered to the retail purchaser
if no public utility has been designated to collect the tax pursuant to
subsection (D) of this section or if the gas is delivered by a person other
than a public utility so designated.
      4.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose a tax upon any
person, business or activity which, under the Constitutions of the United
States or State of Illinois, may not be made the subject of taxation by the
Village.
      5.   A person who purchases gas for resale and therefore does not pay the
tax imposed by this section with respect to the use or consumption of the gas,
but who later uses or consumes part or all of the gas, shall pay the tax
directly to the Village Treasurer on or before the fifteenth day of the second
month following the month in which the gas is used or consumed.
      6.   The tax shall apply to gas for which the delivery to the retail
purchaser is billed by a public utility on or after September 1, 2018.
      7.   If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not
due under the provisions of this section, whether as a result of mistake of
fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be: a) credited against any tax
due, or to become due, under this section from the taxpayer who made the
erroneous payment or b) subject to a refund if no such tax is due or to become
due; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years prior
to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited or refunded.
      8.   No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of
this section shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of
such amount.
      9.   To prevent multiple taxation, the use of gas in the Village by a
retail purchaser shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section if the
gross receipts from the sale at retail of such gas to the retail purchaser are
properly subject to a tax imposed upon the seller of such gas pursuant to the
Village's Municipal Utility Tax, as amended from time to time, authorized
pursuant to section 8-11-2 of the Illinois Municipal Code 2 .
   (D)   Collection Of Tax By Public Utility: The Village President and Village
Treasurer are each authorized to enter into a contract for collection of the
tax imposed by this section with any public utility providing gas service in
the Village. The contract shall include and substantially conform with the
following provisions:
      1.   The public utility will collect the tax from retail purchasers as an
independent contractor;
      2.   The public utility will remit collected taxes to the Village
Treasurer no more often than once each month;
      3.   The public utility will be entitled to withhold from tax collections
a service fee equal to three percent (3%) of the amounts collected and timely
remitted to the Village Treasurer;
      4.   The public utility shall not be responsible to the Village for any
tax not actually collected from a retail purchaser; and
      5.   Such additional terms as the parties may agree upon.
   (E)   Books And Records: Every taxpayer shall keep accurate books and
records, including original source documents and books of entry, denoting the
activities or transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise to any tax
liability or exemption under this section. All such books and records shall, at
all times during business hours, be subject to and available for inspection by
the Village. (Ord. 1998, 8-8-2018; amd. Ord. 2031, 7-10-2019; Ord. 2151, 9-11-
2024)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
2 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
5-10-1: General
5-10-2: Definitions
5-10-3: Tax Imposed
5-10-4: Collection Of Tax By Retailers
5-10-5: Registration
5-10-6: Filing Returns And Remittance By Retailers
5-10-7: Filing Returns/Payments By Taxpayers
5-10-8: Resale Numbers
5-10-9: Maintaining Books And Records
5-10-10: Severability
5-10-11: Status Of Illinois Municipal Code
5-10-1: GENERAL:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be known as the MUNICIPAL
TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by
this village, the state or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply to the following terms when used in this
chapter:
AMOUNT PAID: The amount charged to the taxpayer's service address located in
the village regardless of where such amount is billed or paid.
GROSS CHARGE: The amount paid for the act or privilege of originating or
receiving telecommunications in the village and for all services rendered in
connection therewith, valued in money or otherwise, including cash, credits,
services and property of every kind or nature, and shall be determined without
any deduction on account of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of
materials used, labor or service costs or any other expense whatsoever. If
credit is extended, the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid.
"Gross charge" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
pursuant to:
   1. The tax imposed by this chapter.
   2. Additional charges added to a purchaser's bill pursuant to section 9-222
of the public utilities act.
   3. The tax imposed by the Illinois telecommunications excise tax act.
   4. The tax imposed by section 4251 of the United States internal revenue
code.
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside of the
village.
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. This subsection (C)
applies, but is not limited, to the use of calculators, computers, data
processing equipment, tabulating equipment or accounting equipment, and also
includes the usage of computers under a time sharing agreement.
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment including such equipment that is leased
or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges.
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
Illinois public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the
period of time specified by the Illinois department of commerce and community
affairs.
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries when the tax imposed under this chapter has already been paid to a
retailer and only to the extent that the charges between the parent corporation
and wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries represent
expense allocation between the corporations and not the generation of profit
for the corporation rendering such service.
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectible, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; however, if the portion of the debt
deemed to be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the
tax on that portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made).
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices.
INTERSTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that either originate or
terminate outside this state.
INTRASTATE TELECOMMUNICATIONS: All telecommunications that originate and
terminate within this state.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, the federal
and state governments, including state universities created by statute, or any
city, town or political subdivision of this state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: The acquisition, consumption or use of telecommunications
through a sale at retail.
RETAILER: Includes every person engaged in the business of making sales at
retail as defined in this section.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Includes any retailer
having or maintaining within the state of Illinois, directly or by a
subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities, transmission facilities, sales
office, warehouse or other place of business, or any agent or other
representative operating within this state under the authority of the retailer
or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent or
other representative is located here permanently or temporarily, or whether
such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business in the state of
Illinois.
SALE AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying or furnishing of telecommunications
and all services rendered in connection therewith for consideration: a) to
persons other than the federal and state governments, and state universities
created by statute, and b) other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries, or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the tax
has already been paid to a retailer and the gross charge made by one such
corporation to another such corporation is not greater than the gross charge
paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not for resale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received by a taxpayer. If this is not a defined location, as in
the case of mobile phones, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of a taxpayer's
primary use of the telecommunication equipment as defined by telephone number,
authorization code, or location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TAXPAYER: A person who individually or through his agents, employees or
permittees engages in the act or privilege of originating or receiving in this
village telecommunications and who incurs a tax liability under this chapter.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: (A) In addition to the usual and popular meaning, includes,
but is not limited to, messages or information transmitted through use of
local, toll and wide area telephone service, channel services, telegraph
services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange services, cellular mobile
telecommunications service, specialized mobile radio services, paging service
or any other form of mobile and portable one-way or two-way communications, or
any other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar
means, between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave,
radio, satellite or similar facilities.
   (B)   The definition of "telecommunications" set forth herein shall not
include: 1) value added services in which computer processing applications are
used to act on the form, content, code and protocol of the information for
purposes other than transmission; or 2) purchase of telecommunications by a
telecommunications service provider for use as a component part of the service
provided by him to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates
the taxable end to end telecommunications. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   (A)   A tax is hereby imposed upon:
      1.   The act or privilege of originating or receiving in the village
intrastate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
      2.   The act or privilege of originating in or receiving in the village
interstate telecommunications by a person at a rate of five percent (5%) of the
gross charge for such telecommunications purchased at retail from a retailer.
Any taxpayer, upon proof that the taxpayer has paid a tax in another state on
the same event, shall be allowed a credit against the tax authorized by this
subsection (A)2 to the extent of the amount of such tax properly due and paid
in another state which was not previously allowed as a credit against any other
state or local tax in Illinois.
   (B)   Carrier access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of
intercompany facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent
provision used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end
telecommunications service shall be nontaxable under this chapter as sales for
resale.
   (C)   The tax imposed by this section is not imposed on any act or privilege
to the extent that such act or privilege may not, under the constitution or
statutes of the United States, be made the subject of taxation by the village.
(Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-4: COLLECTION OF TAX BY RETAILERS:
   (A)   Collection/Remittance Of Tax By Illinois Retailers:
      1.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the
taxpayer by a retailer maintaining a place of business in Illinois and making
or effectuating a sale at retail, and shall be remitted by the retailer to the
village.
      2.   Any tax required to be collected pursuant to this chapter and any
such tax collected by the retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the retailer
to the village.
      3.   Retailers shall collect the tax from the taxpayer by adding the tax
to the gross charge for the act or privilege of originating or receiving
telecommunications when sold for use in the manner prescribed by this chapter.
      4.   The tax authorized by this chapter shall constitute a debt of the
purchaser to the retailer that provides the taxable service until paid, and if
unpaid, is recoverable at law in the same manner as the original charge for
taxable services.
      5.   If the retailer fails to collect the tax from a taxpayer, the
taxpayer shall pay the tax directly to the village as provided in section 5-10-
7 of this chapter.
   (B)   Collection/Remittance Of Tax By Out Of State Retailers: The village,
upon application, shall authorize the collection of this tax by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business in this state who, to the satisfaction of
the village treasurer, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and
payment of the tax. Such retailer shall be issued without charge, a permit to
collect the tax imposed by this chapter. When so authorized, it shall be the
duty of the retailer to collect the tax upon all of the gross charges for
telecommunications originated or received in the village in the same manner,
and subject to the same requirements, as a retailer maintaining a place of
business in Illinois.
   (C)   Recordation Of Tax: The tax authorized by this chapter shall, when
collected, be stated as a distinct item separate and apart from the gross
charge for telecommunications. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-5: REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state on the
effective date hereof shall register with the village within thirty (30) days
after that date.
   (B)   Every person becoming a retailer maintaining a place of business in
this state after the effective date hereof shall register with the village
within thirty (30) days after commencing that business. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993,
eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-6: FILING RETURNS AND REMITTANCE BY RETAILERS:
On or before the last day of each calendar month, every retailer maintaining a
place of business in this state and every retailer authorized by the village
treasurer to collect the tax imposed by this chapter shall file with the
village a remittance return and remit all applicable tax for the preceding
calendar month. The return shall be filed on a form prescribed by or acceptable
to the village, containing such information as it may reasonably require. (Ord.
1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-7: FILING RETURNS/PAYMENTS BY TAXPAYERS:
   (A)   When a taxpayer does not pay the tax imposed by this chapter to a
retailer, the taxpayer shall file with the village a tax return and pay the tax
upon that portion of gross charges paid to the retailer during the preceding
calendar month on or before the last day of the month following that month. The
return shall be filed on a form prescribed by or acceptable to the village.
   (B)   When a taxpayer pays the tax imposed by this chapter directly to the
village, the village, at the request of the taxpayer, shall issue an
appropriate receipt to the taxpayer showing the amount of tax paid. (Ord. 1297,
6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-8: RESALE NUMBERS:
   (A)   If a person who originates or receives telecommunications in the
village claims to be a reseller of communications, that person shall apply to
the village for a resale number. The applicant shall state facts showing why it
is not liable for the tax imposed by this chapter on the purchases of any
telecommunications and shall furnish such additional information as the village
reasonably requires.
   (B)   Upon approval of the application, the village shall assign a resale
number to the applicant and shall certify the number to the applicant.
   (C)   The village may cancel the resale number of any person if the number:
      1.   Was obtained through misrepresentation.
      2.   Is used to originate or receive telecommunications tax free when
such telecommunications are not for resale.
      3.   Is no longer necessary because the person has discontinued making
resales.
   (D)   The act or privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications in
the village shall not be made tax free on the ground of being a sale for resale
unless the person has an active resale number issued by the village and
furnishes that number to the retailer in connection with certifying to the
retailer that a sale is nontaxable as the sale for resale. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-
1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-9: MAINTAINING BOOKS AND RECORDS:
Every retailer maintaining a place of business in this state, every retailer
authorized by the village to collect the tax imposed by this chapter, and every
taxpayer shall keep accurate books and records of its business or activity,
including original source documents and books of entry denoting the
transactions that gave rise, or may have given rise, to any tax liability or
exemption. All such books and records shall be kept in the English language,
and at all times during business hours of the day, shall be subject to and
available for inspection by the village. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-10: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof is held
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, such occurrence shall not affect other
provisions of this chapter or of this title, or their application, that can be
given effect without the unconstitutional or invalid provision or its
application. Each unconstitutional or invalid provision, or application of such
provision, is severable, unless otherwise provided by this chapter. In
particular, if subsection 5-10-3(A)2 of this chapter is declared
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid, the tax imposed under subsection 5-10-3
(A)1 of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-
1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
5-10-11: STATUS OF ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL CODE:
If section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code 1  is repealed, or becomes
ineffective for any reason, the tax imposed on persons described in subsection
5-9-2(A) of this title, declared ineffective in favor of this chapter, by
section 5-9-8 of this title, shall be deemed to be in full force and effect as
of the date section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code 2  is repealed or
becomes ineffective. (Ord. 1297, 6-9-1993, eff. 7-1-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17.
2 2. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-17.
CHAPTER 11
COMPREHENSIVE REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
5-11-1: Legislative Finding And Declaration
5-11-2: Definitions
5-11-3: License Required
5-11-4: License Application
5-11-5: License Fee
5-11-6: Prohibited Sales, Delivery, Signs
5-11-7: Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco Products
5-11-8: Purchase And Possession Of Tobacco By Persons Under The Age Of Twenty
One Is Prohibited
5-11-9: Penalty
5-11-10: Proximity To Certain Institutions
5-11-11: Certain Free Distributions Prohibited
5-11-12: Vending Machines; Locking Devices
5-11-13: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
5-11-14: Suspension, Revocation Of License; Fines, Costs
5-11-15: Use Of Premises After Revocation
5-11-1: LEGISLATIVE FINDING AND DECLARATION:
The President and Board of Trustees expressly find and declare that:
   (A)   Cigarette smoking is dangerous to human health;
   (B)   There exists substantial scientific evidence that the use of tobacco
products causes cancer, heart disease and various other medical disorders;
   (C)   The Surgeon General of the United States has declared that nicotine
addiction from tobacco is similar to addiction to cocaine, and is the most
widespread example of drug dependence in this country;
   (D)   The Director of the National Institute on Drug Abuse concluded that
the majority of the three hundred twenty thousand (320,000) Americans who die
each year from cigarette smoking became addicted to nicotine as adolescents
before the age of legal consent;
   (E)   The National Institute on Drug Abuse found that cigarette smoking
precedes and may be predictive of adolescent illicit drug use;
   (F)   The present legislative scheme of prohibiting sales of tobacco
products to persons under the age of eighteen (18) has proven ineffective in
preventing such persons from using tobacco products;
   (G)   The enactment of this chapter directly pertains to and is in
furtherance of the health, welfare and safety of the residents of the Village,
particularly those residents under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 1389, 5-
22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
TOBACCO PRODUCT(S): Shall mean tobacco or any electronic device used to consume
tobacco or product that is made from or derived from tobacco, or that contains
nicotine, that is intended for human consumption whether smoked, heated,
chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled or ingested by any other means.
VENDING MACHINE: Any mechanical, electrical or electronic, self- service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment, dispenses
tobacco products. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2030, 6-26-
2019)
5-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail, to give away, deliver
or to keep with the intention of selling at retail, giving away or delivering
tobacco products within the Village without having first obtained a tobacco
dealer's license therefor pursuant to this chapter. Such license shall be in
addition to any other license required by this Code. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996,
eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-4: LICENSE APPLICATION:
Application for a license hereunder shall be made in writing to the Village
Clerk and shall be processed in accordance with the provisions of the
Midlothian Village codes. By obtaining a valid Village license, the licensee is
authorizing any notice to be served upon the licensee or their manager or
agent. An agent is any person in charge of the business at the time any notice
is served. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-5: LICENSE FEE:
The license fee for a tobacco dealer's license shall be as set forth in section
5-4-34 of this title. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-6: PROHIBITED SALES, DELIVERY, SIGNS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, including any licensee, to sell,
offer for sale, give away or deliver tobacco products to any person under the
age of twenty one (21) years. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord.
2030, 6-26-2019)
   (B)   Signs informing the public of the age restrictions provided for herein
shall be posted by every licensee at or near every display of tobacco products
and on or upon every vending machine which offers tobacco products for sale.
Each such sign shall be plainly visible and shall state: (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996,
eff. 7-1-1996)
      THE SALE OR THE POSSESSION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY
ONE YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
(Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2030, 6-26-2019)
   The text of such signs shall be in red letters on a white background, said
letters to be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-
1996)
5-11-7: MINIMUM AGE TO SELL TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any officer, associate, member,
representative, agent or employee of such licensee to engage, employ or permit
any person under eighteen (18) years of age to sell tobacco products in any
licensed premises. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-8: PURCHASE AND POSSESSION OF TOBACCO BY PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY
ONE IS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
to purchase tobacco products, or to misrepresent their identity or age, or to
use any false or altered identification for the purpose of purchasing tobacco
products. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2030, 6-26-2019)
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to possess any tobacco product; provided that the possession by a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years under the direct supervision of the
parent or guardian of such person in the privacy of the parent's or guardian's
home shall not be prohibited. (Ord. 2030, 6-26-2019)
5-11-9: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violation of section 5-11-8 of this chapter shall be
subject to the following penalties:
   (A)   First Violation Within A Twelve Month Period: Payment of program cost
and required attendance and completion of the smoking cessation course offered
by St. Francis Hospital and Health Center or any Village authorized hospital or
healthcare provider. In the event that the violator does not complete the
course and provide proof of same, a fine shall be levied of not less than two
hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00).
   (B)   Second Violation Within A Twelve Month Period: A fine of not less than
fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) (said fine
may be used by the Village for substance abuse education) and payment of
program cost and required attendance and completion of the smoking cessation
course offered by St. Francis Hospital and Health Center or any Village
authorized hospital or healthcare provider. In the event the violator does not
complete the course and provide proof of same, a fine shall be levied of not
less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) nor more than three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00).
   (C)   Third Violation Within A Twelve Month Period: Attendance at
orientation phase and completion of a community service program at Oak Forest
Hospital or any Village authorized hospital or healthcare provider with
required service hours to be between twenty (20) and twenty four (24) hours to
be served as set out by the hospital. If the community service is not performed
in a satisfactory manner, and proof of same provided, a fine shall be levied of
not less than three hundred fifty dollars ($350.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00).
   (D)   Fourth Or Further Violations Within A Twelve Month Period: A fine
shall be levied of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) nor more than
six hundred dollars ($600.00) and completion of between thirty (30) and fifty
(50) hours of community service at Oak Forest Hospital or any Village
authorized hospital or healthcare provider. If the community service is not
performed in a satisfactory manner, and proof of same provided, the fine will
automatically increase to seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1389, 5-
22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-10: PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, give away or
deliver tobacco products within one hundred feet (100') of any school property,
childcare facility or other building used for education or recreational
programs for persons under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-
1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-11: CERTAIN FREE DISTRIBUTIONS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any person in the business of selling
or otherwise distributing, promoting or advertising tobacco products, or any
employee or agent of any such licensee or person, in the course of such
licensee's or person's business, to distribute, give away or deliver tobacco
products free of charge to any person on any right-of-way, park, playground or
other property owned by the Village, any school district, any park district or
any public library. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-12: VENDING MACHINES; LOCKING DEVICES:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell or offer for sale, give
away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling, giving away or
delivering tobacco products by use of a vending machine, unless such vending
machine is equipped with a manual, electric or electronic locking device
controlled by the licensee, agent or employee so as to prevent its operation by
persons under the age of twenty one (21) years. If the vending machine has no
locking device, it must be located within ten feet (10') of the cashier and in
the direct line of sight of said cashier. The sale of tobacco products from a
vending machine is considered a sale by the licensee and/or the agent in charge
of the business. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996; amd. Ord. 2030, 6-26-
2019)
   (B)   Any premises where access by persons under the age of twenty one (21)
is prohibited by law, or premises where the public is generally not permitted
and where vending machines are strictly for the use of employees of businesses
located at such premises, shall be exempt from the requirements of subsection
(A) of this section, but if a purchase is made by a person under the age of
twenty one (21) the licensee is in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2030, 6-26-
2019)
5-11-13: RESPONSIBILITY FOR AGENTS AND EMPLOYEES:
Every act or omission of whatsoever nature, constituting a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, by any officer, director, manager or other
agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed and held to be the act of
such licensee; and such licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if
such act or omission had been done or omitted by the licensee personally. (Ord.
1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-14: SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OF LICENSE; FINES, COSTS:
   (A)   The Village President shall be charged with the administration of this
chapter. The Village President may suspend or revoke any license issued under
the provisions of this chapter if he determines that the licensee has violated
any of the provisions of this chapter. In addition to or in lieu of suspension
or revocation of a license, the Village President may levy a fine on the
licensee. The fine imposed shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each violation. Each day on which a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
   (B)   No such license shall be suspended or revoked and no licensee shall be
fined except after a public hearing by the Village President with a seven (7)
day written notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to
appear and defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7)
day notice provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail
or by personal service. Personal service on the licensee, manager or agent
shall be valid service upon the licensee.
   (C)   The Village President shall, within seven (7) days after such hearing,
if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked or
suspended, and/or that the licensee should be fined, state the reason for such
determination in a written order and state the amount of the fine, the period
of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy of such
order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee or the licensee's manager or
agent.
   (D)   Any licensee determined by the Village President to have violated any
of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the Village the costs of the
hearing before the Village President on such violation. The Village President
shall determine the costs incurred by the Village for said hearing, including,
but not limited to: court reporter's fees, the costs of transcripts or records,
attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing notices and orders and all
other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the Village or such lesser sum as the
Village President may allow.
   (E)   The licensee shall pay said costs to the Village within thirty (30)
days of notification of the costs by the Village President. Failure to pay said
costs within thirty (30) days of notification is a violation of this chapter
and may be cause for license suspension or revocation and/or the levy of a
fine. (Ord. 1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
5-11-15: USE OF PREMISES AFTER REVOCATION:
When any license shall have been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to said licensee for the period of six (6) months thereafter for the
conduct of the business of selling "tobacco products" as defined in section 5-
11-2 of this chapter in the premises described in such revoked license. (Ord.
1389, 5-22-1996, eff. 7-1-1996)
CHAPTER 12
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE 1
SECTION:
5-12-1: Definitions
5-12-2: Registration Of Telecommunications Providers
5-12-3: Municipal Telecommunications Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
5-12-4: Collection, Enforcement, And Administration Of Telecommunications
Infrastructure Maintenance Fees
5-12-5: Compliance With Other Laws
5-12-6: Existing Franchises And Licenses
5-12-7: Penalties
5-12-8: Enforcement
5-12-9: Severability
5-12-10: Conflict
5-12-11: Waiver And Fee Implementation
5-12-12: Effective Date Of Infrastructure Maintenance Fee
 
Notes
  1. Ordinance 1423 shall be in full force and effect from and after January 1,
1 1998, or its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form, whichever is
  the last to occur.
5-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
GROSS CHARGES: The amount paid to a telecommunications retailer for the act or
privilege of originating or receiving telecommunications within the village,
and for all services rendered in connection therewith, valued in money, whether
paid in money or otherwise, including cash, credits, services, and property of
every kind or nature, and shall be determined without any deduction on account
of the cost of such telecommunications, the cost of the materials used, labor
or service costs, or any other expense whatsoever. In case credit is extended,
the amount thereof shall be included only as and when paid. "Gross charges" for
private line service shall include charges imposed at each channel point within
the village, charges for the channel mileage between each channel point within
the village, and charges for that portion of the interstate interoffice channel
provided within the village. However, "gross charges" shall not include:
   (A)   Any amounts added to a purchaser's bill because of a charge made
under: 1) the fee imposed by this section, 2) additional charges added to a
purchaser's bill under section 9-221 or 9-222 of the public utilities act, 3)
amounts collected under section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code, 4) the
tax imposed by the telecommunications excise tax act, 5) 911 surcharges, or 6)
the tax imposed by section 4251 of the internal revenue code;
   (B)   Charges for a sent collect telecommunication received outside the
village;
   (C)   Charges for leased time on equipment or charges for the storage of
data or information or subsequent retrieval or the processing of data or
information intended to change its form or content. Such equipment includes,
but is not limited to, the use of calculators, computers, data processing
equipment, tabulating equipment, or accounting equipment and also includes the
usage of computers under a time sharing agreement;
   (D)   Charges for customer equipment, including such equipment that is
leased or rented by the customer from any source, wherein such charges are
disaggregated and separately identified from other charges;
   (E)   Charges to business enterprises certified under section 9-222.1 of the
public utilities act to the extent of such exemption and during the period of
time specified by the village;
   (F)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
in connection therewith between a parent corporation and its wholly owned
subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, and only to the extent that
the charges between the parent corporation and wholly owned subsidiaries or
between wholly owned subsidiaries represent expense allocation between the
corporations and not the generation of profit other than a regulatory required
profit for the corporation rendering such services;
   (G)   Bad debts ("bad debt" means any portion of a debt that is related to a
sale at retail for which gross charges are not otherwise deductible or
excludable that has become worthless or uncollectable, as determined under
applicable federal income tax standards; if the portion of the debt deemed to
be bad is subsequently paid, the retailer shall report and pay the tax on that
portion during the reporting period in which the payment is made);
   (H)   Charges paid by inserting coins in coin operated telecommunications
devices; or
   (I)   Charges for telecommunications and all services and equipment provided
to the village.
PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY: Any municipal street, alley, waterway or public right of
way dedicated or commonly used for utility purposes, including utility
easements wherein the village has acquired the right and authority to locate or
permit the location of utilities consistent with telecommunications facilities.
"Public right of way" shall not include any real or personal village property
that is not specifically described in the previous sentence and shall not
include village buildings and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the public right of way.
RETAILER MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE (Or Any Like Term):
Means and includes any retailer having or maintaining within the state of
Illinois, directly or by a subsidiary, an office, distribution facilities,
transmission facilities, sales office, warehouse, or other place of business,
or any agent or other representative operating within this state under the
authority of the retailer or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place
of business or agent or other representative is located here permanently or
temporarily, or whether such retailer or subsidiary is licensed to do business
in this state.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SERVICE ADDRESS: The location of telecommunications equipment from which
telecommunications services are originated or at which telecommunications
services are received. If this is not a defined location, as in the case of
wireless telecommunications, paging systems, maritime systems, air to ground
systems, and the like, "service address" shall mean the location of the
customer's primary use of the telecommunications equipment as defined by the
location in Illinois where bills are sent.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes, but is not limited to, messages or information
transmitted through use of local, toll, and wide area telephone service,
channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer exchange
services, private line services, specialized mobile radio services, or any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. Unless the context clearly requires
otherwise, "telecommunications" shall also include "wireless
telecommunications" as hereinafter defined. "Telecommunications" shall not
include value added services in which computer processing applications are used
to act on the form, content, code, and protocol of the information for purposes
other than transmission. "Telecommunications" shall not include purchase of
telecommunications by a telecommunications service provider for use as a
component part of the service provided by him or her to the ultimate retail
consumer who originates or terminates the end to end communications. Retailer
access charges, right of access charges, charges for use of intercompany
facilities, and all telecommunications resold in the subsequent provision and
used as a component of, or integrated into, end to end telecommunications
service shall not be included in gross charges as sales for resale.
"Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of cable services through
a cable system as defined in the cable communications act of 1984 (47 USC
section 521 and following) as now or hereafter amended or cable or other
programming services subject to an open video system fee payable to the village
through an open video system as defined in the rules of the federal
communications commission (47 CDF 76.1550 and following) as now or hereafter
amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER:
   (A)   Any telecommunications retailer; and
   (B)   Any person that is not a telecommunications retailer that installs,
owns, operates or controls equipment in the public right of way that is used or
designed to be used to transmit telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER OR RETAILER OR CARRIER: Means and includes every
person engaged in the business of making sales of telecommunications at retail
as defined in this section. The village may, in its discretion, upon
application, authorize the collection of the fee hereby imposed by any retailer
not maintaining a place of business within this state, who, to the satisfaction
of the village, furnishes adequate security to ensure collection and payment of
the fee. When so authorized, it shall be the duty of such retailer to pay the
fee upon all of the gross charges for telecommunications in the same manner and
subject to the same requirements as a retailer maintaining a place of business
within the village.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS: Includes cellular mobile telephone services,
personal wireless services as defined in section 704(C) of the
telecommunications act of 1996 (public law no. 104-104), 42 USC section 332(c)
(7), as now or hereafter amended, including all commercial mobile radio
services, and paging services. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-2: REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDERS:
   (A)   Every "telecommunications provider" as defined by this chapter shall
register with the village within thirty (30) days after the effective date of
this chapter or becoming a telecommunications provider, whichever is later, on
a form to be provided by the village, provided, however, that any
telecommunications retailer that has filed a return pursuant to subsection 5-
12-4(C) of this chapter shall be deemed to have registered in accordance with
this section.
   (B)   Every telecommunications provider who has registered with the village
pursuant to subsection (A) of this section has an affirmative duty to submit an
amended registration form or current return as required by subsection 5-12-4(C)
of this chapter, as the case may be, to the village within thirty (30) days
from the date of the occurrence of any changes in the information provided by
the telecommunications provider in the registration form or most recent return
on file with the village. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-3: MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
   (A)   A village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee is hereby
imposed upon all telecommunications retailers in the amount of one percent (1%)
of all gross charges charged by the telecommunications retailer to service
addresses within the village for telecommunications originating or received in
the village.
   (B)   Upon the effective date of the infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized in this chapter, the village infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized hereunder shall be the only fee or compensation for the use of all
public rights of way within the village by telecommunications retailers.
Imposition of the infrastructure maintenance fee provided under this chapter
does not, however, serve as a limitation on the levying of any taxes or
imposition of any fees otherwise authorized by law.
   (C)   The village telecommunications infrastructure maintenance fee
authorized by this section shall be collected, enforced, and administered as
set forth in section 5-12-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-4: COLLECTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND ADMINISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEES:
   (A)   A telecommunications retailer shall charge to and collect from each
customer an additional charge in an amount equal to the village infrastructure
maintenance fee attributable to that customer's service address.
   (B)   Unless otherwise approved by the village clerk the infrastructure
maintenance fee shall be remitted by the telecommunications retailer to the
village not later than the last day of the month subsequent to the month in
which a bill is issued to the customer; provided, however, that the
telecommunications retailer may retain an amount not to exceed two percent (2%)
of the village infrastructure maintenance fee collected by it to reimburse
itself for expenses incurred in accounting for and remitting the fee.
   (C)   Remittance of the municipal infrastructure fee to the village shall be
accompanied by a return, in a form to be prescribed by the village clerk, which
shall contain such information as the village clerk may reasonably require.
   (D)   Any infrastructure maintenance fee required to be collected pursuant
to this chapter and any such infrastructure maintenance fee collected by such
telecommunications retailer shall constitute a debt owed by the
telecommunications retailer to the village. The charge imposed under subsection
(A) of this section by the telecommunications retailer pursuant to this chapter
shall constitute a debt of the purchaser to the telecommunications retailer who
provides such services until paid and, if unpaid, is recoverable at law in the
same manner as the original charge for such services.
   (E)   If it shall appear that an amount of infrastructure maintenance fee
has been paid that was not due under the provisions of this chapter, whether as
a result of a mistake of fact or an error of law, then such amount shall be
credited against any infrastructure maintenance fee due, or to become due,
under this chapter, from the telecommunications retailer who made the erroneous
payment; provided, however, the village clerk may request, and
telecommunications retailer shall provide, written substantiation for such
credit. However, no claim for such credit may be made more than three (3) years
after the date of the erroneous payment unless: 1) the credit is used only to
offset a claim of underpayment made by the village within the applicable
statutory period of limitations, and 2) the credit derives from an overpayment
made by the same telecommunications retailer during the applicable statutory
period of limitations.
   (F)   Amounts paid under this chapter by telecommunications retailers shall
not be included in the tax base under any of the following acts as described
immediately below:
      1.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the telecommunications excise tax
act;
      2.   "Gross receipts" for purposes of the municipal utility tax as
prescribed in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois municipal code;
      3.   "Gross charges" for purposes of the municipal telecommunications tax
as prescribed in section 8-11-17 of the Illinois municipal code;
      4.   "Gross revenue" for purposes of the tax on annual gross revenue of
public utilities prescribed in section 2-202 of the public utilities act.
   (G)   The village shall have the right, in its discretion, to audit the
books and records of all telecommunications retailers subject to this chapter
to determine whether the telecommunications retailer has properly accounted to
the village for the village infrastructure maintenance fee. Any underpayment of
the amount of the village infrastructure maintenance fee due to the village by
the telecommunications retailer shall be paid to the village plus five percent
(5%) of the total amount of the underpayment determined in an audit. If the
audit indicates that the underpayment was more than three percent (3%) of the
amount remitted to the village in a timely manner as provided in this chapter,
then the telecommunications retailer shall reimburse the village for any costs
incurred by the village in conducting the audit. Any amounts payable to the
village pursuant to this subsection shall be paid to the village within twenty
one (21) days after the date of issuance of an invoice for same.
   (H)   The village clerk, or his or her designee, may promulgate such further
or additional regulations concerning the administration and enforcement of this
chapter, consistent with its provisions, as may be required from time to time
and shall notify all telecommunications retailers that are registered pursuant
to section 5-12-2 of this chapter of such regulations. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-5: COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS:
Nothing in this chapter shall excuse any person or entity from obligations
imposed under any law, including, but not limited to:
   (A)   Generally applicable taxes; and
   (B)   Standards for construction on, over, under, or within, use of or
repair of the public rights of way, including standards relating to
freestanding towers and other structures upon the public rights of way, as
provided; and
   (C)   Any liability imposed for the failure to comply with such generally
applicable taxes or standards governing construction on, over, under, or
within, use of or repair of the public rights of way; and
   (D)   Compliance with any ordinance or provision of this code concerning
uses or structures located on, over, or within the rights of way. (Ord. 1423,
11-12-1997)
5-12-6: EXISTING FRANCHISES AND LICENSES:
Any franchise, license, or similar agreements between telecommunications
retailers and the village entered into before the effective date of this
chapter regarding the use of public rights of way shall remain valid according
to and for their stated terms except for any fees, charges or other
compensation to the extent waived. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-7: PENALTIES:
Any telecommunications provider who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or
refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject
to fine in accordance with the general penalty provisions of this code. (Ord.
1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-8: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-9: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter
is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-10: CONFLICT:
This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto
which are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict. (Ord. 1423, 11-
12-1997)
5-12-11: WAIVER AND FEE IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   Effective February 1, 1998, or ninety (90) days after due notice of
this waiver is given as provided in section 25(f) of the act, whichever is
later, and during the time the village imposes the telecommunications
infrastructure maintenance fee provided herein, the village waives all fees,
charges and other compensation that may accrue, after the effective date of the
waiver, to the village by a telecommunications retailer pursuant to any
existing village franchise, license or similar agreement with a
telecommunications retailer. This waiver shall only be effective during the
time the infrastructure maintenance fee provided for in this chapter is subject
to being lawfully imposed on the telecommunications retailer and collected by
the telecommunications retailer from the customer. Any fees charged or other
compensation that may be due and payable for the period through January 31,
1998, are not waived.
   (B)   The village clerk shall send a notice of the waiver by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to each telecommunications retailer with whom the
village has a franchise agreement. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
5-12-12: EFFECTIVE DATE OF INFRASTRUCTURE MAINTENANCE FEE:
The village infrastructure maintenance fee imposed by this chapter shall become
effective and charged on customer bills issued on or after the later of
February 1, 1998, or the first day of the month first beginning ninety (90)
days after the written waiver notices referred to in section 5-12-11 of this
chapter have been given. (Ord. 1423, 11-12-1997)
CHAPTER 13
FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE
SECTION:
5-13-1: Applicability; Definitions
5-13-2: Firearms Dealer's License Required
5-13-3: Application For Firearms Dealer's License
5-13-4: Issuance Of Firearms Dealer's License
5-13-5: Period Of Firearms Dealer's License And Renewal Procedure
5-13-6: Firearms Dealer's License Not Transferable
5-13-7: Firearms Dealer's General Operating Requirements
5-13-8: Revocation And Suspension Of Firearms Dealer's License
5-13-9: Hearing On Granting, Denial, Renewal, Revocation, Or Suspension Of
Firearms Dealer's License
5-13-10: Sale Of Firearms To Intoxicated Persons Prohibited
5-13-11: Lost Or Stolen Firearms
5-13-12: Discharge Of Firearms Within Village Prohibited
5-13-13: Prohibition Against Sale Of Firearms Without Safety Devices
5-13-14: Delivery Of Ammunition Or Firearms Or Blowguns To Persons Under The
Age Of Twenty One Years
5-13-15: Possession Or Use Of Firearms And Ammunition Or Blowguns By Any Person
Under The Age Of Twenty One Years Prohibited
5-13-16: Possession Of Firearms On School Property Prohibited
5-13-17: Possession Of Firearms On Village Property Prohibited
5-13-18: Possession Of Firearms Where Alcohol Sold For Consumption Prohibited
5-13-19: Sale Of Ammunition
5-13-20: False Information
5-13-21: Tampering With Firearm Identification
5-13-22: Other Laws Not Affected
5-13-23: Persons Exempt
5-13-24: Antiques And Ornaments
5-13-25: Penalty
5-13-26: Severability
5-13-1: APPLICABILITY; DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Applicability:
      1.   It is hereby intended that this chapter shall expressly preempt all
Cook County licensing schemes for firearms dealers. As provided in article VII,
section 6(c) of the state of Illinois constitution of 1970, if a county
ordinance conflicts with an ordinance of a municipality, the municipal
ordinance shall prevail within its jurisdiction.
      2.   Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be issued separate
and apart from any general business license issued by the village.
   (B)   Definitions: Except where otherwise indicated by the context, the
following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this
chapter:
   AMMUNITION: Any projectile or other device that will or is designed to or
may readily be converted to be expelled from any "firearm", as that term is
defined herein.
   BLOWGUN: A barreled device of any description from which a projectile such
as a paintball or dart can be forced by mouth or air.
   CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police of the Midlothian police department or
his designee.
   FIREARM: Any lethal, barreled weapon of any description from which a
projectile or other missile can be discharged by the action of an explosive or
compressed gas, or the igniting of flammable or explosive substances;
excluding, however, any pneumatic gun, spring gun, or BB gun that expels a
single globular projectile not exceeding eighteen inches (18") in diameter and
excluding any device excluded by Illinois state statutes.
   FIREARMS DEALER: Any person:
      1.   Who is engaged in the business of selling firearms or ammunition at
wholesale or retail, whether or not such business constitutes the principal
business of such person;
      2.   Who is engaged in the business of manufacturing, servicing or
repairing such firearms or of making or fitting special barrels, stocks, or
trigger mechanisms to firearms; or
      3.   Who is licensed by the federal bureau of alcohol, tobacco and
firearms as a "dealer" who possesses a federal license.
   HANDGUN: Any firearm designed to be fired while being held in one hand, or
any combination of parts from which it is possible to assemble a handgun.
   LICENSE: Includes the word "permit".
   MINOR: Any person less than eighteen (18) years of age.
   PERSON: Any individual, corporation, company, association, firm,
partnership, society, joint stock company, or organization of any kind.
   TRANSFER: Includes to sell, assign, pledge, lease, loan, give away, or
otherwise cause the lawful title or rightful possession of a firearm to vest in
another.
   VILLAGE: Village of Midlothian. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998; amd. Ord. 1479, 1-26-
2000)
5-13-2: FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of dealer in
firearms in this village without first obtaining a license therefor in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-3: APPLICATION FOR FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE:
   (A)   An applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the
village a sworn application in writing, on a form to be furnished by the
village. The application shall include the following information and material:
      1.   Name, social security number, date of birth, residence address, and
telephone number of each individual owner, partner, or, if a corporation or
other organization, each officer and member of the governing board;
      2.   Citizenship and age of each person signing the application;
      3.   Trade names and exact locations and descriptions of any businesses
operated by applicant and each person signing the application, presently and
during the previous five (5) years;
      4.   Names and addresses of employers of each person signing the
application during the previous five (5) years;
      5.   The trade name and address of the business on behalf of which
application is made and its telephone number, if assigned;
      6.   The name, social security number, date of birth, firearms owners
identification card (FOID) number, residence address, and telephone number of
each person employed or intended to be employed to deal in firearms as of the
time the application is filed;
      7.   Applicant, and each person signing the application, must appear in
the police department within fourteen (14) days before application is made to
have his or her photograph taken, which photo is to become part of the
application;
      8.   Fingerprints of the applicant and each person signing the
application.
   (B)   Applications filed under this section by a corporation or other
organization shall be signed by the chief executive officer or other person
duly authorized to act for such corporation or organization.
   (C)   An application fee in the amount of five hundred fifty dollars
($550.00) shall accompany each application filed under this section. Upon the
issuance of a license, such fee shall constitute the license fee.
   (D)   By filing the application, the applicant agrees to abide by all terms
of this chapter. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-4: ISSUANCE OF FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE:
   (A)   Upon receipt of an application for a firearms dealer's license as
provided for herein, the chief of police shall order an investigation of the
applicant's business responsibility and moral character.
   (B)   The chief of police shall approve the application if he finds that:
      1.   The applicant has not been convicted in any jurisdiction of a crime
of violence punishable by imprisonment for more than one year;
      2.   The applicant is at least twenty one (21) years of age;
      3.   The applicant is a citizen of the United States;
      4.   The applicant is not otherwise ineligible to own or possess any
firearm under the laws of this village, the state or any federal laws or
regulations;
      5.   The premises in which the dealer is to operate meets all village
codes and licensing requirements; and
      6.   There is no other firearms dealer's license issued by the village.
   (C)   Upon completion of an investigation by the chief of police and within
thirty (30) to forty five (45) days after receipt of an application and fee
filed pursuant to the provisions herein, the village shall issue to the
applicant a license as a dealer in firearms or shall notify the applicant by
written order of the denial of his application and the reason or reasons
therefor.
   (D)   Because of the village's responsibility to its citizens and the
village's concerns for public health, safety and welfare of its residents there
shall only be one Midlothian firearms dealer's license issued subsequent to the
passage of this chapter, and said license must be in an area zoned for
business. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-5: PERIOD OF FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE AND RENEWAL PROCEDURE:
   (A)   Unless otherwise provided by the village, any license or renewal
license issued hereunder shall be effective as of the date of its issuance and
shall be valid to the end of the calendar year.
   (B)   An applicant for a renewal license shall file with the village a
written application upon forms provided by the village, signed and sworn to in
the same manner required in the case of an original application, and a fee as
above prescribed. The application shall contain such information about the
applicant's demeanor and the conduct and operation of the licensed business
during the preceding license period as is reasonably necessary to enable the
chief of police to determine the applicant's eligibility for a renewal license.
   (C)   The chief of police shall approve the application if all applicable
standards are met. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-6: FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE:
No firearms dealer's license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or
assigned or used by any person other than the person to whom it is issued, or
at any location other than the one for which it is issued. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-
1998)
5-13-7: FIREARMS DEALER'S GENERAL OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
The following general operating requirements shall apply to all firearms
dealers licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Display Of License: The license issued pursuant to this chapter shall
be available for display on the business premises.
   (B)   Valid ID And Background Check Required: No firearm shall be sold or
given away or otherwise disposed of to any person who does not possess and
exhibit a valid Illinois firearms owners ID card; and who does not pass the
background investigation required under applicable Illinois law 1  and all
other applicable Illinois firearm laws.
   (C)   Record Of Transactions: Every person licensed as a firearms dealer
shall keep on the premises mentioned and described in the license an accurate
record of every transaction involving a firearm. Such record shall contain the
date and time of the transaction (application and sale and delivery); the name,
age, and residence of the purchaser; the purchaser's FOID number; the firearms
registration number; and a description of the firearm involved in the
transaction, including the make, model, manufacturer's name and serial number,
the caliber or gauge, and any other distinguishing number or identification
mark on such firearm.
   (D)   Record Inspection: The record herein required shall be open at all
reasonable hours for inspection by any member of the Midlothian police
department authorized by the chief of police or any authorized federal or state
official. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
   (E)   Monthly Submission Of Transfer Records: Any person possessing a
license obtained under this chapter, in addition to any other reports required
by law, must provide to the chief of police, on a monthly basis, the following
information:
A written report containing the name, address, telephone number, social
security number and age of the person to whom the licensee transferred a
firearm, the date on which the transfer took place, the type, model and a
description of the firearm, the manufacturer of the firearm, the price of the
firearm, the serial number of the firearm, a photocopy of the purchaser's
firearms owner's identification card and the purpose given by the purchaser for
the acquisition of the firearm. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
   (F)   Advertising And Display Prohibited: There shall be no outside
advertising of sale of firearms or ammunition on the building or in the
windows, and no advertising of the business shall be put in any papers, flyers
(except as provided in subsection (G) of this section), magazines or
periodicals. There shall be no firearms openly displayed in the establishment.
   (G)   Authorized Sales And Transfers: The primary sale of firearms shall be
to authorized police and security personnel; and flyers may be sent to these
organizations. There may be transfers between authorized firearms dealers. A
record of said transfers must be kept.
   (H)   Illegal Sales: No sale of any type of firearms which is illegal by
federal or state laws and no sale of assault rifles except as may be authorized
for sale to law enforcement agencies.
   (I)   Security Required: Appropriate security for the building and the
firearms are required, including, but not limited to, burglar alarms, fire
alarms, etc. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
   (J)   Transfer Of More Than One Firearm Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person possessing a license to transfer to any person more than one firearm
in any thirty (30) day period. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. 430 ILCS 65/3.1.
5-13-8: REVOCATION AND SUSPENSION OF FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE:
   (A)   A firearms dealer's license issued hereunder may be revoked or
suspended by the village whenever they determine that the public interest so
requires and when it is found, after due investigation, that:
      1.   The licensee breaches any condition upon which the license was
issued or fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter; or
      2.   The licensee has obtained the license through any fraud or
misstatement; or
      3.   The licensed business is a nuisance, or is being operated or carried
on in any unlawful manner; or
      4.   The licensed business is no longer being operated;
      5.   The dealer has had revoked any permit or license required to hold a
dealer's license.
   (B)   Upon a determination by the village that a firearms dealer's license
should be revoked or suspended, a written order of revocation or suspension
setting forth the reason or reasons therefor shall be issued by the village and
served upon the licensee. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-9: HEARING ON GRANTING, DENIAL, RENEWAL, REVOCATION, OR SUSPENSION OF
FIREARMS DEALER'S LICENSE:
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by an order of the village granting, denying,
renewing, revoking, or suspending a license for a proposed or existing business
of dealer in firearms, may file a written request for a hearing before the
village president within ten (10) days after issuance of such order. The
village president shall give notice of a hearing upon this request to be held
in not less than five (5) days after service of the notice on the person
requesting the hearing. The village president shall also give notice of the
hearing to other persons directly interested in the order in question. At such
hearing, the village president shall determine whether the granting, denial,
renewal, revocation, or suspension of the license was in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and shall issue written findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and an order to carry out its findings and conclusions.
These findings of fact, conclusions of law, and order shall be served by the
village president upon all parties appearing or represented at said hearing.
   (B)   The village attorney shall furnish such assistance and advice to the
village president as he shall request.
   (C)   Any person aggrieved by an order issued by the village president
pursuant to the provisions of this section may, at any time within thirty five
(35) days after the date the decision was served upon the party, file an appeal
with the circuit court of Cook County in accordance with applicable provisions
of law under the administrative review act. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-10: SALE OF FIREARMS TO INTOXICATED PERSONS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell, loan, or furnish a firearm to any person
under the influence of alcohol or any narcotic drug or stimulant or depressant
or to any person in a condition of agitation and excitability.
   (B)   Such unlawful sale, loan, or furnishing shall be grounds for
revocation of any license issued by the village pursuant to this chapter. (Ord.
1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-11: LOST OR STOLEN FIREARMS:
The loss or theft of any firearm shall be reported to the chief of police by
the person from whose possession the firearm was lost or stolen, within twenty
four (24) hours after such loss or theft is discovered. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-12: DISCHARGE OF FIREARMS WITHIN VILLAGE PROHIBITED:
No person shall discharge any firearm within the village except by permission
of the chief of police, granted for special occasions, except in proper
position for firing salutes or by command of a proper military or police
officer in the performance of official duty, or in a licensed shooting range.
(Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-13: PROHIBITION AGAINST SALE OF FIREARMS WITHOUT SAFETY DEVICES:
It shall be unlawful for any person possessing a license to transfer any
firearm which does not contain a safety mechanism, such as a trigger lock,
cable lock, combination handle lock or solenoid use limitation device, that
substantially hinders the use of the firearm by children under the age of
seventeen (17) or other unauthorized users. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
5-13-14: DELIVERY OF AMMUNITION OR FIREARMS OR BLOWGUNS TO PERSONS UNDER THE
AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS:
No person shall sell, barter, lend, give, or in any way furnish to a person
under the age of twenty one (21) years any firearm or blowgun or any cartridge,
shell, ammunition, or device containing any explosive substance, designed or
intended to be used in or fired from a firearm. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
5-13-15: POSSESSION OR USE OF FIREARMS AND AMMUNITION OR BLOWGUNS BY ANY PERSON
UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE YEARS PROHIBITED:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall fire, discharge, shoot,
or operate, or participate in the firing, discharging, shooting, or operating,
or have in his possession, care, custody, or control a firearm or blowgun or
device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging any
dangerous missile, or any cartridge, shell, ammunition, or device containing
any explosive substance, designed or intended to be used in or fired from any
firearm. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
5-13-16: POSSESSION OF FIREARMS ON SCHOOL PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
No person except authorized law enforcement officers shall knowingly possess,
carry or use a firearm in a school building, on any school property or other
facility used for school purposes or at a school sponsored activity. (Ord.
1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-17: POSSESSION OF FIREARMS ON VILLAGE PROPERTY PROHIBITED:
Unless authorized, no employee of the village shall bring onto, nor have in his
possession while on village property or any other property upon which the
employee is conducting village business, a firearm, whether concealed or
unconcealed, loaded or unloaded. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-18: POSSESSION OF FIREARMS WHERE ALCOHOL SOLD FOR CONSUMPTION PROHIBITED:
No person except authorized law enforcement officers, shall carry or possess a
firearm in that portion of any tavern, lounge, or other licensed establishment
where alcoholic beverages are sold or offered for sale to the public for
consumption on the premises. This provision applies whether or not the firearm
is concealed or visible, or loaded or unloaded; and whether or not the
possessor has a license or permit to carry the firearm. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-19: SALE OF AMMUNITION:
No ammunition suitable for use in any firearm shall be sold or given away or
otherwise disposed of to any person who has not been issued an Illinois
firearms owners identification card and who does not exhibit such document to
the dealer at the time of the purchase. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
5-13-20: FALSE INFORMATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person purchasing any firearm or ammunition or
license under this chapter, or in giving any information pursuant to the
requirements of this chapter, to give false information or offer false evidence
of his identity or age. (Ord. 1479, 1-26-2000)
5-13-21: TAMPERING WITH FIREARM IDENTIFICATION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to change, alter, remove, or obliterate the
name of the maker, model, manufacturer's number, or any other mark or
identification on any firearm. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-22: OTHER LAWS NOT AFFECTED:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting or otherwise altering
the requirements of any other applicable laws respecting the carrying or
possession of weapons. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-23: PERSONS EXEMPT:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the sale, transfer,
ownership, or possession of any firearm or ammunition to or by:
   (A)   Any person directly transporting any firearm to the police department
of this village to surrender such firearm pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter or any state or federal law, statute or regulation;
   (B)   Any member of the armed forces of the United States or of the national
guard when on duty;
   (C)   Any authorized officer, agent or employee of a local municipality, the
state, or the federal government who is authorized to carry a firearm and who
is carrying a firearm in the performance of his official authorized duties; and
   (D)   Any law enforcement officers employed by governmental agencies outside
the state who are engaged in their official duties. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-24: ANTIQUES AND ORNAMENTS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to antique firearms which are
incapable of being fired or discharged or which do not fire fixed ammunition,
or those manufactured before 1898 for which cartridge ammunition is not
commercially available, and are possessed as curiosities or ornaments or for
their historical significance or value. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-25: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be fined
not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day the violation
occurs or continues to occur shall be a separate violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
5-13-26: SEVERABILITY:
Severability is intended throughout and within the provisions of this chapter.
If any section, subsection, clause, phrase, or portion of this chapter is held
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, then that
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1429, 2-11-1998)
CHAPTER 14
FARMERS' MARKET
SECTION:
5-14-1: Provisional Permit, License
5-14-2: Definitions
5-14-3: Location
5-14-4: Permit Required
5-14-5: Permit Fee
5-14-6: Hours Of Operation
5-14-7: Sanitary Condition Required
5-14-8: Compliance
5-14-9: Rules And Regulations
5-14-10: Penalty
5-14-1: PROVISIONAL PERMIT, LICENSE:
Farmers' market permits shall be issued by the village clerk without charge
only for the experimental period of June 27, 1998 through July 25, 1998. No
such license shall be renewed until and unless the board of trustees makes a
finding that said farmers' market operation was not in any way detrimental to
the public health, safety and welfare. In the event the board of trustees finds
that the operation of said farmers' market was detrimental to the public
health, safety and welfare, no further farmers' market permits shall be issued
by the village clerk, and the farmers' market shall immediately terminate. On
the other hand, if the board of trustees finds the operation of said farmers'
market was not in any way detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare,
the village clerk may renew the original permits issued hereunder or add other
permits for remainder of the season for the fee of one hundred ten dollars
($110.00). (Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
FARMER: Any person offering for sale articles for human consumption, such as
fruits or their juices, vegetables, edible grains, nuts and berries, breads and
apiary products or nonedible articles such as cut or potted flowers, which
articles have been raised or prepared by the grower or producer, members of his
family or by persons in his employ.
MARKETING AREA: The eighteen foot (18') space permitted to farmer for sale of
articles. (Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-3: LOCATION:
A farmers' market may be conducted at 147th and Waverly Avenue. (Ord. 1434, 5-
13-1998)
5-14-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
No person shall occupy a position in said farmers' market for the purpose of
selling any fresh fruits, vegetables and flowers without a permit to do so.
(Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-5: PERMIT FEE:
Farmers' market permits shall be issued by the village clerk for a seasonal fee
of one hundred twenty five dollars ($125.00) per marketing space. Market season
will be the last full week of June through the second full week in October.
(Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
The farmers' market shall open for market purposes from seven o'clock (7:00)
A.M. to one o'clock (1:00) P.M. on Saturday of each week, and no vehicle or
stand used for the sale of farm goods in said market shall be permitted to be
or remain on said farmers' market except during said hours. (Ord. 1434, 5-13-
1998)
5-14-7: SANITARY CONDITION REQUIRED:
The farmers' market shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and no person shall
deposit or leave or cause to be deposited or left upon the public way or the
farmers' market place, any decayed or decaying matter or any fruits,
vegetables, remnants, refuse or debris or any part of the contents of any
vehicle or stand used in the farmers' market. (Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-8: COMPLIANCE:
All vendors must abide by the rules and regulations set forth by the village
and provide the village with a signed affidavit affirming compliance and
holding the village, its agents, officials and employees harmless, and to
indemnify them for any and all claims arising from their activities conducted
under the required permit. (Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The rules and regulations of the Midlothian farmers' market are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter, and it is acknowledged that said
rules and regulations may be changed from time to time, and therefore, the
dates, times, fees, etc., referred to in this chapter may be changed, as well
as other terms of this chapter may be changed by a change in the rules and
regulations. (Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
5-14-10: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not
less than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1434, 5-13-1998)
CHAPTER 15
EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN
SECTION:
5-15-1: Definitions
5-15-2: Submittal Of Plan
5-15-3: Review Of Plan
5-15-4: Implementation
5-15-5: Violations; Enforcement
5-15-6: Construction
5-15-7: Severability
5-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter unless the context otherwise requires:
CONTROL AREA: An electrical system bounded by interconnection (tie line)
metering and telemetry. It controls generation directly to maintain its
interchange schedule with other control areas and contributes to frequency
regulation of the interconnection.
CONTROL AREA EMERGENCY: The control area is at risk of having to shed firm
load, having taken or committed to take all feasible mitigating action short of
shedding firm load and firm sales.
CONTROLLED ROTATING INTERRUPTIONS OF ELECTRICAL SERVICE: The implementation of
a plan to curtail electric service to firm load customers for a short period of
time and rotating this curtailment of electric service through different areas
within the electric utility's service territory in a situation where the demand
has exceeded or is at significant risk of exceeding the supply of electricity
available to the electric utility. The action of an electric utility to
interrupt or curtail electric service to a customer participating in or taking
service under an interruptible or curtailable rate is not included in this
definition of a "controlled rotating interruption of electric service".
ELECTRIC UTILITY COMPANY OR ELECTRIC UTILITY: Any person or entity engaged in
the business of distributing, transmitting, or otherwise delivering
electricity, regardless of its source, for use or consumption within the
village. This term shall not include any person or entity that delivers
electricity to fewer than fifty (50) customers within the village.
EMERGENCY ENERGY PLAN: The portions of the emergency load conservation
procedures, which immediately precede and include the controlled rotating
interruption of electrical service to firm load customers within the village.
The emergency energy plan shall include the following steps:
   (A)   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
   (B)   A declaration of a control area emergency;
   (C)   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use; and
   (D)   Implementation of the plan for controlled rotating interruptions of
electrical service.
EMERGENCY LOAD CONSERVATION PROCEDURES: A planned course of action developed by
an electric utility company to be implemented in emergency situations when the
demand for electricity exceeds, or is at significant risk of exceeding, the
supply of electricity available to the electric utility. (Ord. 1477, 12-8-1999)
5-15-2: SUBMITTAL OF PLAN:
   (A)   Every electric utility company must have adopted an emergency energy
plan no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter,
or within thirty (30) days after becoming an electric utility company,
whichever is later. Every such electric utility company shall submit to the
village clerk and superintendent of public works an emergency energy plan
adopted by the company no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date
of this chapter, or within twenty four (24) hours of the time the plan is
adopted, whichever is later. The electric utility company shall be required to
examine and update as needed its emergency energy plan at least annually. The
electric utility company shall notify the foregoing public officials in writing
of any material revisions to its plan and the rationale for said revisions
within five (5) business days of the time said revisions are made.
   (B)   The emergency energy plan shall include, at a minimum, information
detailing:
      1.   Circumstances that would require the implementation of the emergency
energy plan;
      2.   Stages of the emergency energy plan;
      3.   The approximate geographic limits of each outage area provided for
in the emergency energy plan;
      4.   The approximate number of customers within each outage area provided
for in the emergency energy plan;
      5.   The police facilities, fire stations, hospitals, nursing homes,
schools, daycare centers, senior citizen centers, community health centers,
dialysis centers, community mental health centers, correctional facilities,
stormwater and wastewater treatment or pumping facilities, and water pumping
stations that have been identified by the village, and persons on life support
systems that are known to the company, and that could be affected by controlled
rotating interruptions of electric service under the emergency energy plan; and
      6.   The anticipated sequence and duration of intentional interruptions
of electric service to each outage area under the emergency energy plan. (Ord.
1477, 12-8-1999)
5-15-3: REVIEW OF PLAN:
   (A)   Upon submittal of the emergency energy plan to the village, the
village shall review the emergency energy plan in order to determine if the
emergency energy plan is complete and to assure appropriate coordination with
public health and safety agencies. The village may reject the emergency energy
plan if it does not contain all the information required under subsection 5-15-
2(B) of this chapter, in which case the village shall notify the electric
utility company in writing of said rejection and the reasons therefor. The
electric utility company shall thereafter submit a complete emergency energy
plan to the village no later than thirty (30) days after such notice is sent by
the village.
   (B)   The village and the electric utility shall work cooperatively to:
      1.   Identify customers and facilities for which a controlled rotating
interruption of electric service would require heightened response by village
public health and safety agencies;
      2.   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on public health and
safety; and
      3.   Mitigate the potential impact of the plan on the duties of the
village's public health and safety agencies. (Ord. 1477, 12-8-1999)
5-15-4: IMPLEMENTATION:
   (A)   Whenever an electric utility company determines that it may be
necessary to implement a controlled rotating interruption of electrical service
due to the demand for electricity exceeding, or being at significant risk of
exceeding, the supply of electricity available to the electric utility company,
the electric utility company shall do the following:
      1.   Take appropriate action in preparation for implementing a controlled
rotating interruption of electric service and notify the appropriate electric
utility company personnel, and
      2.   Notify the village clerk and superintendent of public works that the
electric utility company will be implementing its emergency energy plan. The
notification shall be made pursuant to a notification procedure approved by the
above mentioned public officials after consultation with the above mentioned
public officials. The above mentioned public officials may waive the notice
requirement to accommodate exigent circumstances.
   (B)   Subsequent to providing the notice as required above, an electric
utility company shall reasonably and separately advise the designated village
officials when it implements each step of the emergency energy plan. Such steps
shall include the following:
      1.   A request for emergency help from neighboring utilities;
      2.   A declaration of a control area emergency;
      3.   A public appeal for voluntary curtailment of electricity use.
   (C)   The electric utility company shall give a separate notice to the
village clerk and superintendent of public works, immediately upon the
determination that there will be a controlled rotating interruption of electric
service pursuant to the emergency energy plan. The notification shall include
the areas to be interrupted; the sequence and estimated duration of the service
outage for each area; and the affected feeders and number of affected customers
in each area. Whenever practical, the notification shall be made at least two
(2) hours prior to the time of the outages, and in no case shall the
notification be made less than thirty (30) minutes prior to the outages, if the
company is aware that controlled rotating interruptions may be required.
   (D)   Notification required by this section shall be in addition to any
notification requirements set forth in any applicable franchise agreement or
franchise ordinance, or as may be required by applicable federal or state law
or regulation. (Ord. 1477, 12-8-1999)
5-15-5: VIOLATIONS; ENFORCEMENT:
Any electric utility company that knowingly violates this chapter or any rules
promulgated thereunder shall be subject to a fine of not less than two thousand
five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) and not more than ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00) for each offense. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
The village may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for an injunction
or order to compel the other party to comply with the provisions of this
chapter. (Ord. 1477, 12-8-1999)
5-15-6: CONSTRUCTION:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to preclude or interfere with the
implementation by an electric utility company of measures necessary to assure
the provision of adequate, efficient, reliable and environmentally safe
service, as required by the Illinois public utilities act 1 . Nothing set forth
in this chapter shall be deemed to modify the terms of any existing franchise
agreement or franchise ordinance otherwise applicable to any electric utility
company, or to excuse any performance required by such agreement or ordinance,
or to limit any authority that may be exercised pursuant to such agreement or
ordinance, or to limit any remedy that may be available under such agreement or
ordinance. (Ord. 1477, 12-8-1999)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/1-101 et seq.
5-15-7: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this chapter
be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining words, phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of
this chapter, since the same would have been enacted by the board of trustees
without the incorporation in this chapter of any such invalid or
unconstitutional word, phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. (Ord.
1477, 12-8-1999)
CHAPTER 16
CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
5-16-1: Definitions
5-16-2: Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
5-16-3: PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
5-16-4: Applicable Principles
5-16-5: No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
5-16-6: Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
5-16-7: Late Fees/Payments
5-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   (A)   "Gross revenues" shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (A)9 of
this definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   (B)   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   (C)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers and
the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 1653, 10-10-2007)
5-16-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues.
   (C)   Notice To Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   (E)   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection (B) of this section. (Ord. 1653, 10-10-2007)
5-16-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   (A)   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section 5-16-2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in subsection 5-16-2(D) of this chapter.
   (D)   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   (E)   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection (B) of this
section. (Ord. 1653, 10-10-2007)
5-16-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 1653, 10-10-2007)
5-16-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 1653, 10-
10-2007)
5-16-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   (A)   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act 1 . No
acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as an accord that the
amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 1653, 10-10-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 50 ILCS 45/1 et seq.
5-16-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 1653, 10-10-2007)
CHAPTER 17
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
SECTION:
5-17-1: Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
5-17-2: Enforcement
5-17-3: Penalties
5-17-4: Customer Credits
5-17-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   (A)   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village boundaries. (A copy of 220
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501 is attached to the ordinance codified
herein, incorporated herein by reference as exhibit A.)
   (B)   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date hereof shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality boundaries. However,
any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities
shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without formal action
by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 1654, 10-10-2007)
5-17-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
protection law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village. (Ord. 1654, 10-10-2007)
5-17-3: PENALTIES:
The village, pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(r)(1), does
hereby adopt penalties for any material breach of the cable and video
protection law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and
shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day of the
material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00)
for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   (A)   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified
material breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection (B) of this
section. (Ord. 1654, 10-10-2007)
5-17-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the
customer for the next billing cycle following the violation or following the
discovery of the violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for
providing the credits and the customer is under no obligation to request the
credit. (Ord. 1654, 10-10-2007)
CHAPTER 18
FAIR HOUSING
SECTION:
5-18-1: Preamble
5-18-2: Purpose
5-18-3: Construction
5-18-4: Definitions
5-18-5: Real Estate Transactions
5-18-6: Disability
5-18-7: Financial Services
5-18-8: Blockbusting
5-18-9: General Prohibited Acts
5-18-10: Exemptions
5-18-11: Administration
5-18-1: PREAMBLE:
The preamble of the ordinance codified herein shall be incorporated by
reference into the text of this chapter as if fully set forth herein. (Ord.
1696, 7-8-2009)
5-18-2: PURPOSE:
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the sale and rental of
dwelling units for the protection of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare. It is also the purpose of this chapter to assure fair housing and
freedom from discrimination throughout the village to protect village residents
from the effects of residential segregation by race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial
status, disability, military status, source of income, gender identity, housing
status or sexual orientation and to secure to its residents the economic,
social and professional benefits of living in a stable and integrated society.
   (B)   To the extent that this chapter does not apply to other protected
classes specifically covered by any applicable state or federal laws, it has
been determined that those laws provide adequate protection to those protected
classes and that a local remedy for the enforcement of the rights of those
protected classes is not necessary because state and federal remedies are
adequate. (Ord. 1752, 5-25-2011)
5-18-3: CONSTRUCTION:
This chapter shall be liberally construed to further the purposes and policies
stated herein. (Ord. 1696, 7-8-2009)
5-18-4: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and terms shall have
these specified meanings:
ANSI A117.1-1998: The 1998 edition of the American National Standards Institute
for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and usability for
physically disabled people, as hereafter amended from time to time.
ACCESSIBLE: The public and common use areas of the multi- family dwellings can
be approached, entered, and used by individuals with physical disabilities.
ACCESSIBLE ROUTE: A continuous unobstructed path that connects accessible
elements and spaces in a building or within a site that can be negotiated by a
person using a wheelchair and that is also safe for and usable by people with
other disabilities that complies with the requirements of the American National
Standards Institute's (ANSI) A117.1-1998, as amended from time to time, the
Illinois accessibility code (71 Illinois administrative code, part 400), as
amended from time to time, or a comparable standard shall be considered an
"accessible route".
ADMINISTRATOR: The person designated by the village to administer the
provisions of this chapter.
AGE: The chronological age of a person.
AGGRIEVED PERSON: Any person who claims to have been injured by a
discriminatory housing practice or who believes that such a person will be
injured by a discriminatory housing practice that is about to occur.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES: The president and board of trustees of the village of
Midlothian.
BROKER: Any person authorized to perform an action on behalf of another person
regarding any matter related to the sale or rental of dwellings, including
offers, solicitations or contracts and the administration of matters regarding
such offers, solicitations or contracts or any residential real estate related
transactions.
BROKER, AGENT OR SALESPERSON: A person, whether licensed or not, who, for or
with the expectation of receiving a consideration, lists, sells, purchases,
exchanges, rents or leases real property, or who negotiates or attempts to
negotiate any of these activities, or who holds himself or herself out as
engaged in these.
BUILDING: A structure, facility, or portion thereof that contains or serves one
or more dwelling units.
CHARGE: An allegation contained in a complaint.
COMMON USE AREAS: Those rooms, spaces or elements inside or outside of a
building that are made available for the use of residents of a building or
their guests. These areas include hallways, lounges, lobbies, laundry rooms,
refuse rooms, mailrooms, recreational areas and passageways among and between
buildings.
COMPLAINANT: A party or a person who files a complaint.
COMPLAINT: The document filed by a complainant with the administrator.
CONCILIATION: The attempted resolution of issues raised by a complaint, or by
the investigation of such complaint, through informal negotiations involving
the aggrieved person, the respondent and the designated officials of the
village of Midlothian.
CONCILIATION AGREEMENT: A written agreement setting forth the resolution of the
issues in conciliation.
CONGREGATE ELDERLY HOUSING: A building or a special use development housing
more than one family, with or without separate dwelling units for each family,
at least eighty percent (80%) of the occupancy of which is limited to persons
who are at least fifty five (55) years of age (or, if 2 or more persons occupy
a unit, at least 1 shall be 55 years of age or more), and which provides
significant and coordinated social and support services to residents, such as
meals, housekeeping, laundry, recreation, education and transportation.
CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Any drug or other substance, or immediate precursor
included in the definition in section 102 of the controlled substances act (21
USC 802).
DISABILITY: A determinable physical or mental characteristic of a person,
including, but not limited to, a determinable physical characteristic which
necessitates the person's use of a guide, hearing or support dog, the history
of such characteristic, or the perception of such characteristic by the person
complained against, which may result from disease, injury, congenital condition
of birth or functional disorder and which characteristic is unrelated to the
person's ability to acquire, rent or maintain a housing accommodation.
DISCRIMINATE: To treat any person differently from others because of race,
color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source of
income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
DWELLING: A building or portion of a building designed or used exclusively for
residential purposes, including single-family and multiple-family dwellings,
but not including mobile homes or other trailers and lodging rooms in hotels,
motels or lodging houses.
DWELLING, MULTI-FAMILY: Four (4) or more dwelling units, including modular
homes, attached along and sharing one or more common walls between any two (2)
units and/or stacked one above another.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are arranged, designed, or used as
living quarters for one family only. Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen
facilities that are permanently installed to serve the entire family shall
always be included within each dwelling unit.
FAMILIAL STATUS:
   (A)   One or more individuals who have not attained the age of eighteen (18)
years being domiciled with:
      1.   A parent or a person having legal custody of such individual or
individuals;
      2.   The designee of such parent or other person having such custody,
with the written permission of such parent or other person; or
   (B)   Persons who are pregnant or in the process of securing legal custody
of any individual who has not attained the age of eighteen (18).
FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or
adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit; or a group of not more
than six (6) persons not related by blood, marriage or adoption, living
together as a single housekeeping unit.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: A bank, credit union, insurance company, mortgage
banking company, savings and loan association, or other similar entity or
organization which makes or purchases loans or provides other financial
assistance and which operates or has a place of business in the state of
Illinois.
GENDER IDENTITY: The actual or perceived appearance, expression, identity, or
behavior of a person as being male or female, whether or not that appearance,
expression, identity or behavior is different from that traditionally
associated with the person's designated sex at birth.
HANDICAP: See definition of Disability.
HEARING: That part of an adjudicative proceeding that involves the submission
of evidence, either by oral presentation or written submission, and includes
the submission of briefs and oral arguments on the evidence and applicable law.
HOUSING ACCOMMODATION: Includes any improved or unimproved real property, or
part thereof, which is used or occupied, or is intended, arranged or designed
to be used or occupied, as the home or residence of one or more individuals.
HOUSING STATUS: The type of housing in which an individual resides, whether
publicly or privately owned; an individual's ownership status with respect to
the individual's residence; or the status of having or not having a fixed
residence.
LEASE: Any sublease, assignment, or rental and any contract to enter into any
of the foregoing.
LOAN: Includes, but is not limited to, the providing of funds, for
consideration, which are:
   (A)   Sought for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving,
repairing, or maintaining a housing accommodation;
   (B)   Sought for any commercial or industrial purposes; or
   (C)   Secured by residential real estate.
MARITAL STATUS: The legal status of being married, single, separated, divorced
or widowed.
MODIFICATION: Any change to the public or common use areas of a building or any
change to a dwelling unit.
NATIONAL ORIGIN: The place in which a person or one of his or her ancestors was
born.
OFFER: Means and includes every attempt by means of written or oral
communications to present for acceptance or rejection, to hold out or proffer,
to make a proposal to, or to exhibit real estate that may be taken or received
with the intention of ultimately entering into a real estate transaction.
OWNER: A person or persons who holds or hold legal or equitable title to or who
owns any beneficial interest in any real estate interest or who holds legal or
equitable title to shares of any entity which owns any real estate, or who is
recorded on such official records and includes a duly authorized agency or
notary, a trustee, a purchaser, or a devisee or any person having a vested or
contingent interest in the property in question.
PARENTAL STATUS: The status of living with one or more dependent minors or
disabled children.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business, trust
estate, partnership, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest,
or any other legal entity.
PERSON IN THE BUSINESS OF SELLING OR RENTING DWELLINGS: A person:
   (A)   Who has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as a
principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any
dwelling or any interest therein;
   (B)   Who has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as an
agent, other than in the sale of his or her own personal residence, in
providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or
more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest
therein; or
   (C)   Who is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy
by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families.
PUBLIC USE AREAS: Interior and exterior rooms or spaces of a building that are
made available to the general public. Public use may be provided at a building
that is privately or publicly owned.
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION: Includes the purchase or sale of legal title to or a
beneficial interest in, or the rental or lease of, any real property, or an
option to do any of the foregoing, or any negotiation, listing, contract or
agreement in connection therewith. The term "real estate transaction" also
includes the selling, brokering or appraising of residential real property and
the making or purchasing of loans or providing other financial assistance for
purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling or
secured by residential real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: Includes buildings, structures, real estate, lands, tenements,
leaseholds, interests in real estate cooperatives, condominiums, and
hereditaments, corporeal and incorporeal; or any interest therein.
RELIGION: Includes all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as
belief.
RENT: Includes lease, sublease, let and otherwise to grant for a consideration
the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant.
RESPONDENT:
   (A)   The person or other entity against whom a discriminatory housing
practice has been alleged in a complaint;
   (B)   Any other person or entity identified in the course of investigation
and notified as required under this chapter.
SALESPERSON: See definition of Broker.
SEX: The status of being either male or female.
SOURCE OF INCOME: The lawful manner by which an individual supports himself or
herself and his or her dependents.
STEERING: Influencing or attempting to influence by words or acts the choice or
location of housing of a prospective purchaser, occupant or tenant in
connection with viewing, buying, leasing, or occupying real estate based on
race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source
of income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation. (Ord. 1762,
8-24-2011)
5-18-5: REAL ESTATE TRANSACTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to engage in the
following proscribed conduct:
   (A)   Refusal To Negotiate Or Deal: Discriminate against any person by
refusing to sell or rent (when any dwelling is available for sale or rental),
after the making of a bona fide offer, or by refusing to negotiate for the sale
or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person.
   (B)   Qualification Criteria: Discriminate against any person by using
different qualification criteria or applications, or sale or rental standards
or procedures such as income standards, application requirements, application
fees, credit analysis or sale or rental approval procedures.
   (C)   Discriminatory Terms: Discriminate against any person in the terms,
conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision
of services or facilities in connection therewith.
   (D)   Withholding Of Dwellings: Discriminate against any person by
representing that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental,
when such dwelling is in fact available, or by failing to bring a property
listing to his or her attention, or by refusing to permit him or her to inspect
such real property.
   (E)   Eviction: Discriminate against any person by evicting a tenant(s)
because of either the tenant's or the tenant's guest's race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status,
familial status, disability, military status, source of income, gender
identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
   (F)   Discriminatory Advertisements, Signs Or Notices: Discriminate against
any person by making, printing, circulating or publishing or causing to be
made, printed or published, any written or oral notice, statement, or
advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling that indicates
any preference, limitation, or discrimination based on race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status,
familial status, disability, military status, source of income, gender
identity, housing status or sexual orientation or an intention to make such
preference, limitation, or discrimination. Discriminatory notices, statements
and advertisements include, but are not limited to:
      1.   Using words, phrases, photographs, illustrations, symbols, or forms
which convey that dwellings are available or not available to a particular
group of persons because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national
origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, disability,
military status, source of income, gender identity, housing status or sexual
orientation.
      2.   Expressing to agents, brokers, salespersons, employees, prospective
sellers or renters or any other persons a preference for or limitation on any
purchaser or renter because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national
origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, disability,
military status, source of income, gender identity, housing status or sexual
orientation.
      3.   Selecting media or locations for advertising the sale or rental of
dwellings which deny particular segments of the housing market information
about housing opportunities because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status,
disability, military status, source of income, gender identity, housing status
or sexual orientation.
      4.   Refusing to publish advertising for the sale or rental of dwellings,
or requiring different charges or terms for such advertising because of race,
color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source of
income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
   (G)   Listings: Discriminate against any person by offering, soliciting,
accepting, using or retaining a listing of property with knowledge that
unlawful discrimination in a real estate transaction is intended.
   (H)   Multiple Listing Services: Discriminate against a person by denying
that person access to or membership or participation in any multiple listing
service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization, or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings or
discriminate against any person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation.
   (I)   Participating In Discrimination: Discriminate against any person by
acting or undertaking to act as a real estate broker, salesperson, or agent
with respect to any dwelling the disposition of which requires said person to
participate in discrimination.
   (J)   Varying Rent/Sale Price: Impose different sales prices or rental
charges for the sale or rental of a dwelling upon any person because of race,
color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source of
income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
   (K)   Qualification Criteria: Use different qualification criteria or
applications, sale or rental standards or procedures, such as income standards,
application requirements, application fees, credit analysis or sale of rental
approval procedures or other requirements, because of race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status,
familial status, disability, military status, source of income, gender
identity, housing status or sexual orientation. (Ord. 1752, 5-25-2011)
5-18-6: DISABILITY:
In addition to the discriminatory acts prohibited in section 5-18-5 of this
chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person within the village to engage in
the following proscribed conduct:
   (A)   Discriminate Specifically Because Of Disability: Discriminate against
any person in the terms, conditions, or privileges of sale or rental of a
dwelling or in the provision of services or facilities in connection with such
dwelling, or otherwise make unavailable or deny a dwelling to any buyer or
renter because of a disability of:
      1.   That buyer or renter;
      2.   A person residing in or intending to reside in that dwelling after
it is so sold, rented or made available; or
      3.   Any person associated with that buyer or renter.
   (B)   Accommodations In Rules: Discriminate against any person with a
disability by refusing to make reasonable accommodations in rules, policies,
practices or services when such accommodations may be necessary to afford such
person equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
   (C)   Modification Of Unit:
      1.   Discriminate against any person with a disability by refusing to
permit, at the expense of that person, reasonable modifications of existing
premises occupied or to be occupied by such person if such modifications may be
necessary to afford such person the full enjoyment of the premises.
      2.   In the case of a rental, the landlord may, where it is reasonable to
do so, condition his or her permission of a modification on the renter agreeing
to restore the interior of the premises to the condition that existed before
the modification, reasonable wear and tear excepted. However, where it is
necessary to ensure with reasonable certainty that funds will be available to
pay for the restorations at the end of the tenancy, the landlord may negotiate
as part of such a restoration agreement a provision requiring that the tenant
pay into an interest bearing escrow account, over a reasonable period, a
reasonable amount of money not to exceed the cost of the restorations. The
interest in any such account shall accrue to the benefit of the tenant. A
landlord may condition permission for a modification on the renter providing a
reasonable description of the proposed modifications as well as reasonable
assurances that the work will be done in a workmanlike manner and that any
required building permits will be obtained.
   (D)   New Construction: Discriminate against any person with a disability by
failing to design and construct multi-family dwellings in such a manner that:
      1.   The public use areas and common use areas of such multi- family
dwellings are readily accessible to and usable by disabled persons;
      2.   All the doors designed to allow passage into and within dwellings
are sufficiently wide to allow passage by persons in wheelchairs; and
      3.   All premises within such dwellings contain the following features of
adaptive design: a) an accessible route into and through the dwelling; b) light
switches, electrical outlets, thermostats and other environmental controls in
accessible locations; c) reinforcements in bathroom walls to allow later
installation of grab bars; and d) usable kitchens and bathrooms such that an
individual in a wheelchair can maneuver about the space.
Compliance with the appropriate requirements of ANSI A117.1 or the Illinois
accessibility code for buildings and facilities providing accessibility and
usability for physically handicapped people shall suffice to satisfy the
requirements of subsection (D)3 of this section.
   (E)   Guide, Hearing Or Support Dogs: Discriminate against any person with a
disability by refusing to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer,
or refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or in the terms, conditions,
or privileges of, sale or rental of a dwelling or in the provision of services
or facilities in connection with such dwelling, or otherwise make unavailable
or deny a property to any buyer or renter because such person has a guide,
hearing or support dog or require an extra charge in a lease, rental agreement,
or contract of purchase or sale, other than for actual damage done to the
premises by the dog. (Ord. 1696, 7-8-2009)
5-18-7: FINANCIAL SERVICES:
In addition to the discriminatory acts prohibited in sections 5-18-5 and 5-18-
6 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person within the village to
engage in the following proscribed conduct:
   (A)   Borrowing Or Lending: Discriminate against any person in connection
with borrowing or lending money, guaranteeing loans, accepting mortgages, or
otherwise financing a real estate transaction.
   (B)   Lending Terms: Discriminate against any person by delaying the
processing or by denying or varying the terms of a loan or other financial
assistance that will be used for the purpose of purchasing, constructing,
improving, repairing, or maintaining a dwelling, or discriminate in the fixing
of that amount, interest rate, duration or other terms or conditions of such
loan or other financial assistance.
   (C)   Other Financial Services: Discriminate against any person by denying
such person any of the services normally offered by a financial institution or
by providing such person with any service which is different from, or provided
in a different manner than, that which is provided to other similarly situated
persons.
   (D)   Appraisal/Insurance: Discriminate against any person in appraising the
value of real estate or in the sale of insurance in connection with a real
estate transaction.
   (E)   Brokerage Services: Discriminate against any person by denying such
person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing
service, real estate brokers' organization or other service, organization or
facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or
discriminate against such person in the terms or conditions of such access,
membership or participation.
   (F)   Geographical Area: Deny or vary the terms and/or conditions of a loan
on the basis that a specific parcel of real estate offered as security is
located in a specific geographical area. (Ord. 1696, 7-8-2009)
5-18-8: BLOCKBUSTING:
It shall also be unlawful for any person within the village to engage in the
following proscribed conduct:
   (A)   Solicitation: Discriminate against any person by soliciting for sale,
rental, lease, listing or purchase any residential real estate on the grounds
of loss of value due to the present or prospective entry into the vicinity of
the property involved of any person(s) of any particular race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status,
familial status, disability, military status, source of income, gender
identity, housing status or sexual orientation. Solicit any owner to sell or
rent or list residential property at any time after such person has notice that
such owner does not desire to sell, rent, or list such residential property.
For the purposes of this subsection, notice must be provided as follows:
      1.   The notice may be given by the owner personally or by a third party
in the owner's name either in the form of an individual notice or a list,
provided it complies with subsection (A)2 of this section.
      2.   Such notice shall be explicit as to whether each owner on the notice
seeks to avoid both solicitation for listing and sale, or only for listing, or
only for sale, as well as the period of time for which any avoidance is
desired. The notice shall be dated and either of the following shall apply:
         (a)   Each owner shall have signed the notice; or
         (b)   The person or entity preparing the notice shall provide an
accompanying affidavit to the effect that all the names on the notice are, in
fact, genuine as to the identity of the persons listed and that such persons
have requested not to be solicited as indicated.
      3.   The individual notice or notice in the form of a list with the
accompanying affidavit shall be served personally or by certified or registered
mail, return receipt requested.
   (B)   Statements: Discriminate against any person by distributing or causing
to be distributed written material or statements designed to induce any owner
of residential real estate to sell or lease his or her property because of any
present or prospective changes in the race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status,
disability, military status, source of income, gender identity, housing status
or sexual orientation of residents in the vicinity of the property involved.
   (C)   Creating Alarm: Discriminate against any person by intentionally
creating alarm among residents of any community by transmitting communications
in any manner, including a telephone call, whether or not conversation thereby
ensues, with a design to induce any owner of residential real estate to sell or
lease his or her property because of any present or prospective entry into the
vicinity of the property involved of any person(s) of any particular race,
color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source of
income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
   (D)   Steering: Discriminate against any person by steering his or her
choices in connection with seeking, negotiating for, buying or renting a
dwelling so as to perpetuate, or tend to perpetuate, segregated housing
patterns, or by discouraging or obstructing choices in a community,
neighborhood or development. Prohibited actions under this subsection, which
are generally referred to as unlawful steering practices, shall include, but
are not limited to:
      1.   Discouraging any person from inspecting, purchasing or renting a
dwelling because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin,
age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status, disability,
military status, source of income, gender identity, housing status or sexual
orientation of persons in a community, neighborhood, or development.
      2.   Discouraging the purchase or rental of a dwelling because of race,
color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source of
income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation by exaggerating
drawbacks or failing to inform any person of desirable features of a dwelling
or of a community, neighborhood or development.
      3.   Communicating to any prospective purchaser that he or she would not
be comfortable or compatible with existing residents of a community,
neighborhood or development because of race, color, religion, creed, ancestry,
national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial status,
disability, military status, source of income, gender identity, housing status
or sexual orientation.
      4.   Assigning any person to a particular section of a community,
neighborhood or development, or to a particular floor of a building, because of
race, color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital
status, parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source
of income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation. (Ord. 1752,
5-25-2011)
5-18-9: GENERAL PROHIBITED ACTS:
It shall also be unlawful for any person within the village to engage in the
following generally proscribed conduct:
   (A)   Aiding Or Abetting: Discriminate against any person by aiding or
abetting acts performed in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Interfering, Coercing Or Intimidating: Discriminate against any person
by coercing, intimidating, threatening or interfering in the exercise or
enjoyment of any right granted or protected by this chapter.
   (C)   Excluding Children: Discriminate against any person by requiring as a
condition precedent to the rental of a housing accommodation, that the
prospective tenant shall not have, at the time the application for rental is
made one or more children under the age of fourteen (14) years or insert in any
lease or agreement for the rental of any housing accommodation a condition
terminating the lease if there shall be one or more children under the age of
fourteen (14) in the family of any person holding the lease and occupying the
housing accommodation. Any agreement or lease which contains a condition of the
type described in this subsection shall be void as to that condition.
   (D)   Differential Treatment: Engage in any differential treatment toward
any prospective seller, purchaser, or tenant because of that person's race,
color, religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status,
parental status, familial status, disability, military status, source of
income, gender identity, housing status or sexual orientation, or that of the
person in the area in which that property is located. (Ord. 1752, 5-25-2011)
5-18-10: EXEMPTIONS:
The following actions shall be exempted from the terms of this chapter:
   (A)   Private Sales Or Rentals Of Single-Family Houses: The sale or rental
of any single-family house sold or rented by a private individual owner,
provided that:
      1.   Such owner does not own or have a beneficial interest in more than
three (3) single-family houses in the village at any one time;
      2.   The owner or a member of his or her family was the last current
resident of the home;
      3.   The home is sold without the use in any manner of the sales or
rental facilities or services of any real estate broker or salesperson or of
any employee or agent of any real estate broker or salesperson;
      4.   The house is sold or rented without the use, in any manner, of the
sales or rental facilities or services of any real estate broker, agent,
salesperson or other person in the business of selling or renting dwellings.
Nothing in this subsection (A)4, however, shall prohibit the use of attorneys,
escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional
assistant, as necessary to perfect or transfer the title; and
      5.   The house is sold or rented without publication, posting or mailing,
of any advertisement or written notice of the sale or rental of a dwelling that
indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color,
religion, creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental
status, familial status, disability, military status, source of income, gender
identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
   (B)   Rental Of Apartments: The rental of housing accommodations in a
building which contains housing accommodations for not more than three (3)
families living independently of each other, if the lessor or a member of his
or her family resides in one of the housing accommodations.
   (C)   Private Rooms: The rental of a room(s) in a private home by an owner
if he or she or a member of his or her family resides therein or, while absent
for a period of not more than twelve (12) months, if he or she or a member of
his or her family intends to return to reside therein.
   (D)   Religious Organizations: The sale, rental or occupancy of dwellings
owned or operated for other than a commercial purpose by a religious
organization, association, or society, or any nonprofit institution or
organization operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with a
religious organization, association or society to persons of the same religion.
These organizations shall also not be prohibited from giving preference to such
persons in the sale, rental or occupancy of such lodgings unless membership in
such religion is restricted on account of race, color, religion, creed,
ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status, familial
status, disability, military status, source of income, gender identity, housing
status or sexual orientation.
   (E)   Private Clubs: The rental or occupancy of lodgings owned or operated
by a private club not in fact open to the public, which as an incident to its
primary purpose(s) provides lodgings for other than a commercial purpose to its
members. These private clubs shall also not be prohibited from giving
preference to its members in the rental or occupancy of such lodgings unless
membership in such club is restricted on account of race, color, religion,
creed, ancestry, national origin, age, sex, marital status, parental status,
familial status, disability, military status, source of income, gender
identity, housing status or sexual orientation.
   (F)   Maximum Number Of Occupants: The application of local, state or
federal restrictions regarding the maximum number of occupants permitted to
occupy a dwelling.
   (G)   Sex: The restriction of the rental of rooms in a housing accommodation
to persons of one sex.
   (H)   Housing For Older Persons: The application of provisions in this
chapter regarding familial status with respect to congregate elderly housing
facilities.
   (I)   Persons Convicted Of Drug Related Offenses: The application of local,
state or federal regulations with regard to conduct against a person(s)
convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of the illegal manufacture or
distribution of controlled substance as defined by section 102 of the federal
controlled substance act (21 USC 802).
   (J)   Persons In Business Of Furnishing Appraisals: The consideration by
persons in the business of furnishing appraisals of real property from taking
into consideration factors other than those based on unlawful discrimination or
familial status in furnishing appraisals.
   (K)   Financial Institutions: Actions which prohibit financial institutions
from considering sound underwriting practices in contemplation of any loan to
any person. Such practices shall include:
      1.   The willingness and the financial ability of the borrower to repay
the loan.
      2.   The market value of any real estate or other item of property
proposed as security for any loan.
      3.   Diversification of the financial institution's investment portfolio.
   (L)   Subsidized Housing: The rental or sale of housing accommodations on
the basis of age or physical disability where such accommodation is authorized,
approved, financed or subsidized in whole or in part by a unit of state, local,
or federal government. (Ord. 1752, 5-25-2011)
5-18-11: ADMINISTRATION:
The administrative and adjudicative responsibilities for this chapter shall be
implemented as follows:
   (A)   Administrator: The superintendent of buildings, or his/her designee,
shall serve as the administrator. The administrator shall have such duties,
responsibilities, and powers as are necessary for the implementation of this
chapter; including, but not limited to, the initiation, receipt, and due
processing of complaints.
   (B)   Complaint: Any person aggrieved in any manner by a violation of any
provision of this chapter may file with the administrator a written verified
complaint setting forth his/her complaint within forty five (45) days after the
date of the alleged violation. The complaint shall state, on a printed form
provided by the administrator, such detail as to substantially apprise any
party properly concerned as to the time, place, and facts surrounding the
alleged violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Notice: Within fifteen (15) calendar days after a complaint has been
received by the administrator, the administrator shall serve or cause to be
served, in person, or by certified mail, a copy of said complaint on the person
alleged to be in violation of this chapter, hereinafter referred to as
respondent.
   (D)   Investigation: The administrator shall conduct a prompt investigation
of the complaint.
   (E)   Report: Within thirty (30) calendar days after a complaint has been
received by the administrator, the administrator shall determine whether:
      1.   The alleged complaint does not constitute violation of this chapter
and dismiss the complaint and notify the parties and advise the complainant of
the administrator's decision; or
      2.   The alleged complaint appears to constitute violation of this
chapter, in which case the administrator will proceed with a conciliation
conference under the process set forth in subsection (F) of this section; or
      3.   More time is needed to complete the investigation and reach a
conclusion, and in that event, the administrator shall notify the complainant
and respondent that the investigation is ongoing.
      4.   If the administrator dismisses the complaint pursuant to subsection
(E)1 of this section, the complainant shall have twenty eight (28) calendar
days to file an appeal of the administrator's decision with the zoning board of
appeals.
   (F)   Conciliation: When a conciliation conference is determined necessary,
the administrator shall:
      1.   Notify the complainant and respondent in writing by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by personal service, of the time, place, and date
of the conciliation session at least ten (10) days prior thereto, and either or
both parties shall appear at the conciliation session in person or by attorney;
and
      2.   Attempt by all accepted methods of conciliation and lawful
persuasion to resolve the grievance delineated in the complaint; and
      3.   If, within sixty (60) calendar days after a complaint has been
received by the administrator, the administrator determines that attempts at
further conciliation will not be in furtherance of the objectives of this
chapter, or that the complaint cannot be resolved by conciliation, the
administrator shall so report to the zoning board of appeals. The chairman of
the zoning board of appeals shall, within thirty (30) calendar days of
referral, set a hearing date relative to the complaint.
   (G)   Injunctive (Temporary Relief): At any time after a complaint is
referred to the zoning board of appeals, the zoning board of appeals may
petition the appropriate court for temporary relief, pending final
determination of the proceedings under this chapter, including an order or
decree restraining the respondent from doing or causing any act which would
render ineffectual a recommendation with respect to the complaint. Such
petition shall contain a certification by the chairman of the zoning board of
appeals that the particular matter presents exceptional circumstances in which
irreparable injury will result from a violation of this chapter in the absence
of temporary relief. The petition shall not request injunctive relief in excess
of a fourteen (14) day period unless:
      1.   A longer period is agreed to by the respondent; or
      2.   The court finds that there is substantial evidence to demonstrate
that the respondent has engaged in violations of this chapter.
   (H)   Hearings On Complaint: The zoning board of appeals shall, upon not
less than ten (10) days' written notice to all parties, conduct a hearing on
the complaint. All parties shall be entitled to be represented by legal
counsel, and shall have the right to call witnesses in their own behalf and to
cross examine witnesses. Testimony taken at the hearing shall be under oath or
affirmation, and a transcript shall be made and filed with the administrator.
The rules of evidence shall not apply to such hearing.
   (I)   Village Attorney: The village attorney shall be present at a hearing
on such complaint. It is the duty of the village attorney to advise the zoning
board of appeals during all phases of the hearing process.
   (J)   Hearing Decision: When all testimony has been taken, the zoning board
of appeals shall render its decision in a written report with findings of fact
that shall be served upon the complainant and the respondent by certified mail
within thirty (30) calendar days, if possible, following the close of the
hearing.
   (K)   Recommended Actions: If the zoning board of appeals finds that the
respondent has engaged in a violation of this chapter, it may:
      1.   Institute proceedings to enforce the provisions of this chapter
against any person found in violation;
      2.   Apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for:
         (a)   An order restraining any person from violating any provision of
this chapter, or
         (b)   Such other or further relief as may seem to the court
appropriate for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of
violations hereof.
      3.   In the case of any violation of this chapter by any person in the
course of performing under a contract or contract with the state or any
political subdivision or agency thereof, or with the United States of America
or any agency or instrumentality thereof, petition or institute proceedings
with such contracting agency for the purpose of causing it to terminate such
contract or any portion thereof, either absolutely or on condition of
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (L)   Appeal Procedure:
      1.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the zoning board of appeals
shall have the right to appeal the decision to the full village board. The
appeal shall be initiated by filing with the administrator, within twenty eight
(28) calendar days of the decision, a written statement, under oath, setting
forth specifically the grounds for the appeal. These grounds shall be supported
by written argument filed along with said statement. A copy of the statement
and written argument shall be served upon all parties by the person filing same
with the administrator. The opposing party shall be entitled to file a written
response within twenty eight (28) calendar days of the filing of the statement
and written argument by the aggrieved party. The village board, after reviewing
the statement and written argument, the response, if any, and the transcript of
the proceedings before the zoning board of appeals shall render a decision
within thirty (30) days after the filing of the response; or if no response is
filed, within forty (40) days after the filing of the statement and written
argument, either:
         (a)   Upholding the decision of the zoning board of appeals;
         (b)   Reversing the decision of the zoning board of appeals; or
         (c)   Revising the decision of the zoning board of appeals.
      2.   During the pendency of an appeal, the zoning board of appeals shall
refrain from taking any action to enforce its decision.
   (M)   Judicial Review: Any person aggrieved by the violation of any
provision of this chapter, who has exhausted the remedies provided by this
chapter, may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction for appropriate
relief from such violation, including:
      1.   An order compelling compliance with this chapter;
      2.   Such other and further relief as may seem appropriate to the court
for the enforcement of this chapter and the elimination of violations thereof.
   (N)   Penalties: Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be
fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each violation. Each day that such violation shall
continue shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to any fine, a
violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of any license, permit or business certificate issued by the village
to the person found to be in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1696, 7-8-2009)
CHAPTER 19
MOTOR FUEL TAX
SECTION:
5-19-1: Definitions
5-19-2: Tax Imposed
5-19-3: Collection Of Tax
5-19-4: Registration And Maintenance Of Records
5-19-5: Sales And Uses Presumed Taxable; Burden Of Proof
5-19-6: Exemptions
5-19-7: Failure To Report And Pay Tax
5-19-8: Suspension/Revocation Of Business License
5-19-9: Penalties For Violations
5-19-1: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
MOTOR FUEL: Any volatile and flammable liquid or gas produced, blended or
compounded for the purpose of or which is suitable for operating a vehicle, or
which is used in propelling a vehicle. The term "motor fuel" includes, without
limitation, gasoline, gasohol, diesel oil, motor benzol, motor benzene, propane
gas fuel, kerosene, compressed natural gas, hydrogen gas, compressed hydrogen
gas, and "special fuel" as defined in the motor fuel tax law 1 .
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any machine or device in, upon or by which any person or
property is or may be transported or drawn upon a rail, street, road, highway
or otherwise upon land, in or upon water, or through the air. The term
"vehicle" includes, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, buses, trains,
motorcycles, boats, airplanes and helicopters.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
corporation, joint venture, joint stock company, receiver, trustee,
conservator, legal representative, or other legally recognized entity.
RETAIL FUEL DEALER OR MOTOR FUEL RETAILER: Any person who is engaged in the
business of selling motor fuel in the village to a purchaser for the
purchaser's use or consumption, and not for resale in any form.
SALE AT RETAIL OR RETAIL PURCHASE: Any sale to a person for that person's use
or consumption and not for resale to another.
SALE, RESALE OR PURCHASE: Any transfer of ownership or title or both, any
exchange or any barter, whether conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by
any means whatsoever for consideration.
TAX OR MOTOR FUEL TAX: The village motor fuel tax provided for in this chapter.
USE: The exercise of any right to or power over motor fuel incident to the
ownership thereof, including, but not limited to, the receipt of motor fuel by
any person into a fuel supply tank of a motor vehicle.
VILLAGE: The village of Midlothian, Cook County, Illinois. (Ord. 1718, 4-14-
2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 35 ILCS 505/1 et seq.
5-19-2: TAX IMPOSED:
There is a tax imposed and levied upon the retail purchase within the village
of motor fuel at the rate of three cents ($0.03) per gallon or any fraction
thereof.
   (A)   This tax shall be in addition to any and all other federal, state and
local taxes.
   (B)   While the ultimate incidence and liability for the tax shall be upon
the retail purchaser of motor fuel, it is the duty of each motor fuel retailer
in the village of Midlothian to collect the tax and to pay it over to the
village of Midlothian, along with an accounting thereof as set forth in this
chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to impose a tax upon the
occupation of selling motor fuel. (Ord. 1718, 4-14-2010)
5-19-3: COLLECTION OF TAX:
   (A)   Each motor fuel retailer in the village shall have the duty to collect
the motor fuel tax from each purchaser and to pay it over to the village, along
with an accounting thereof, on return forms provided by the village.
   (B)   The return and tax payment shall be due on the same filing dates as
are established for filing with the Illinois department of revenue of the
retailer's occupation tax return form ST-1, sales and tax use return, a copy of
which shall be attached to the village motor fuel tax return.
   (C)   The retailer's occupation tax return form ST-1, sales and tax use
return and the ST-1 worksheet for line 2 (of the form ST-1) shall be attached
to the village motor fuel tax return.
   (D)   If mailed, the return must be postmarked on or before the last day of
the month following the month for which the report is due. (Ord. 1729, 7-14-
2010)
5-19-4: REGISTRATION AND MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
   (A)   Each motor fuel retailer shall maintain complete and accurate books,
records and accounts showing the gross receipts for the sale of motor fuel and
the taxes collected from the purchaser thereof.
   (B)   These documents shall be available in the village for examination and
for audit by the village upon reasonable notice during customary business
hours.
   (C)   Every motor fuel retailer doing business on April 1, 2010, shall
register with the village clerk by April 30, 2010. Every person becoming a
motor fuel retailer after that date shall register with the village clerk
within thirty (30) days after the commencement of such business. (Ord. 1718, 4-
14-2010)
5-19-5: SALES AND USES PRESUMED TAXABLE; BURDEN OF PROOF:
It shall be presumed that all sales of motor fuel in the village are subject to
tax under this chapter until the contrary is established. The burden of proving
that a sale is not taxable hereunder shall be upon the motor fuel retailer.
(Ord. 1718, 4-14-2010)
5-19-6: EXEMPTIONS:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall not apply to the following sales of motor
fuel:
   (A)   Sale by a motor fuel retailer of motor fuel whose place of business is
outside of the village.
   (B)   Sale for purposes other than for propulsion or operation of a motor
vehicle.
   (C)   Sale by any transportation agency as defined in the regional
transportation authority act 1  which is operated by a grant from or has a
service agreement with the regional transportation authority or any of its
service boards.
   (D)   Sale to the extent the tax imposed by this chapter would violate the
state or United States constitution.
   (E)   Sale by or to the federal government or any state or local
governmental body. (Ord. 1718, 4-14-2010)
 
Notes
1 1. 70 ILCS 3615/1.01 et seq.
5-19-7: FAILURE TO REPORT AND PAY TAX:
   (A)   If any motor fuel retailer fails to timely file any report or if any
amount due shall remain unpaid after the due date:
      1.   Any tax not paid or remitted when due shall bear interest at the
rate of five percent (5%) per month, or fraction thereof, until the tax is paid
or remitted.
      2.   In addition to any interest charged, any person who fails to pay or
to remit the tax when due shall be subject to a late penalty of ten percent
(10%) of such tax.
      3.   In addition to any interest or penalty charged in subsections (A)1
and (A)2 of this section, any person who fails to file a remittance return when
due shall be subject to a late filing penalty of ten percent (10%) of the total
tax liability due for the reporting period.
      4.   Where the failure to pay or to remit the tax or to file the
remittance return in a timely manner is due to reasonable cause beyond the
control of the person charged with filing and paying the tax, the penalties
described in subsections (A)2 and (A)3 of this section may be waived by the
village treasurer.
   (B)   The village may also bring a civil action to collect any unpaid tax or
penalty. (Ord. 1718, 4-14-2010)
5-19-8: SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF BUSINESS LICENSE:
   (A)   If the village president (mayor), or his or her designee, after an
administrative hearing, pursuant to section 5-1-11 of this title, finds that
any motor fuel retailer has wilfully evaded the responsibility to collect the
tax imposed by this chapter, he or she may suspend or remove any village
licenses issued to the establishment and shall issue any additional penalties
pursuant to section 5-1-11 of this title, including summary suspension of the
motor fuel retailer's business license.
   (B)   The owner, operator, licensee or motor fuel retailer shall have an
opportunity to be notified and to be heard at the hearing, pursuant to section
5-1-11 of this title. Any license suspension or revocation resulting from the
hearing shall not relieve or discharge the civil liability for nonpayment of
the tax due. (Ord. 1718, 4-14-2010)
5-19-9: PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS:
Any motor fuel retailer, purchaser or user who violates the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), for each offense, in addition to
any other penalty provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 1718, 4-14-2010)
CHAPTER 20
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
5-20-1: Definitions
5-20-2: Business License Required
5-20-3: Application For Massage Establishment Business License
5-20-4: Issuance Of License For A Massage Establishment
5-20-5: Approval Or Denial Of Application
5-20-6: Posting Of License
5-20-7: Register Of Employees
5-20-8: Revocation Or Suspension Of License
5-20-9: Revocation Of Massage Therapist License
5-20-10: Facilities Necessary
5-20-11: Operating Requirements
5-20-12: Persons Under Age Eighteen Prohibited On Premises
5-20-13: Alcoholic Beverages And Overnight Accommodations Prohibited
5-20-14: Hours
5-20-15: Employment Of Massage Therapist
5-20-16: Inspection Required
5-20-17: Unlawful Acts
5-20-18: Sale Or Transfer Or Change Of Location
5-20-19: Name And Place Of Business
5-20-20: Transfer Of License
5-20-21: Violation And Penalty
5-20-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
                            Any person over eighteen (18) years of age, other
                            than a massage therapist, who renders any service
EMPLOYEE:                   in connection with the operation of a massage
                            business and receives compensation from the
                            operator of the business or patrons.
                            The person to whom a license has been issued to own
LICENSEE:                   or operate a "massage establishment" as defined
                            herein.
                            Any establishment having a fixed place of business
                            where any person, firm, association or corporation
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:      engages in or carries, or permits to be engaged in
                            or carries on any of the activities mentioned in
                            the definition of "massage or massage therapy."
                            A system of structured palpation or movement of the
                            soft tissue of the body. The system may include,
                            but is not limited to, techniques such as
                            effleurage or stroking and gliding, petrissage or
                            kneading, tapotement or percussion, friction,
                            vibration, compression, and stretching activities
                            as they pertain to massage therapy. These
                            techniques may be applied by a licensed massage
                            therapist with or without the aid of lubricants,
                            salt or herbal preparations, hydromassage, thermal
MASSAGE OR MASSAGE THERAPY: massage, or a massage device that mimics or
                            enhances the actions possible by human hands. The
                            purpose of the practice of massage is to enhance
                            the general health and well-being of the mind and
                            body of the recipient. "Massage" does not include
                            the diagnosis of a specific pathology. "Massage"
                            does not include those acts of physical therapy or
                            therapeutic or corrective measures that are outside
                            the scope of massage therapy practice as defined in
                            this section. Massage includes Asian bodyworks, or
                            any other technique that may or may not require a
                            state license.
                            A person who is licensed by the Illinois Department
MASSAGE THERAPIST:          of Professional Regulation and administers massage
                            for compensation.
                            Any business, the function of which is to engage in
OUTCALL MASSAGE SERVICE:    or carry on massages at a location designated by
                            the customer or client rather than at a massage
                            establishment.
OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS:   A room, group of rooms or space within a building
                            in which someone may live or stay overnight.
                            Any person over eighteen (18) years of age who
PATRON:                     received a massage under such circumstances that it
                            is reasonably expected that he or she will pay
                            money or give any other consideration therefor.
PERMITTEE:                  The operator of a massage establishment.
                            Any individual, partnership, firm, association,
PERSON:                     limited liability company, joint stock company,
                            corporation or combination of individuals of
                            whatever form or character.
                            Genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or perineum
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA:     of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
                            (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
 
5-20-2: BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED:
   (A)   Business License Required: No person shall engage in or carry out the
business of massage unless he has a valid business license issued by the
Village pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for each and every separate
office or place of business conducted by such person. However, where
individuals possessing the license required in division (B) of this section,
perform massage in their own homes, or for an individual client in the home of
that client, no business license shall be required for the premises. When a
licensee performs massage in his or her own home, the requirements of the
Midlothian zoning ordinance pertaining to home occupations shall be met in
addition to the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   State License Required: No person shall engage in massage for
compensation, unless he has a valid state license issued pursuant to 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 57/1 et seq., the Massage Licensing Act or 225
Illinois Compiled Statutes 410/3A-1 et seq. To the extent that any part of this
chapter conflicts with the Illinois Massage Licensing Act or statutes related
thereto, the act, or its related statutes, shall control. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-
2019)
5-20-3: APPLICATION FOR MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT BUSINESS LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license to maintain, operate, or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application under oath with the Village of
Midlothian upon a form provided by the Village Clerk and pay a nonrefundable
background check fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) and an annual business
license fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per Chapter 1 of this title. The
application, once accepted, shall also be referred to the police department for
investigation of the applicant's character and qualification. The police
department will perform the required criminal record check. Background
investigations shall require the submission of fingerprints with the cost of
fingerprint submissions to be borne by the applicant. Each application shall
contain the following information:
   (A)   A definition of service to be provided.
   (B)   The location, mailing address and all telephone numbers where the
business is to be conducted.
   (C)   The name and residence address of each applicant (hereinafter all
provisions which refer to applicant) include an applicant which may be an
individual, partnership, firm, association, limited liability company, joint
stock company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
      1.   If the applicant is; a corporation or limited liability company, the
names and residence addresses of each of the officers and directors of said
corporation or company and of each stockholder owning more than ten percent
(10%) of the stock of the corporation or company, and the address of the
corporation or company itself, if different from the address of the massage
establishment.
      2.   If the applicant is a partnership, the names and residence addresses
of each of the partners including limited partners, and the address of the
partnership itself, if different from the address of the massage establishment.
   (D)   The individual or partnership applicant's height, weight, color of
eyes, hair and sex.
   (E)   A copy of photographic identification such as a driver's license,
state I.D. card or passport.
   (F)   A complete set of applicant's fingerprints shall be taken by the chief
of police or his agent. If the applicant is a partnership, limited liability
company, or corporation, the chief of police shall have the right to require
fingerprints of any and all officers, shareholders, directors, partners,
members, managers or agents of the entity with the fee for each to be paid by
the applicant.
   (G)   Business, occupation, and/or employment of the applicant for the three
(3) years immediately preceding the date of application.
   (H)   The massage or similar business license history of the applicant;
whether such person, in previously operating in this or another village or
state, has had a business license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor,
and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension
or revocation.
   (I)    All criminal convictions other than misdemeanor traffic violations,
including the dates of convictions, nature of the crimes and place convicted.
   (J)   The name and address of any massage business or other establishment
owned or operated by any person whose name is required to be given in division
(C) of this section wherein the business or profession of massage is carried
on.
   (K)   A description of any other business to be operated on the same
premises or on adjoining premises owned or controlled by the applicant.
   (L)   Authorization of the Village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit.
   (M)   Such other identification and information necessary to discover the
truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the
application. Upon the completion of the above provided form and the furnishing
of all foregoing information the police department shall accept the application
for the necessary investigations. The holder of a massage establishment license
shall notify the Village Clerk of each change in any of the data required to be
furnished by this section within ten (10) days after such change occurs. (Ord.
2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE FOR A MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT:
The Village of Midlothian may issue a business license for a massage
establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described in this
chapter are met unless it finds:
   (A)   The correct license fee or other fees or fines owed to the Village of
Midlothian have not been tendered to the Village, and in the case of a check,
or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
   (B)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the Village's
building, zoning, and health regulations.
   (C)   The applicant, if an individual; or any of the stockholders holding
more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of the corporation or limited
liability company, any of the officers and directors, if the applicant is a
corporation or limited liability company; or any of the partners, including
limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; or the holder of any lien,
of any nature, upon the business and/or the equipment used therein; and the
manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the business,
has/have been convicted of any of the following offenses or convicted of an
offense outside the state of Illinois that would have constituted any of the
following offenses if committed within the state of Illinois:
      1.   An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person
of another that amounts to a felony.
      2.   An offense involving sexual misconduct.
      3.   An offense involving narcotics, dangerous drugs or dangerous weapons
that amounts to a felony.
      4.   An offense involving a violation of the Massage Licensing Act (225
ILCS 57/1).
   The Village of Midlothian may issue a license to any person convicted of any
of the crimes described in subsection C1, C2 or C3 of this section if it finds
that such conviction occurred at least ten (10) years prior to the date of the
application and the applicant has had no subsequent felony convictions or
arrests and no subsequent misdemeanor convictions or arrests for a crime or
crimes mentioned in this section or who's conduct/status has not involved the
following:
   (D)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent
statement of fact or failed to disclose required information or a fact in the
license application or in any document required by the Village in conjunction
therewith.
   (E)   The applicant has had a massage business, massage therapy, or other
similar permit or license revoked, or suspended by the Village or any other
state or local agency within ten (10) years prior to the date of the
application.
   (F)   The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers and directors,
if the applicant is a corporation or limited liability company; or any of the
partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership; and
the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation of the
business is under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-5: APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF APPLICATION:
The Village of Midlothian shall act to approve or deny an application for a
license under this chapter within a reasonable period of time which shall not
exceed ninety (90) days. Every license issued pursuant to this chapter will
terminate at the end of the calendar year unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-6: POSTING OF LICENSE:
   (A)   Every massage therapist shall post his/her state license in his/her
work area.
   (B)   Every person, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, or
association licensed under this chapter shall display such license in a
prominent place.
   (C)   Only employees or individuals posted as provided in paragraph (A) of
this section may lawfully perform any form of massage or massage therapy upon a
patron. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-7: REGISTER OF EMPLOYEES:
The licensee or person designated by the licensee of a massage establishment
shall maintain a register of all persons employed at any time, as well as a
list of all massage therapists and a copy of their licenses.
Such register shall be available for inspection at the massage establishment
for code enforcement officers of the Village of Midlothian during regular
business hours. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-8: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
Any license issued for a massage establishment may be revoked or suspended by
the Village of Midlothian, as provided in section
5-1-11 of this title, for good cause, or in any case where any of the
provisions of this chapter are violated or where any employee of the licensee,
including a massage therapist is engaged in any conduct which violates any of
the state or local laws or ordinances at licensee's place of business and the
licensee has actual knowledge or should have had knowledge by due diligence.
Such permit may also be suspended by the Village of Midlothian, upon the
recommendations of the chief of police or code enforcement officer or health
inspector (subject to notice and hearing provisions of
5-1-11) with findings that such business is being managed, conducted or
maintained without regard to proper sanitation and hygiene or is a danger to
public health. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-9: REVOCATION OF MASSAGE THERAPIST LICENSE:
A massage therapist license issued by the state may be revoked or suspended in
accordance with the Massage Licensing Act. The chief of police shall report any
and all suspected violations to the massage licensing board and the Illinois
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-10: FACILITIES NECESSARY:
No license to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an
inspection by the Village of Midlothian reveals that the establishment complies
with all of the Village of Midlothian's building, plumbing, electrical and
zoning codes. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-11: OPERATING REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Every portion of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to all prospective customers.
   (C)   All employees, including massage therapists, shall be clean and wear
clean, nontransparent outer garments, sufficient to cover the buttocks, torso
and genital areas at all times, whose use is restricted to the massage
establishment. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on the
premises with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing
rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.
   (D)   All massage establishments shall provide clean, laundered sheets and
towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after each use thereof and
stored in a sanitary manner.
   (E)   No massage establishment granted a license under the provisions of
this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed,
published or distributed any advertisement, picture, or statement which is
known to be false, deceptive, misleading or sexually enticing in order to
induce any person to purchase or utilize any professional or unlawful massage
services.
   (F)   All massage establishments shall comply with all Village building and
zoning regulations, and with all other applicable Village regulations. (Ord.
2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-12: PERSONS UNDER AGE EIGHTEEN PROHIBITED ON PREMISES:
No person shall permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless
with a guardian, to come or remain on the premises of any massage business
establishment, as massage therapist, employee, or patron, unless such person is
on the premises on lawful business other than as a massage therapist, employee
or patron. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-13: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND OVERNIGHT ACCOMMODATIONS PROHIBITED:
No person shall sell, give, dispense, provide or keep, or cause to be sold,
given, dispensed, provided or kept, any alcoholic beverage or overnight
accommodations in any business premises used in any way for or by a massage
business. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-14: HOURS:
No portion of any business premises used in any way for or by a massage
business shall be kept open for any purpose between the hours of nine o'clock
(9:00) p.m. and eight o'clock (8:00) a.m. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-15: EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPIST:
No person shall employ as a "massage therapist" as defined by this chapter, any
person, unless said employee has obtained and has in effect a state license
issued pursuant to the Massage Licensing Act. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-16: INSPECTION REQUIRED:
The police department, code enforcement department or health inspector shall
from time to time make inspections of each massage business establishment for
the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are fully
complied with. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such
inspection officer access to the premises or hinder such officer in any manner.
(Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-17: UNLAWFUL ACTS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to
place his or her hand or hands upon, to touch with any part of his or her body,
to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital part of any other
person. Sexual or genital parts shall include the genitals, pubic area,
buttocks, anus, or perineum of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment, to
expose his or her sexual or genital parts, or any portion thereof, to any other
person. It shall also be unlawful for any person, in a massage establishment,
to expose the sexual or genital parts, or any portions thereof, of any other
person.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person, while in the presence of any
other person in a massage establishment, to fail to conceal with a fully opaque
covering, the sexual or genital parts of his or her body.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person owning, operating or managing a
massage establishment, knowingly to cause, allow or permit in or about such
massage establishment, any agent, employee, or any other person under his
control or supervision to perform such acts prohibited in subsection A, B or C
of this section.
   (E)   It shall be further unlawful for any permittee under this chapter to
administer massage except within an establishment licensed to carry on such
business under this chapter.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any massage service to be carried on within
any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment which is
fitted with a door capable of being locked. Toilets and cubicles used solely
for the application of liquid and vapor baths shall be clearly marked as to
purposes on the exterior door or curtain of said cubicle, room or booth.
Nothing contained herein shall be construed to eliminate other requirements of
statutes or ordinances concerning the maintenance of premises, or to preclude
authorized inspection thereof, whenever such inspection is deemed necessary by
the police or health departments.
   (G)   It shall be unlawful to shield, block out or otherwise impede the view
of public areas through exterior doors and windows of any massage or massage
therapy establishment in the Village. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-18: SALE OR TRANSFER OR CHANGE OF LOCATION:
Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a massage establishment, the license
therefor shall be null and void unless approved as provided in section
5-20-20 of this chapter provided, however, that upon the death or incapacity of
the licensee or any co-licensee of the massage establishment, any heir,
beneficiary or legal representative of a deceased licensee, or any guardian of
an heir or beneficiary of a deceased licensee, may continue the business of the
massage establishment for a reasonable period of time not to exceed ninety (90)
days to allow for an orderly transfer of the license. (Ord. 2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-19: NAME AND PLACE OF BUSINESS:
No person granted a license pursuant to this chapter shall operate the massage
establishment under a name not specified in his license, nor shall he conduct
business under any designation or location not specified in his license. (Ord.
2040, 9-11-2019)
5-20-20: TRANSFER OF LICENSE:
No license shall be transferable except with the consent of the Village of
Midlothian. An application for such transfer shall be in writing and shall be
accompanied by fees prescribed in Chapter 1 of this title. The written
application for such transfer shall contain the same information as requested
herein for initial application for the license.
5-20-21: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Every person, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner,
operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere agent or
independent contractor for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a
participant or worker, who in any way, directly or indirectly, gives massages
or operates a massage establishment or provides any of the services defined in
this chapter without first obtaining a license and paying a fee to do so in
accordance with this chapter, or whosoever shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be subject to a fine
not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord.
2040, 9-11-2019)
TITLE 6
POLICE REGULATIONS
General Offenses   1
Animals   2
Dog Kennels (Rep. by Ord. 833, 6-11-1975)   3
Weapons   4
Excessive, Loud, Unnecessary Noise   5
Loudspeakers; Amplifiers   6
Curfew, Improper Supervision, Truancy   7
Misdemeanors   8
Arrests Without Warrants   9
Intoxicants; Drugs   10
Administrative Adjudication Of Municipal Code Violations   11
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
6-1-1: Cruelty To Animals
6-1-2: Assault And Battery
6-1-3: Birds Or Animals; Unlawful Shooting
6-1-4: Cellar Doors; Gratings
6-1-5: Disorderly Conduct
6-1-6: Disturbing Assemblages
6-1-7: Disturbing The Peace
6-1-8: Drunkenness
6-1-9: Gambling
6-1-10: Indecent Exhibitions
6-1-11: Indecent Exposure
6-1-12: Instigating Fights
6-1-13: Lotteries
6-1-14: Obscene Literature
6-1-15: Pound; Unlawful Entry
6-1 16: Malicious Injury To Property
6-1-17: House Of Prostitution
6-1-18: Swindling
6-1-1: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, overwork, cruelly beat,
torture, mutilate, or cruelly kill any animal, or cause, or knowingly allow the
same to be done 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-6.
6-1-2: ASSAULT AND BATTERY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an assault, or an assault and
battery 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 2. 720 ILCS 5/12-1.
6-1-3: BIRDS OR ANIMALS; UNLAWFUL SHOOTING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to shoot any bird or animal, or hunt with
gun or dog in any street, highway, alley, thoroughfare, park or public grounds.
(Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
6-1-4: CELLAR DOORS; GRATINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or leave open any cellar door, or
the grating of any vault in any highway or sidewalk, or permit the same to be
left or kept open, or to permit any sidewalk in front of his premises to become
or remain so broken as to endanger life or limb 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13.
6-1-5: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of disorderly conduct, or to
make, aid, countenance or assist in making any improper noise, riot,
disturbance, or breach of the peace or to be guilty of open lewdness,
disorderly conduct or any act of public indecency tending to debauch the public
morals 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3.
6-1-6: DISTURBING ASSEMBLAGES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to interrupt or disturb any assembly of
people met for the worship of God, by any menace, profane swearing, vulgar
language, or any disorderly or unusual conduct, or to interrupt or disturb any
school or other assembly or procession of people, met for lawful purposes 1 .
(Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 3. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2.
6-1-7: DISTURBING THE PEACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to provoke a breach of the peace, or to use
any violent, threatening, profane or indecent language to the disturbance of
any person, or to use any threatening or abusive language toward any other
person tending to a breach of the peace 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 4. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-2; 720 ILCS 5/26-1.
6-1-8: DRUNKENNESS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be drunk, or to be in a state of
intoxication in any street, park or public place, or in any private house or
place, to the disturbance of any person 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 5. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3.
6-1-9: GAMBLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play for money, or other valuable thing,
at any game with cards, dice, checks, or at billiards, device, electronic game,
apparatus or with any other article, instrument or thing whatever, which may be
used for the purpose of playing or betting upon, or winning or losing money, or
anything of value, or to bet on any game others may be playing, except as
provided in title 5, chapter 2 of this code.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep a common gaming house, or in any
building, place, booth, yard, garden, boat or float, by him or his agent used
and occupied, to procure or permit any persons to frequent or to come together
to play for money, or other valuable thing, at any game, or to keep any tables
or other apparatus for the purpose of playing at any game or sport for money,
or any valuable thing, or to keep or rent any such place for any such purpose 1
, except as provided in title 5, chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 1801, 8-22-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1; 720 ILCS 5/28-1.
6-1-10: INDECENT EXHIBITIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause or procure, or in any
manner assist in any indecent or immoral show or exhibition of any animal.
(Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
6-1-11: INDECENT EXPOSURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to bathe or swim in any lake, river, pond,
ditch, or body of water within the village in a naked state, amounting to an
indecent exposure of the person during the period of time, commencing at
sunrise, and ending one hour after sunset, to the annoyance of any person or
family, or to appear in a public place in a state of nudity, or to make any
indecent exposure of the person or any part thereof 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 2. 720 ILCS 5/11-20.
6-1-12: INSTIGATING FIGHTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to instigate, cause or procure any
dogfight, prizefight, cockfight, or any public or private fighting 1 . (Ord. 4,
5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 3. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-3.
6-1-13: LOTTERIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, direct or manage, or to
aid in the keeping, maintaining, directing or managing of any lottery for
drawing or disposing of money or any other property or thing whatever, or to
sell, or to offer for sale any lottery ticket 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 4. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1; 720 ILCS 5/21-1.
6-1-14: OBSCENE LITERATURE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit, sell, or offer to sell, give
away, or offer to give away, or have in his possession, with or without intent
to sell or give away, any obscene and indecent book, pamphlet, paper, drawing,
lithograph, engraving, picture, daguerreotype, photograph, stereoscopic
pictures, model, cast, instrument or article of indecent or immoral use, or any
other thing tending to debauch the public morals 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1; 720 ILCS 5/11-20.
6-1-15: POUND; UNLAWFUL ENTRY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to break open, or in any manner to,
directly or indirectly, aid or assist in, or counsel or advise the breaking
open of any pound. (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
6-1-16: MALICIOUS INJURY TO PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, destroy or deface, or assist in
injuring, destroying or defacing any bridge, fence, building, schoolhouse,
church building, depot, house, public building, street, sign, lamp, lamppost,
sidewalk, or hydrants, or to write or place any indecent or bawdy words or
pictures or advertisements thereon 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 2. 720 ILCS 5/21-1.
6-1-17: HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a house of ill fame or
assignation, or to place for the practice of prostitution or lewdness, or to
patronize or be an inmate of the same, or to let, own or be interested in any
house, room or other premises, for any such purpose, or to keep a common, ill
governed, disorderly house, to the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking,
fornication or other misbehavior 1 . (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
 
Notes
1 3. 65 ILCS 5/11-5-1; 720 ILCS 5/11-17.
6-1-18: SWINDLING:
It shall be unlawful for any person to manage, use or practice any game or
device whatever, with intent to cheat or defraud another. (Ord. 4, 5-10-1927)
CHAPTER 2
ANIMALS
SECTION:
6-2-1: Purpose
6-2-2: Licensing Of Dogs And Cats
6-2-3: Inoculations For Rabies
6-2-4: Keeping Of Numerous Animals
6-2-5: Keeping Of Exotic Animals
6-2-6: Running At Large Prohibited
6-2-7: Restraint Of Vicious Or Dangerous Animals
6-2-8: Dangerous Animals; Determination And Requirements
6-2-9: Animal Bites
6-2-10: Noisy Animals
6-2-11: Abandonment
6-2-12: Impoundment
6-2-13: Caring For Animals
6-2-14: Cruelty To Animals
6-2-15: Sanitation
6-2-16: Housing Of Animals
6-2-17: Keeping Of Bees
6-2-18: Ground Feeding Prohibited
6-2-19: Penalty
6-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and general
welfare of the residents of the village and to ensure the humane treatment of
animals by regulating the care and control of said animals. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-
2003)
6-2-2: LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS:
   (A)   No person shall own, keep or harbor any dog or cat over the age of
four (4) months within the village unless such dog or cat is licensed as
provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Application for such license shall be to the village clerk on a form
providing the owner's name, address and telephone number, and the name, breed,
color and sex of each dog or cat, along with a certificate from a licensed
veterinarian that states each dog or cat has been inoculated for rabies, in
compliance with section 6-2-3 of this chapter.
   (C)   Upon supplying the foregoing information and certificate and the
payment of the license fee, the clerk shall issue said license and tag for each
dog or cat. The shape of the tag shall be changed each year, and it shall be
stamped with the year for which the fee is paid. All licenses shall take effect
on the date of issuance and shall be valid for one year or June 30, whichever
occurs first.
It is the owner's responsibility to assure the license tag is securely attached
to the dog's or cat's collar at all times.
   (D)   The license fee for each dog or cat shall be six dollars ($6.00) per
year. All licenses shall expire on June 30 of each year.
   (E)   Such application must be made within ten (10) days after acquiring any
dog or cat over four (4) months of age or within ten (10) days after a dog or
cat reaches four (4) months of age. A new resident to the village of Midlothian
shall have ten (10) days from the date of establishing a residence in the
village to obtain said animal license. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-3: INOCULATIONS FOR RABIES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to own or keep a dog or cat within the
village unless the animal has been inoculated for rabies. In order to comply
with this section, dogs or cats must be inoculated every twelve (12) months
unless said animal has a proper three (3) year inoculation. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-
2003)
6-2-4: KEEPING OF NUMEROUS ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep more than a combined total of three
(3) dogs, cats or other animals within the village, except a litter of pups,
kittens or other young animals which may be kept for a period of time not
exceeding four (4) months from birth. This section shall not apply to any
establishment licensed as a pet shop. No kennels are permitted in the village.
(Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-5: KEEPING OF EXOTIC ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to own, harbor or permit at large, any exotic
animal without the written permission of the village board. Such permission
shall be given only if it is demonstrated to the satisfaction of the village
board that the animal will not constitute a threat to public health or safety.
An "exotic animal" is defined as follows: any live monkey, alligator,
crocodile, cayman, raccoon, skunk, fox, bear, sea mammal, poisonous snake,
poisonous or venomous reptiles or insects, member of the feline species other
than domestic cat (Felix domesticus), member of the canine species other than
domestic dog (Canis familiaris) or any other animal that would require a
standard of care and control greater than that required for customary household
pets sold by commercial pet shops. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-6: RUNNING AT LARGE PROHIBITED:
   (A)   It is unlawful for the owner of any dog or domestic cat to permit the
animal to run at large. A dog or domestic cat is deemed to be running at large
when such animal is off the property of the owner and is not on a leash held by
a human being. It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow an animal to cross
outside the property line of its owner to any extent, including reaching over
or under a fence, or to keep or allow said animal to be outdoors on an unfenced
portion of the owner's property, unless the animal is leashed and under the
control of its owner. It shall be an unlawful failure to restrain for an animal
to attack, bite, threaten, or jump on any person without that person's consent,
outside the property of the animal's owner. Said animals can be declared a
public nuisance and the owner subject to a fine.
   (B)   Village personnel shall attempt to contact the registered owner of any
dog or cat, displaying a license tag, found running at large. It is the owner's
responsibility to claim the animal within two (2) hours after receiving the
telephone call. If the animal is not claimed within the two (2) hour time
period, it will be taken to a local animal shelter deemed appropriate by the
village and said animal will not be the responsibility of the village. The
owner will be charged a fee, payable to the village, for the transportation
costs of the animal to the animal shelter.
   (C)   It is the owner's responsibility to claim the dog or cat from said
shelter. An owner claiming an impounded animal must pay a fee directly to the
animal shelter plus provide proof to the shelter that they have paid the
village's transportation fee.
   (D)   If any dog or cat is discovered not appropriately registered with the
village and the owner is identified, said owner will have three (3) working
days from the date the at large dog or cat is discovered to obtain a license
and tag for said animal and be subject to a fine.
   (E)   No person shall hinder or interfere with the efforts of any village
personnel lawfully engaged in catching or impounding any dog or cat or shall be
subject to a fine. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-7: RESTRAINT OF VICIOUS OR DANGEROUS ANIMALS:
It is unlawful to permit any dangerous or vicious animal of any kind to run at
large in the village. A "dangerous or vicious animal" means an animal meeting
any one of the following criteria:
   (A)   Any animal which bites, inflicts injury on, kills or otherwise attacks
a human being or domestic animal without provocation on any public or private
property; or
   (B)   Any animal, because of temperament or training, has a known propensity
to attack, bite or physically injure human beings or domestic animals; or
   (C)   Any animal which on more than one occasion, without provocation,
chases or approaches any person in an apparent attitude of attack, on any
public property or in any place outside or over the boundaries of its owner's
property; or
   (D)   Any dog that is used by a commercial venture to guard public or
private property, except those owned by a governmental or law enforcement unit;
or
   (E)   Any animal which has been found to be vicious or dangerous under state
law.
Any animal owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog or
other animal fighting or any animal trained for dog or other animal fighting is
prohibited in the village of Midlothian.
Every vicious or dangerous animal shall be confined by its owner indoors or in
an enclosed and locked pen or structure upon the premises of the owner. The pen
or structure must have minimum dimensions of five feet by ten feet (5' x 10')
and must have secure sides and a secure top attached to the sides. If no bottom
is secured to the sides, the sides must be embedded into the ground no less
than two feet (2'). A permit must be obtained prior to the construction of any
pen. The enclosure must be humane and provide some protection from the elements
for the animal. Whenever off the premises of its owner, said animal shall be
securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a minimum tensile strength
of three hundred (300) pounds and not more than three feet (3') in length, or
caged. The muzzle must be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the
animal or impair its vision or breathing but must prevent it from biting any
person or animal. Every person harboring a vicious or dangerous animal is
charged with an affirmative duty to confine the animal in such a way that
children do not have access to such animal. Any animal that has attacked or
bitten another animal or human being two (2) times shall be deemed hazardous to
the residents of the village and ordered permanently removed from the village.
(Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-8: DANGEROUS ANIMALS; DETERMINATION AND REQUIREMENTS:
The police chief, or his designee, shall have the authority to make a
determination that an animal is a dangerous animal, as defined in section 6-2-
7 of this chapter, and to order the owner to comply with any of the measures
set forth below for the protection of public health, safety and welfare:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complaint or other report of an animal bite, attack,
threatening behavior or other reason to believe an animal may be a dangerous
animal, the seriousness of the complaint or report shall be evaluated and, if
circumstances warrant, an investigation of the facts conducted. The
investigation may include interviewing the complainant, the victim, if any, the
animal's owner, and any witnesses, and observation of the animal and the scene.
The individual conducting the investigation shall make a written finding of
whether an animal is a dangerous animal as defined in section 6-2-7 of this
chapter and of the basis for the finding. In addition, if during the
investigation evidence of inhumane treatment of any animal in violation of
section 6-2-13 of this chapter, a written finding of the specific violation
will be made and forwarded to the police chief. For purposes of this section, a
police report may constitute an investigation and may include a finding of
dangerousness. Based upon said report, the police chief or his designee shall
declare in writing whether the animal is a dangerous animal.
   (B)   Where an animal is declared to be a dangerous animal and the animal
has caused severe injury to any person, then the police chief or his designee
may order the humane destruction of the animal, where appropriate, taking into
consideration the severity and circumstances of injury. Where an animal is
declared to be a dangerous animal, and the animal has caused death to any
person, then the police chief or his designee shall order the humane
destruction of the animal.
   (C)   In all cases where an animal is declared to be a dangerous animal and
the animal is not humanely destroyed, the owner shall comply with the following
requirements:
      1.   While on the owner's property, the owner must securely confine or,
while off the owner's property, muzzle the dangerous animal as required in
section 6-2-7 of this chapter.
      2.   The owner must display, in a conspicuous manner, a sign on the
owner's premises warning that a dangerous animal is on the premises by stating
in capital letters at least four inches (4") in height, "WARNING-DANGEROUS
ANIMAL-KEEP AWAY". The sign must be visible and legible from the public way and
from fifty feet (50') away from the special enclosure required in section 6-2-
7 of this chapter.
      3.   Within ten (10) days of the declaration the animal is a dangerous
animal, the owner must procure and maintain liability insurance, including
coverage of claims arising from the conduct of the owner's animal, in an amount
not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), providing coverage
for any injury, damage or loss caused by the dangerous animal.
      4.   The owner must confine the dangerous animal to the secure enclosure
outlined in section 6-2-7 of this chapter.
      5.   If any of the terms of this chapter are not complied with, the
police chief or his designee may order that the dangerous animal be permanently
barred from the village and the animal license revoked. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-9: ANIMAL BITES:
Whenever any animal bites any person, the owner of the animal or anyone having
knowledge of the bite shall immediately notify the police chief who shall cause
the animal to be confined under the supervision of a licensed veterinarian for
a period of at least ten (10) days for appropriate observation. If the animal
is determined to have rabies or symptoms of rabies, the animal shall be
destroyed and all expenses borne by the owner of said animal. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-
2003)
6-2-10: NOISY ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to harbor or keep any animal which disturbs the peace by
loud noises at any time of the day or night including, but not limited to,
continued and repeated howling, barking, whining or other utterances causing
unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors in close
proximity with the premises where the animal is kept or harbored. (Ord. 1563,
1-22-2003)
6-2-11: ABANDONMENT:
It is unlawful for any person to abandon any dog or domestic cat in the
village. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-12: IMPOUNDMENT:
In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, a dog or cat may be
seized, impounded and humanely confined to an animal shelter, by village
personnel, for the following reasons:
   (A)   Any dog or cat without a valid license;
   (B)   Any animal at large;
   (C)   Any animal constituting a public nuisance or considered a danger to
the public;
   (D)   Any unattended animal that is ill, injured or otherwise in need of
care;
   (E)   Any animal that is reasonably suspected to have been abused or
neglected;
   (F)   Any animal that is reasonably suspected of having rabies;
   (G)   Any animal that is charged with being potentially dangerous or is a
threat to public health and safety;
   (H)   Any animal that is considered unattended or abandoned, as in
situations where the owner is deceased, has been arrested or evicted from his
regular place of residence. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-13: CARING FOR ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal to refuse or fail to provide
such animal with sufficient wholesome and nutritious food, potable water,
veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering, humane care and treatment, or
to unnecessarily expose any such animal in hot, stormy, cold or inclement
weather. No person shall leave any animal unattended in a motor vehicle or
enclosed trailer when the outside temperature exceeds thirty degrees Celsius
(30°C) (86°F) or contain any animal in such manner that said animal does not
have proper air circulation while confined in a motor vehicle, trailer,
doghouse or any type of container or structure in which an animal may be
confined. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-14: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully or maliciously strike, beat,
abuse or intentionally run down with a vehicle any animal or otherwise engage
in any act to cause or inflict unnecessary pain, injury, suffering or death to
such animal; except that reasonable force may be used to drive away vicious or
trespassing animals. (Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-15: SANITATION:
No owner of any animal shall cause or allow such animal to soil, defile or
defecate on any public property or upon any street, sidewalk, public way, play
area or common grounds owned jointly by the members of a homeowners' or
condominium association, or upon private property other than that of the owner,
unless such owner immediately removes and disposes of all feces deposited by
such animal. All feces deposited on an animal owner's property must be removed
and disposed of in a sanitary manner within twenty four (24) hours after
deposit by the animal. (Ord. 1573, 7-23-2003)
6-2-16: HOUSING OF ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful to keep or have any poultry, cattle, horses, swine and
goats or like livestock, specifically excluding dogs and cats, anywhere in the
village. (Ord. 1573, 7-23-2003)
6-2-17: KEEPING OF BEES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain bees in the village.
(Ord. 1563, 1-22-2003)
6-2-18: GROUND FEEDING PROHIBITED:
The ground feeding of birds, cats, squirrels, chipmunks, rats, mice, rabbits,
raccoons, opossums, skunks, deer, ducks or any other wild animals is prohibited
in order to prevent rodent infestation, disease from feces, and a public
nuisance from droppings. "Ground feeding" is defined as the spreading, casting,
laying, depositing or dumping of feed including, but not limited to, birdseed,
corn, bread pieces, food scraps or any like or similar substance, on any public
or private property in the village. Aboveground hanging bird feeders are
allowed as long as all feed is placed in a container or feeder designed for the
specific purpose of feeding birds. (Ord. 1593, 5-26-2004)
6-2-19: PENALTY:
Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall result in a fine of
not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00) for each separate offense to the maximum allowed by state
statute for each offense. (Ord. 1593, 5-26-2004)
CHAPTER 3
DOG KENNELS
(Rep. by Ord. 833, 6-11-1975)
CHAPTER 4
WEAPONS
SECTION:
6-4-1: Definitions
6-4-2: Unlawful Discharge Of A Weapon Other Than A Firearm
6-4-3: Unlawful Possession Of Weapons By Persons Under Eighteen Years Of Age
6-4-6: Unlawful Sale Of Weapons To Minors
6-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The items listed below shall be considered "weapons" under this section:
AIR RIFLE: Any air gun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, pellet
gun or any implement that is not a firearm which impels a pellet and/or
projectile constructed of hard plastic, steel, lead or other hard material with
a sufficient amount of force that it can be reasonably expected to cause
physical harm.
BALLISTIC KNIFE: Any knife or device that propels a knifelike blade as a
projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed gas.
BOW AND ARROW: Any bow, long bow, recurve bow, compound bow, crossbow or other
archery device having a pull of ten (10) pounds and for which the purpose of
said device is the throwing or projecting of arrows, missiles or similar
projectiles.
OTHER DANGEROUS WEAPONS: Any bludgeon, blackjack, slungshot, sand club,
sandbag, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon regardless of its composition,
throwing star or billy club or similar object.
OTHER KNIFE: Bowie, dagger, dirk, razor, stiletto, broken bottle or other piece
of glass carried or possessed with the intent to use the same unlawfully
against another.
STUN GUN OR TASER:
   (A)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting
the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him incapable of
normal functioning; or
   (B)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in such
a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning.
SWITCHBLADE KNIFE: Any knife or device which has a blade that opens
automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in
the handle of a knife. (Ord. 1902, 8-26-2015)
6-4-2: UNLAWFUL DISCHARGE OF A WEAPON OTHER THAN A FIREARM:
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or shoot any air rifle,
ballistic knife or bow and arrow within the village limits. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit any person from discharging a weapon otherwise
prohibited under this section when said action is taken while lawfully
defending his or her person or property. (Ord. 1902, 8-26-2015)
6-4-3: UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF WEAPONS BY PERSONS UNDER EIGHTEEN YEARS OF AGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person under eighteen (18) years of age to possess
any weapon within the village limits. (Ord. 1902, 8-26-2015)
6-4-4: UNLAWFUL SALE OF WEAPONS TO MINORS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership, association, or corporation
to sell, lend, rent, give or otherwise transfer a weapon to any person under
the age of eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 1902, 8-26-2015)
CHAPTER 5
EXCESSIVE, LOUD, UNNECESSARY NOISE
SECTION:
6-5-1: Excessive, Loud, Unnecessary Noises Prohibited
6-5-2: Noises To Be Abated Described
6-5-3: Loud Gathering, Noise Producing Activities
6-5-4: Hours Of Abatement
6-5-5: Presumptive Violation Decibel Level
6-5-6: Exceptions
6-5-7: Penalties
6-5-1: EXCESSIVE, LOUD, UNNECESSARY NOISES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or
continued, any excessive, loud, unnecessary, or unusual noise which either
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, convenience,
health, peace, or safety of others within the village. (Ord. 480, 8-24-1960;
amd. Ord. 2107, 10-26-2022)
6-5-2: NOISES TO BE ABATED DESCRIBED:
The following acts, noises and sounds among others, are declared to be
excessive, loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this
chapter and therefore abated, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be
exclusive:
   (A)   Horns, Signaling Devices: At all times, the sounding of any horn or
signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street
or public place of the village, except as a danger warning; the creation by
means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the
sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time;
the use of any horn, whistle, or other device operated by engine exhaust; and
the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up.
   (B)   Electronic Receiving, Playing Devices: The playing, using, operating,
or permitting to be played, used, or operated, of any electronic receiving or
playing devices, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or with
louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are
in the room, chamber, vehicle, or outdoor area, where such machine or device is
played, used or operated. The operation of any such device, instrument,
phonograph, or machine, between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and eight
o’clock (8:00) A.M. in such manner as to be plainly audible on adjacent
property shall be prima facie evidence of violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Yelling, Shouting: Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing
on the public streets of the village between the hours of ten o’clock (10:00)
P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. or at any time or place so as to annoy or
disturb the peace, quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in
any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence, or of persons in the vicinity.
   (D)   Animals, Birds: At all times, the keeping of any animal or bird shut
up or tied up in any yard, enclosure, stable, house or other place which, by
barking, howling, crying, singing, or causing frequent or long continued noise,
shall disturb the comfort or repose of persons in the vicinity.
   (E)   Engine Exhausts: At all times, the discharge into the open air of the
exhaust of any steam engine, gasoline engine, stationary internal combustion
engine, or other kind or type of engine, motorboat, motorcycle or motor
vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively
prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom.
   (F)   Defect In Vehicle Or Load: At all times, the use within the village of
any wagon, cart, automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other vehicle, so out of
repair or loaded in such a manner or with material of such a nature as to
create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noises.
   (G)   Construction, Repair Of Buildings: The erection, including excavating,
demolition, alteration, or repair of any building other than between the hours
of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) P.M. on weekdays, except
in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and
then only with a permit from the village board, or the building inspector,
which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three (3) days or less
while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of
three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. If the village board, or
the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will
not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any
building, or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M., and if he shall further
determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he
may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of eight o’clock
(8:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. upon application.
   (H)   Schools, Courts, Churches And Hospitals: The creation of an excessive
noise in the vicinity of any school, institution of learning, church, court, or
hospital, while the same is in use, which unreasonably interferes with the
workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in
the hospital; provided, that conspicuous signs are displayed in the vicinity of
any such building indicating that the same is a school, hospital, court, or
church.
   (I)   Hawkers, Peddlers: At all times, the shouting and crying of peddlers,
hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of a residential
neighborhood.
   (J)   Drums: The use of any drum, bucket or other instrument or device in a
manner that disrupts the peace and quiet of a residential neighborhood or the
business activities of a business district.
   (K)   Factories, Machinery: The operation of any factory within two hundred
feet (200') of any residence wherein is used machinery or other apparatus which
cause loud or unusual noises, without exercising reasonable care to limit such
noise and to confine the same.
   (L)   Pile Drivers, Hammers: The operation between the hours of eight
o’clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. of any pile driver, steam
shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist, or other appliance,
the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noises.
   (M)   Mufflers, Blowers and Engines: At all times, the operation of any
noise creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the
operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or
fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and the engine is
equipped with a muffler device to deaden the noise. (Ord. 2017, 10-26-2022)
6-5-3: LOUD GATHERING, NOISE PRODUCING ACTIVITIES:
   (A)   Prohibited actions. It is unlawful for any persons who are in
possession of, or are record owners of a premises, to permit guests, tenants,
invitees, visitors or trespassers to gather and engage in any of the following
activities:
      1.   Create such noise as disturbs and interrupts the peace, quiet and
repose of the neighborhood;
      2.   Amplify music or other sounds to disturb the peace, quiet and repose
of the neighborhood;
      3.   Litter public property;
      4.   Litter private property without consent;
      5.   Block or obstruct public rights-of-way or private access to the
public rights-of-way;
      6.   Allow harmful, offensive or noxious odors to permeate the air of
adjacent property or public property; and
      7.   Engage in fighting, boxing or wrestling.
   (B)   Duty of owners or occupants to abate noise. Owners or occupants of the
premises, upon being given an abatement order by any police officer, shall
immediately abate the noise disturbance within 15 minutes, and failing to do
so, shall be in violation of this section.
   (C)   Authority to order dispersal. Upon the refusal or failure of any
occupant or owner of the premises to comply with an abatement order under
paragraph (B) of this section, any police officer of the village may order all
persons present at any such gathering, wherein the noise levels regulated by
this chapter are exceeded, to disperse immediately. The failure or refusal to
disperse shall constitute a second violation of this chapter.
   (D)   Resumption of the noise disturbance within (4) hours after compliance
with an abatement order shall be considered a second offense. (Ord. 2017, 10-
26-2022)
6-5-4: HOURS OF ABATEMENT:
Except as specifically provided in this chapter, it shall be a violation of
this section to allow or cause the noise or sounds enumerated in section
6-5-2 and
6-5-3 upon adjacent property or the public right-of-way between the hours of
ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. (Ord. 2017, 10-26-2022)
6-5-5: PRESUMPTIVE VIOLATION DECIBEL LEVEL:
Except as specifically provided in this chapter it shall be a presumptive
violation of this chapter to emit noise or sound upon adjacent property or
public property at a decibel level (dB) of 70 or greater during the hours
regulated. (Ord. 2017, 10-26-2022)
6-5-6: EXCEPTIONS:
Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply under the following
circumstances:   
   (A)   Cries or loud calls for emergency assistance or of warning;
   (B)   Radios, sirens, horns, or bells which emanate from police, fire,
ambulance, or other emergency response vehicles;
   (C)   Special events by permit, such as parades, races, fireworks displays,
festivals and block parties for which the Village of Midlothian has issued a
special events permit, as well as sidewalk cafes licensed pursuant to village
board approval, so long as the aforesaid are conducted pursuant to the
conditions of the permit or license and all village ordinances.
   (D)   Activities on or in municipal and school athletic facilities and on or
in publicly owned property and facilities provided that such activities have
been authorized by the owner or operator of such municipal or school property;
   (E)   Fire alarms and security alarms prior to the giving of notice and a
reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant of the premises, police
department, fire department, or other first responders to turn-off or otherwise
cancel the alarm or security system not to exceed once per 24-hour period or
three (3) times per year;
   (F)   Religious worship activities including but not limited to the ringing
of bells, the playing of musical instruments, the singing or chanting of
choirs, or the singing or chanting of those in attendance at such worship
activities;
   (G)   Clock towers, bell towers, and carillons;
   (H)   Rail locomotives and other railroad equipment as regulated by state
and federal law;
   (I)   Aircraft in takeoff, flight and landing as regulated by federal law;
   (J)   Generators and pumps used to relieve emergency situations such as
electrical power outages or flooding of buildings; or
   (K)   Mechanical stationary noise of less than seventy (70) decibels. (Ord.
2017, 10-26-2022)
6-5-7: PENALTIES:
The penalty for violation of this chapter shall be one hundred dollars ($100)
for a first offense; two hundred dollars ($200) for a second offense and five
hundred dollars ($500) for each offense thereafter within a twenty-four month
period. (Ord. 2017, 10-26-2022)
CHAPTER 6
LOUDSPEAKERS; AMPLIFIERS
SECTION:
6-6-1: License Required
6-6-2: License Fee
6-6-3: Application
6-6-4: Issuance Of License
6-6-5: Restrictions
6-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier
connected with any radio, phonograph, microphone, or other device by which
sounds are magnified and may be heard over any public street or public place
without having first obtained a permit therefor. (Ord. 481, 8-24-1960)
6-6-2: LICENSE FEE:
The fee for such permit shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each day of each
license. (Ord. 921, 4-12-1978)
6-6-3: APPLICATION:
Any person desiring a license for the use or operation of such a device, shall
file an application therefor with the clerk, upon a form provided by him,
setting forth the name and address of the applicant, the name of the owner of
the device, the date upon which it is intended to be used, and such other
information as may be prescribed. (Ord. 481, 8-24-1960)
6-6-4: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
The license shall be issued upon the payment of the license fee, as herein
provided, to the clerk, and shall permit the use of any such device subject to
the terms and conditions of this chapter, only upon the date specified on the
license and no other. (Ord. 481, 8-24-1960)
6-6-5: RESTRICTIONS:
No licensee shall use, operate or employ any such device within the village
after the hour of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. prevailing time, of any day; no
licensee shall use, operate or employ any such device within a radius of two
(2) blocks from any hospital or within the radius of two (2) blocks from any
church while funeral services are being held there.
This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure
vehicles, when the same are operated in such manner as not to be audible at a
distance of fifty feet (50') from the vehicle, nor to noise devices, bands, or
other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which is operated
under a permit in accordance with the provisions of this code.
No licensee shall cause or permit to be emanated from any such device any lewd,
obscene, profane, or indecent language or sounds, or any false representation
of any matter, produce, or project advertised thereby the sale of which is
prohibited by any law or statute. (Ord. 481, 8-24-1960)
CHAPTER 7
CURFEW, IMPROPER SUPERVISION, TRUANCY
SECTION:
6-7-1: Curfew
6-7-2: Parental Responsibility
6-7-3: Arrests; Notification Of Parents
6-7-4: Truancy
6-7-1: CURFEW:
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen (17) years of age to
be present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, business, street,
highway or other public place or way at the following times:
      1.   Between ten thirty o'clock (10:30) P.M. on Sunday through Thursday,
inclusive, and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. the following day.
      2.   Between eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on Friday and six o'clock
(6:00) A.M. Saturday.
      3.   Between eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. on Saturday and six
o'clock (6:00) A.M. Sunday.
   (B)   It is a defense to a violation under this chapter that the child
engaged in the prohibited conduct while:
      1.   Accompanied by the child's parent, legal guardian, custodian,
sibling, stepbrother or stepsister at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      2.   Accompanied by an adult at least twenty one (21) years of age
approved by the child's parent, guardian or custodian;
      3.   Participating in, going to, or returning from:
         (a)   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
         (b)   A school recreational activity;
         (c)   A religious event;
         (d)   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury or substantial damage;
         (e)   An activity involving the exercise of the child's rights
protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or
article 1, sections 3, 4, and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois,
or both;
         (f)   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults.
A citation for violation of subsection (A) of this section may be issued by a
police officer only if he reasonably believes that a violation has occurred and
none of the defenses enumerated in this subsection apply.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate the provisions
of subsection (A) of this section. It shall be a rebuttable presumption that a
person has violated this section if someone under seventeen (17) years of age
of whom such person has custody or control is present upon any public assembly,
building, business, street or highway or other public place or public way in
violation of subsection (A) of this section, and none of the defenses
enumerated in subsection (B) of this section apply.
   (D)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). (Ord. 1605, 9-8-2004)
6-7-2: PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY:
   (A)   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
   KNOWINGLY: Having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or
ground for belief which warrants further inquiry or inspection.
   LEGAL GUARDIAN: A person appointed guardian or given custody of a minor by a
circuit court of this state, but does not include a person appointed guardian
or given custody of a minor under the Illinois juvenile court act of 1987 1 .
   MINOR: A person who has not yet reached eighteen (18) years of age.
   PARENT: A natural or adoptive parent or a court designated guardian.
   UNEMANCIPATED MINOR: A person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age
who is still under the care and custody of at least one of his or her parents
or a legal guardian.
   UNSUPERVISED: A lack of visual or oral oversight coupled with lack of
sufficient proximity to obtain immediate control over the item or minor.
   WILFUL: Proceeding from a conscious and voluntary intentional motion of the
will.
   (B)   Violations:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person, including a parent or legal
guardian, to knowingly or wilfully cause, aid or encourage any minor to violate
or attempt to violate any federal or state law or municipal ordinance or to
knowingly or wilfully act in such a manner as to directly tend to cause a minor
to violate or attempt to act in such a manner as to directly tend to cause a
minor to violate or attempt to violate any federal or state law or municipal
ordinance.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any parent or guardian to fail to make all
reasonable, necessary and effective efforts to prevent a minor under the parent
or guardian's care and custody from violating any provisions of this code.
      3.   For purposes of this section, the parent or legal guardian of an
unemancipated minor residing with such parent or legal guardian shall be
presumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, to have knowingly
permitted such minor to have committed a violation of this section if:
         (a)   Said minor shall either be adjudicated to be in violation of any
ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful or malicious acts causing damage
or injury to a person, animal or property or shall have incurred nonjudicial
sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt or
violation of any ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful or malicious acts
causing damage or injury to a person, animal or property; and
         (b)   The parent or legal guardian shall have received a written
notice thereof either by certified or registered mail, return receipt requested
or by personal service, with a certification of personal service returned, from
the Midlothian police department following such adjudication or nonjudicial
sanction; and
         (c)   Within two (2) years following receipt of the notice set forth
in subsection (B)3(b) of this section, such minor is either adjudicated to have
violated within the corporate limits of the village of Midlothian any
ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful or malicious acts causing damage
or injury to a person, animal or property or shall have incurred nonjudicial
sanctions from another official agency resulting from an admission of guilt of
a violation within the corporate limits of the village of Midlothian of any
ordinance, law or statute prohibiting wilful or malicious acts causing damage
or injury to a person, animal or property.
   (C)   Penalty:
      1.   Any person convicted of a violation of subsection (B)1 or (B)2 of
this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not
greater than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or the maximum amount
permitted by state statute.
   (D)   Parental Responsibility For Fines And Penalties:
      1.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides
with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable for any fine, condition,
restriction or order of reparation imposed by a court or administrative body
for a violation of any provision of this code but only if: a) such
unemancipated minor has not paid the fine or made restitution or reparation
within the time ordered by the court or administrative body and b) said parent
or legal guardian has been served with summons or notice to appear in the
original cause of action as provided by law. (Ord. 1838, 6-12-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 705 ILCS 405/1-1 et seq.
6-7-3: ARRESTS; NOTIFICATION OF PARENTS:
When any person under the age of eighteen (18) years has been charged with or
arrested for the violation of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the police
department to notify the parent, guardian or person having the legal custody,
care or direction of such person of the charge or arrest and to request his
appearance at the police station where the police department shall explain the
details of the charge or arrest. (Ord. 1605, 9-8-2004)
6-7-4: TRUANCY:
   (A)   Truancy Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person under the age
of eighteen (18) enrolled in a public, private or parochial school within the
corporate limits of the village to absent himself or herself from attendance at
school without permission of his or her parent or legal guardian. Any person
who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the offense of
truancy and be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth in this section.
Emergency or unforeseen absences due to illness or other causes beyond the
control of the person so absenting himself or herself from school without the
permission of a parent or legal guardian shall not constitute truancy if
permission for such absence has been obtained from the parent or legal guardian
and such permission is submitted, in writing, to the proper school authorities
within twenty four (24) hours after such absence.
   (B)   Parental Responsibility: No parent or legal guardian shall suffer or
permit his or her minor child or ward to violate this section, and if a court
citation is issued, one parent or guardian must appear at the hearing.
   (C)   Penalty: The penalty for violation of this section shall be as set
forth in the general penalty provisions of this code 1 . In addition to, or in
lieu of, the penalty set forth in the general penalty provisions, a period of
community service not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) hours may be imposed
upon a minor who violates this section. (Ord. 1605, 9-8-2004)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 1, chapter 4 of this code.
CHAPTER 8
MISDEMEANORS
SECTION:
6-8-1: Disorderly Conduct
6-8-2: Assault
6-8-3: Battery
6-8-4: Inciting Riots
6-8-5: Resisting Or Obstructing A Member Of The Police Force
6-8-6: Duty To Assist Police
6-8-7: Disorderly Houses
6-8-8: Vagrancy
6-8-9: Damage To Public Property
6-8-10: Injuring Or Obstructing Signal System
6-8-11: False Fire Alarms
6-8-12: Passing Police Lines
6-8-13: Press Cards
6-8-14: Application; Press Cards
6-8-15: Open Burning Prohibited; Exceptions
6-8-16: Masking In Public
6-8-17: Possessing Burglar Tools
6-8-18: Throwing Objects On Athletic Fields And Public Parks
6-8-19: Objects On Sills Or Railings
6-8-20: Spikes In Railings And Fences
6-8-21: Carrying Or Exhibiting Flags
6-8-22: Rag Picking
6-8-23: Trespassing On Property
6-8-24: Removing Sod Or Earth
6-8-25: Removal Of Sod Along Public Way
6-8-26: Spiritualism And Fortune Telling (Rep. by Ord. 1697, 7-8-2009)
6-8-27: Forging Signatures
6-8-28: Deceptive Advertising
6-8-29: Advertising Psychic Or Magical Powers (Rep. by Ord. 1697, 7-8-2009)
6-8-30: Coin Operated Amusement Devices
6-8-31: Charitable Entertainments
6-8-32: Public Morals
6-8-33: Tampering With Telephones
6-8-34: Indecent Solicitation Of A Child
6-8-35: Adultery
6-8-36: Fornication
6-8-37: Public Indecency
6-8-38: Prostitution
6-8-39: Patronizing A Prostitute
6-8-40: Aggravated Assault
6-8-41: Reckless Conduct
6-8-42: Intimidation
6-8-43: Theft
6-8-44: Theft Of Lost Or Mislaid Property
6-8-45: Theft Of Labor Or Services Or Use Of Property
6-8-46: Deceptive Practices
6-8-47: Damage To Property
6-8-48: Trespass To Vehicles
6-8-49: Trespass To Land
6-8-50: Mob Action
6-8-51: Prowlers
6-8-52: Avoiding Arrest
6-8-53: Invalidity Of Any Section Or Provision; Separability
6-8-54: Penalty
6-8-55: Railroad Blockage Of Intersections; Violation
6-8-56: Littering; Public Place
6-8-57: Littering; Private Property
6-8-58: Loitering
6-8-59: Alcoholic Liquor
6-8-60: Tampering With Motor Vehicles
6-8-61: Graffiti
6-8-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
   (A)   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
   (B)   With intent to annoy another, makes a telephone call, whether or not
conversation thereby ensues; or
   (C)   Transmits in any manner to another a false alarm to the effect that a
bomb or other explosive of any nature is concealed in such place that its
explosion would endanger human life, knowing at the time of such transmission
that there is no reasonable ground for believing that such bomb or explosive is
concealed in such place; or
   (D)   Transmits in any manner to any member of the police department, public
officer or public employee a report to the effect that an offense has been
committed, knowing at the time of such transmission that there is no reasonable
ground for believing that such an offense has been committed; or
   (E)   Enters upon the property of another and for a lewd or unlawful purpose
deliberately looks into a dwelling on the property through any window or other
opening in it; or
   (F)   Fights in public places in the village. (Ord. 1343, 11-23-1994)
Any person so violating any of the provisions of this section shall, on
conviction, be fined for each offense in a sum not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00), nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 1343, 11-23-1994;
amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-2: ASSAULT:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits an assault when, without lawful authority,
he engages in conduct which places another in reasonable apprehension of
receiving a battery. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of assault shall be fined not to exceed
the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-3: BATTERY:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits battery if he intentionally or knowingly
without legal justification and by any means: 1) causes bodily harm to an
individual, or 2) makes physical contact of an insulting or provoking nature
with an individual. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of battery shall be fined not to exceed
the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-4: INCITING RIOTS:
It is unlawful to create a clear and present danger of a riot or assault,
battery, or other unlawful trespass against any person or group of persons
because of his, her or their race, religion, color, national origin, or
ancestry, or to create a clear and present danger of arson, vandalism,
defacement, or other unlawful trespass against property because of the race,
religion, color, national origin, or ancestry of the owner, possessor, or
authorized user or users of said property, or, in the case of a cemetery, of
the decedent buried therein.
The term "person" as used in this section shall include one or more
individuals, copartnerships, corporations, firms, organizations, associations,
leagues, or other bodies. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571,
5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-5: RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A MEMBER OF THE POLICE FORCE:
No person shall knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one known to
the person to be a member of the police force of any authorized act within his
official capacity. (Ord. 664, 3-27-1968)
Any person so violating any of the provisions of this section shall, on
conviction, be fined for each offense in a sum not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 664, 3-27-1968; amd. Ord.
1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-6: DUTY TO ASSIST POLICE:
It shall be the duty of any person in the village, when called upon by any
member of the police department, to promptly aid and assist him in the
execution of his police duties. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-7: DISORDERLY HOUSES:
Every common, ill governed, or disorderly house, room or other premises kept
for the encouragement of idleness, gaming, drinking, fornication, or other
misbehavior, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, and the keeper and all
persons connected with the maintenance thereof, and all persons patronizing or
frequenting the same, shall be fined not exceeding the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-8: VAGRANCY:
All persons who are idle and dissolute, or who go about begging; all persons
who use any shell game, sleight of hand or juggling trick, or other unlawful
game to cheat, defraud, or unlawfully obtain money or other valuable thing;
pilferers; confidence men; common drunkards; common night walkers; persons
lewd, wanton, or lascivious in speech or behavior; common brawlers, persons who
are habitually neglectful of their employment or their calling, and do not
lawfully provide for themselves or for the support of their families; and all
persons who are idle or dissolute and who neglect all lawful business; and who
habitually misspend their time by frequenting houses of ill fame or gaming
houses; all persons lodging in or found in the nighttime in sheds, barns or
unoccupied buildings or lodging in the open air, and not giving a good account
of themselves; and all persons who are known to be thieves, burglars, or
pickpockets, either by their own confession or otherwise, or by having been
convicted of larceny, burglary, or other crime against the laws of the state
punishable by imprisonment in the state prison or in a house of correction of
any city, and having no lawful means of support, are habitually found prowling
around any railroad depot, banking institution, broker's office, place of
public amusement, auction room, store, shop or crowded public way, public
conveyance, or at any public gathering, assembly, or lounging about any
courtroom, private dwelling houses, or are found in any house of ill fame or
gambling house, are hereby declared to be vagabonds, and shall be fined not to
exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord.
1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-9: DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No person shall cut, injure, mark, or deface any public building, sewer, water
pipe, hydrant, or other village property, or any tree, grass, shrub, or walk in
any public way or public park. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-10: INJURING OR OBSTRUCTING SIGNAL SYSTEM:
No person, unless duly authorized, shall open a signal box, unless it be to
give an alarm of fire or to communicate with the police on necessary business,
nor break, cut, injure, deface, derange, or in any manner meddle or interfere
with any signal box or the fire alarm or police telegraph wires, or with any
municipal electric wires, poles, conduits, or apparatus. Any person violating
any of the foregoing provisions of this section shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each
offense.
Any person who shall scratch, stencil, or post placards or bills on any of the
poles used for wires of the police and fire alarm telegraph, or in any other
manner deface, or injure the same, shall be fined not less than five dollars
($5.00) nor more than twenty dollars ($20.00) for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-
13-1964)
6-8-11: FALSE FIRE ALARMS:
Whoever, without reasonable cause, by outcry or otherwise, makes or circulates,
or causes to be made or circulated, any false alarm of fire, shall be fined not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-12: PASSING POLICE LINES:
No person shall pass police and fire lines for the purpose of gathering and
editing spot news or photographing news events unless such person is a legal
holder of a press card as provided herein. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-13: PRESS CARDS:
The chief of police has power to issue press cards entitling the holder thereof
to pass police and fire lines for the purpose of gathering and editing spot
news or photographing news events in the village. Such press cards shall be
issued only to those engaged in gathering, reporting, editing or photographing
current news events for newspapers, press associations, newsreels and radio
stations. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-14: APPLICATION; PRESS CARDS:
The application for such press cards shall be made in writing by the employer
on behalf of the employee qualified to hold press cards. The employer shall
represent that the employee on whose behalf an application for a press card is
made is a full time reporter, editor, writer, photographer or broadcaster of
spot news, is of good moral character and is a citizen of the United States. No
such card shall be issued unless the applicant meets these requirements and
unless and until the fingerprints of the prospective holder are filed in the
office of the chief of police. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-15: OPEN BURNING PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to burn or cause the burning at any location
within the village of any paper, cardboard, leaves, twigs, branches, wood,
grass, grass clippings or other refuse from farming, gardening or otherwise, or
other combustible materials of any nature whatsoever, except as follows:
      1.   Burning any combustible materials wholly within a building in a
fireplace or other equipment or facility designed and constructed for such
purpose; provided, that any refuse burning incinerator installed in any
residence building shall comply with the rules and regulations of the state air
pollution control board as the same may from time to time be in effect;
      2.   Burning charcoal briquettes, natural gas, propane, approved wood or
commercially prepared seasoned wood chips or pellets in conjunction with any of
the foregoing for cooking purposes, provided, however that the following
restriction shall apply to multi-family dwelling (excluding townhomes):
         (a)   Charcoal burners and other uncovered open flame cooking devices
shall not be operated;
         (b)   Burning of charcoal briquettes, approved wood or commercially
prepared seasoned wood chips or pellets shall not be allowed;
      3.   Burning combustible materials in a high temperature incinerator
providing complete combustion and complying with the rules and regulations of
the state air pollution control board as the same may from time to time be in
effect;
      4.   Burning "approved wood", as defined in subsection (B) of this
section, in an outdoor bonfire at a gathering conducted by religious,
educational or other not for profit organization; provided that a permit
therefor is previously issued by the fire department and that such bonfire is
attended by adult supervision and adequate safety equipment as approved by the
fire department;
      5.   Burning "approved wood" in an "approved container" for recreational
campfires, as defined in subsection (B) of this section in a safe and
controlled manner. Provided that:
         (a)   Such fire shall be under the control of and attended at all
times by a person eighteen (18) years of age or older who is not intoxicated or
under the influence of drugs or alcohol.
         (b)   A portable fire extinguisher having a minimum rating of 4-A or
other approved extinguishing agent such as sand, dirt or water in sufficient
quantity shall be available for immediate use or water from a hose connected to
an operational water source which hose shall have sufficient length and
capacity to promptly extinguish the fire.
         (c)   Such fire shall at all times be safely managed and shall not be
permitted to create excessive flames, flying cinders or smoke. The fire shall
be properly extinguished and not permitted to smolder after substantial
completion of combustion.
         (d)   Such fire shall be located in an area separated from any
structure by not less than fifteen feet (15') and shall not be permitted upon
any public street, road, sidewalk or other public property.
         (e)   Such fire shall not be used in such a manner as to emit
offensive or objectional smoke or odors or when other circumstances make such
fires hazardous.
         (f)   At no time shall such fire be utilized for waste disposal
purposes;
   (B)   For purposes of this section the following definitions apply:
   APPROVED CONTAINER: A commercially manufactured device specifically
designed, intended, advertised and utilized for the purposes of recreational
campfires, such as chimineas, outdoor fireplaces and/or covered outdoor
firepits. Such container must be located above ground and in no event shall it
be built into the ground or located below grade.
   APPROVED WOOD: Seasoned dry firewood of dimensions appropriate to safely fit
within the approved container with any cover remaining attached. In particular,
but without limitations, approved wood shall not include any green or fresh
vegetation materials; construction materials, such as treated woods, plywood or
pressure treated wood, or any other materials which produce excessive smoke,
cinders or other emissions characteristic of nonseasoned wood.
   BONFIRE: A safely conducted and controlled outdoor fire utilized for
ceremonial purposes.
   RECREATIONAL CAMPFIRE: A safely conducted and controlled fire utilized for
comfort, enjoyment or relaxation. (Ord. 1872, 6-11-2014)
6-8-16: MASKING IN PUBLIC:
It shall be unlawful for any person within the village to appear in public in
any mask, hood or other thing concealing the identity of the wearer; provided,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply to persons attending or
taking part in carnivals, mask balls, parties, public shows, entertainment, or
holiday celebrations in the village, or under permission of the proper
authorities of the village, nor to any person holding a written permit issued
by the mayor; nor shall it apply to any article of wearing apparel used by a
person or persons to protect him from the elements, such as rain or extremely
cold weather. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-17: POSSESSING BURGLAR TOOLS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any nippers of
the description known as burglar's nippers, picklock, skeleton key, key to be
used with a bit, jimmy, or other burglar's instrument or tool of whatsoever
kind or description, unless it be shown that such possession is innocent or for
a lawful purpose, under a penalty of not less than one hundred dollars
($100.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code
or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-
1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-18: THROWING OBJECTS ON ATHLETIC FIELDS AND PUBLIC PARKS:
No person shall throw, drop, or place upon any baseball park, athletic field or
public park, or other place where games are played any bottle or other glass
receptacle or any broken bottle or other broken instrument or thing. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than
twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-19: OBJECTS ON SILLS OR RAILINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or keep on any windowsill,
railing, or balcony, top of porch, or any other projection from any house or
other building in the village, any flowerpot, wooden box, bowl, pitcher, or
other article or thing unless the same is securely and firmly fastened or
protected so as to render it impossible for any such pot, box, bowl, pitcher or
other article to fall into the public way. Any person violating this section
shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each offense. (Ord.
571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-20: SPIKES IN RAILINGS AND FENCES:
No owner, lessee, or person in possession of any building in this village,
shall erect, maintain, or permit to be erected or maintained on or about the
stairway in, or the entrance to, such building, or on or about its exterior
building line, or upon any portion of the sidewalk adjacent to such building,
any railing, fence, guard, or protection of any kind, upon which there shall be
affixed or in any manner attached so as to protrude therefrom any spike, nail,
or other pointed instrument of any kind or description, unless such protrusion
shall be an integral part of the fencing located entirely on private property;
and unless any such protrusion, projecting vertically upward, shall be at least
six feet (6') in height above the ground; and unless any such protrusion,
projecting vertically downward, shall be not more than six inches (6") from the
ground. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense; and each day any person shall fail or neglect to
remove from such railing, fence, or other protection, any such spike, nail, or
other pointed instrument after notice in writing from the commissioner of
buildings so to do, shall constitute a distinct offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-21: CARRYING OR EXHIBITING FLAGS:
No person shall carry in parade on any public way in the village, or exhibit in
any licensed hall or public place of amusement or display or exhibit on any
vehicle or on any building or premises, or in any other manner in public within
the village any banner, ensign, or sign having upon it any inscription opposed
to organized government, or which is sacrilegious, or which may be derogatory
to public morals. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-22: RAG PICKING:
No person shall engage in the occupation of paper or rag picking or general
junking by handcart, automobile, or other vehicle before the hour of seven
thirty o'clock (7:30) A.M. or after the hour of five thirty o'clock (5:30)
P.M., provided that no rag picking shall be permitted at any time of the day or
night on Sundays or legal holidays. Any person that shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00)
for the first offense and fifty dollars ($50.00) for each subsequent offense.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-23: TRESPASSING ON PROPERTY:
No person shall enter into or upon any lot, block, or tract of ground in the
village which is under cultivation, or which is improved with a building used
for dwelling, business, commercial or other allied use, unless such person be
an owner, lessee, or person entitled so to enter, or the duly authorized agent
thereof, and any person found by the police in and upon any such premises shall
be treated as a trespasser unless he can produce satisfactory evidence of
ownership or right to be in and upon any such premises.
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be fined not
less than one dollar ($1.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-24: REMOVING SOD OR EARTH:
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any public way or
other public place within the village without a permit from the village board,
or from any premises not his own without the consent of the owner, under a
penalty of not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes
for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-25: REMOVAL OF SOD ALONG PUBLIC WAY:
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any property adjoining
or contiguous to a public way in such a manner as to leave said property in an
unsafe or unsanitary condition or in such condition as will constitute a public
nuisance. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-26: SPIRITUALISM AND FORTUNE TELLING:
(Rep. by Ord. 1697, 7-8-2009)
6-8-27: FORGING SIGNATURES:
Whenever it may be necessary, in order to procure a license, permit, grant, or
privilege of any kind, or to obtain a referendum vote on any proposition to
secure signatures to a petition for the same under any law or ordinance
affecting the whole or any part of the village, it shall be unlawful for any
person, individually, or any firm or corporation by its members, officers or
agents, to forge the signature or procure the forging of the signature to the
same of any person, or to sign or procure the signing of a fictitious name to
such petition, or to procure the signature to the same of the person qualified
to sign such petition by payment of money or other valuable thing to the person
so signing.
Any person that shall violate the provisions of this section by forging a
signature, signing a fictitious name, or purchasing a signature, or by
procuring the doing of same, shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00)
nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense, and the signing or
procuring of each false or fraudulent name to such petition shall be regarded
as a distinct and separate offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-
1995)
6-8-28: DECEPTIVE ADVERTISING:
No person shall, with intent to sell or in any way dispose of merchandise,
securities, service, or anything offered directly or indirectly to the public
for sale or distribution, or with intent to increase the consumption thereof,
or to induce the public in any manner to enter into any obligation relating
thereto, or to acquire title thereto or any interest therein, make, publish,
disseminate, circulate, or place before the public, or cause directly or
indirectly to be made, published, disseminated, circulated or placed before the
public, in this village, in any newspaper or other publication sold or offered
for sale upon any public way or other public place, or on any sign upon any
public way or other public place, or in any handbill or advertisement posted
upon any public way or public place, or on any placard, advertisement or
handbill exhibited or carried in any public way or public place, or on any
banner or sign flying across the public way or from any house, an advertisement
of any sort regarding merchandise, securities, service, or anything so offered
to the public which advertisement contains any assertion, representation or
statement which is untrue, deceptive, or misleading. Any person violating any
provision of this section shall be fined not less than twenty five dollars
($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code or
the maximum allowed by State Statutes for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964;
amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-29: ADVERTISING PSYCHIC OR MAGICAL POWERS:
(Rep. by Ord. 1697, 7-8-2009)
6-8-30: COIN OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICES:
See section 5-2-5 of this Code for restrictions and use of these devices. (Ord.
1338, 11-9-1994)
6-8-31: CHARITABLE ENTERTAINMENTS:
No person shall use any ticket, poster, placard, badge or other advertisement
in the promotion of any dance, bazaar, picnic, game, theater or other
entertainment or performance purporting to be given for charitable purposes
unless the names of the persons or organizations intended to be benefited by
the receipts from such entertainment or performance are stated on such ticket,
poster, badge or other advertisement. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
Any person violating any of the provisions of this section, shall be fined not
less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by State Statutes for each offense.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-32: PUBLIC MORALS:
   (A)   Every house of ill fame or house of assignation where men and women
resort for the purpose of fornication, prostitution or lewdness is hereby
declared to be a nuisance.
   No person shall keep or maintain a house of ill fame or assignation, or
place for the practice of fornication, prostitution, lewdness. Each twenty four
(24) hours that such house or place shall be kept or maintained for such
purpose shall constitute a separate and distinct offense.
   No person shall patronize, frequent, be found in or be an inmate of any such
house or place used for any of the purposes set forth in this section.
   No person shall lease to another any house, room or other premises, in whole
or in part, for any of the uses or purposes set forth in this section or
knowingly permit the same to be used or occupied for such purposes.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall direct, take, transport, or offer to direct,
take, or transport, any person for immoral purposes to any other person, or
assist any person by any means to seek or to find any prostitute or other
person engaged in immoral practices, or any brothel, bawdyhouse, or any other
place of ill fame. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   Any person that shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by State Statutes
for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
   (C)   No person shall knowingly receive any person for purposes of lewdness,
assignation, or prostitution into or upon any vehicle or other conveyance or
permit any person to remain for any of the said purposes in or upon any such
vehicle or other conveyance. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   Any person that shall violate the provisions of this subsection shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by State Statutes
for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
   (D)   The license of any such person or employees thereof directly involved
in the violation of subsection (B) or (C) of this section may be revoked, and
also in the license of the vehicle or conveyance used may be revoked in the
discretion of the Mayor. No license so revoked hereunder shall be reinstated
until the lapse of a period of one year after such revocation.
   (E)   It shall be unlawful for any prostitute, solicitor to prostitution,
pervert, or any person of evil fame or repute, to ply his vocation upon the
public ways or other public places in the Village. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (F)   No person shall commit any indecent, lewd or other act prohibited by
this section in any public place in the Village or use any threatening or
abusive language likely to place another in reasonable fear of having an
unwanted indecent or lewd act performed upon them.
   (G)   No person shall appear in a public place in a state of nudity or shall
make any indecent exposure of his or her person.
   (H)   It shall be unlawful for any person to exhibit any indecent or lewd
book, picture, or other indecent or lewd thing in any place where the same can
be seen from the public way, or to display in a public place frequented by
children any picture representing a person in a nude state which is not
connected with any art or educational exhibition. (Ord. 2025, 5-1-2019)
   (I)   It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, attempt
to sell, exhibit, give away, or in any way furnish or attempt to furnish to any
person under the age of seventeen (17) years any photograph, drawing, book,
magazine, pamphlet, comic book or other publication which, considered as a
whole, is obscene. Such an "obscene" photograph, drawing, book, magazine,
pamphlet, comic book or other publication shall include any photograph, book,
magazine, pamphlet, comic book or other publication which, considered as a
whole, has the dominant effect of substantially arousing sexual desires in
persons under the age of seventeen (17) years, the probability of which effect
is so great as to outweigh whatever artistic, literary, historical or other
merits such photographs, drawings, books, magazines, pamphlets, comic books or
other publications may possess. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 2025, 5-1-2019)
   (J)   Any person violating any of the provisions of subsection (I) of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be fined in an amount not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more
than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum
allowed by State Statutes. Each day that such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder. If more than one publication prohibited hereunder
shall be sold, offered for sale, exhibited, given away or in any way furnished
or attempted to be furnished to any such person in violation of subsection (I)
of this section, the sale, offer, exhibiting, giving away or in any way
furnishing or attempting to furnish to any such person of each separate
publication prohibited hereunder shall constitute a separate offense and shall
be punished as such hereunder. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995;
Ord. 2025, 5-1-2019)
   (K)   No person shall swim or bathe in any public bathing or public swimming
pool in the Village, unless such person is clothed in a suitable bathing dress.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 2025, 5-1-2019)
Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall be fined not less
than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by State Statutes for each offense. (Ord.
571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995; Ord. 2025, 5-1-2019)
6-8-33: TAMPERING WITH TELEPHONES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into
the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, or other
substance, or to manipulate or operate, or to attempt to manipulate or operate,
in any manner whatever, any telephone instrument or any mechanism or device
connected or commonly used therewith, with the intent to obtain telephone
service without paying therefor.
It shall be unlawful for any person to insert, or to attempt to insert, into
the coin box or money receptacle of any telephone, any slug, button, wire,
hook, or other implements or substances with the intent to obtain from such
coin box or money receptacle a legal tender coin of the United States. (Ord.
571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-34: INDECENT SOLICITATION OF A CHILD:
   (A)   Defined: Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who
solicits a child under the age of thirteen (13) years to do any act, which if
done would be an indecent liberty with a child or an act of contributing to the
sexual delinquency of a child commits indecent solicitation of a child.
   (B)   No Defense To Solicitation: It shall not be a defense to indecent
solicitation of a child that the accused reasonably believed the child to be of
the age of thirteen (13) years and upwards. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (C)   Penalty: A person convicted of indecent solicitation of a child shall
be fined not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or
the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-
13-1995)
6-8-35: ADULTERY:
   (A)   Defined: Any person who cohabits or has sexual intercourse with
another not his spouse commits adultery, if the behavior is open and notorious,
and:
      1.   The person is married and the other person involved in such
intercourse is not his spouse; or
      2.   The person is not married and knows that the other person involved
in such intercourse is married. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of adultery shall be fined not to exceed
the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-36: FORNICATION:
   (A)   Defined: Any person who cohabits or has sexual intercourse with
another not his spouse commits fornication if the behavior is open and
notorious. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of fornication shall be fined not to
exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-37: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   (A)   Any person of the age of seventeen (17) years and upwards who performs
any of the following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      1.   An act of sexual intercourse; or
      2.   An act of deviate sexual conduct; or
      3.   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to satisfy
the sexual desire of the person; or
      4.   A lewd fondling or caress of the body of another person of either
sex.
   (B)   "Public place" for purposes of this section means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others. (Ord. 571, 5-13-
1964)
   (C)   A person convicted of public indecency shall be fined not more than
the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-38: PROSTITUTION:
   (A)   Defined: Any person who performs, offers or agrees to perform any of
the following acts commits soliciting for a prostitute:
      1.   Solicits another for the purpose of prostitution; or
      2.   Arranges or offers to arrange a meeting of persons for the purpose
of prostitution; or
      3.   Directs another to a place knowing such direction is for the purpose
of prostitution. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of soliciting for a prostitute shall be
fined not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or
the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-
13-1995)
6-8-39: PATRONIZING A PROSTITUTE:
   (A)   Defined: Any person who performs any of the following acts with a
person not his or her spouse commits the offense of patronizing a prostitute:
      1.   Engages in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct
with a prostitute; or
      2.   Enters or remains in a place of prostitution with intent to engage
in an act of sexual intercourse or deviate sexual conduct. (Ord. 571, 5-13-
1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of patronizing a prostitute shall be fined
not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-
1995)
6-8-40: AGGRAVATED ASSAULT:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits an aggravated assault, when, in committing
an assault, he or she:
      1.   Uses a deadly weapon; or
      2.   Is hooded, robed or masked, in such manner as to conceal his or her
identity; or
      3.   Knows the individual assaulted to be a teacher or other person
employed in any school and such teacher or other employee is upon the grounds
of a school or grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of a building used
for school purposes; or
      4.   Knows the individual assaulted to be a supervisor, director,
instructor or other person employed in any park district and such supervisor,
director, instructor or other employee is upon the grounds of the park or
grounds adjacent thereto, or is in any part of a building used for park
purposes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of aggravated assault shall be fined not
to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-41: RECKLESS CONDUCT:
   (A)   Defined: A person who causes bodily harm to or endangers the bodily
safety of an individual by any means, commits reckless conduct if he or she
performs recklessly the acts which cause harm or endanger safety, whether they
otherwise are lawful or unlawful. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of reckless conduct shall be fined not to
exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-42: INTIMIDATION:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits intimidation when, with intent to cause
another to perform or to omit the performance of any act, he or she
communicates to another a threat to perform without lawful authority any of the
following acts:
      1.   Inflict physical harm on the person threatened or any other person
or on property; or
      2.   Subject any person to physical confinement or restraint; or
      3.   Commit any criminal offense; or
      4.   Accuse any person of an offense; or
      5.   Expose any person to hatred, contempt or ridicule; or
      6.   Take action as a public official against anyone or anything, or
withhold official action, or cause such action or withholding; or
      7.   Bring about or continue a strike, boycott or other collective
action. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of intimidation shall be fined not to
exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-43: THEFT:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits theft when he or she knowingly:
      1.   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner;
or
      2.   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner; or
      3.   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner; or
      4.   Obtains control over stolen property knowing the property to have
been stolen by another, and:
         (a)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit
of the property; or
         (b)   Knowingly uses, conceals, or abandons the property in such
manner as to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
         (c)   Uses, conceals, or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person first convicted of theft of property not from the
person and not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) in value shall be
fined not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or
the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-
13-1995)
6-8-44: THEFT OF LOST OR MISLAID PROPERTY:
   (A)   Defined: A person who obtains control over lost or mislaid property
commits theft when he or she:
      1.   Knows or learns the identity of the owner or knows, or is aware of,
or learns of a reasonable method of identifying the owner, and
      2.   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of theft of lost or mislaid property shall
be fined not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or
the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-
13-1995)
6-8-45: THEFT OF LABOR OR SERVICES OR USE OF PROPERTY:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits theft when he or she obtains the temporary
use of property, labor or services of another which are available only for
hire, by means of threat or deception or knowing that such is without the
consent of the person providing the property, labor or services. (Ord. 571, 5-
13-1964)
   (B)   Penalty: A person convicted of theft of labor or services or use of
property shall be fined not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964;
amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-46: DECEPTIVE PRACTICES:
   (A)   Defined: A person commits a deceptive practice when:
      1.   He or she causes another, by deception or threat to execute a
document disposing of property or a document by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred; or
      2.   Being an officer, manager or other person participating in the
direction of a financial institution, he or she knowingly receives or permits
the receipt of a deposit or other investment, knowing that the institution is
insolvent; or
      3.   He or she knowingly makes or directs another to make a false or
deceptive statement addressed to the public for the purpose of promoting the
sale of property or services; or
      4.   With intent to obtain control over property or to pay for property,
labor or services of another, he or she issues or delivers a check or other
order upon a real or fictitious depository for the payment of money, knowing
that it will not be paid by the depository. Failure to have sufficient funds or
credit with the depository when the check or other order is issued or delivered
is prima facie evidence that the offender knows that it will not be paid by the
depository.
   (B)   Financial Institution Defined: A "financial institute" means a bank,
insurance company, credit union, savings and loan association, investment trust
or other depository of money or medium of savings or collective investment.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
   (C)   Penalty: A person convicted of deceptive practices shall be fined not
to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-47: DAMAGE TO PROPERTY:
Whoever commits any of the following acts shall be fined not to exceed the
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes: (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
   (A)   Knowingly damages any property of another without his or her consent;
or
   (B)   Recklessly by means of fire or explosives damages property of another;
or
   (C)   Knowingly starts a fire on the land of another without his or her
consent; or
   (D)   Knowingly injures a domestic animal of another without his or her
consent; or
   (E)   Knowingly deposits on the land or in the building of another, without
his or her consent, any stink bomb or any offensive smelling compound and
thereby intends to interfere with the use by another of the land or building.
(Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-48: TRESPASS TO VEHICLES:
Whoever knowingly and without authority enters any vehicle, aircraft or
watercraft or any part thereof of another without his or her consent shall be
fined not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or
the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-
13-1995)
6-8-49: TRESPASS TO LAND:
   (A)   Whoever enters upon the land or any part thereof of another, after
receiving, immediately prior to such entry, notice from the owner or occupant
that such entry is forbidden, or remains upon the land of another after
receiving notice from the owner or occupant to depart, shall be fined not to
exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
   (B)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within the
meaning of subsection (A) of this section if he or she has been notified
personally, either orally or in writing, or if a printed or written notice
forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at the main
entrance to such land or the forbidden part thereof. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-50: MOB ACTION:
   (A)   Mob action consists of any of the following:
      1.   The use of force or violence disturbing the public peace by two (2)
or more persons acting together and without authority of law; or
      2.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons to do an unlawful act; or
      3.   The assembly of two (2) or more persons, without authority of law
for the purpose of doing violence to the person or property of anyone supposed
to have been guilty of a violation of the law, or for the purpose of exercising
correctional powers or regulative powers over any person by violence. (Ord.
571, 5-13-1964)
   (B)   Any person engaged in mob action shall be fined not to exceed the
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes.
   (C)   Any participant in a mob action who does not withdraw on being
commanded to do so by any peace officer shall be fined not to exceed the
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-51: PROWLERS:
Whoever at nighttime maliciously loiters or maliciously prowls around a
dwelling place or any other place used wholly or in part for living or dwelling
purposes, belonging to or occupied by another, is guilty of violating this
section and upon conviction thereof shall be sentenced to pay a fine not
exceeding the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum
allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-52: AVOIDING ARREST:
Any operator of a motor vehicle who the police officer has reasonable grounds
to believe has violated a state law or municipal ordinance who has received a
visual or audible signal such as a red light or a siren from such police
officer, directing the said operator to bring his vehicle to a stop and who
wilfully increases his speed or extinguishes his lights in an attempt to elude
the police officer, or who does elude such police officer, is guilty of
violation of this section and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a
fine not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-
1995)
6-8-53: INVALIDITY OF ANY SECTION OR PROVISION; SEPARABILITY:
It is the intention of the village board that this chapter, and every provision
thereof, shall be considered separable; and the invalidity of any section,
clause, provision, or part or portion of any section, clause or provision of
this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this
chapter. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964)
6-8-54: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, where no other
penalty is specifically provided, shall be fined not more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes
for each offense. (Ord. 571, 5-13-1964; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-55: RAILROAD BLOCKAGE OF INTERSECTIONS; VIOLATION:
It shall be unlawful for any railroad corporation or any officer, employee or
agent thereof to continuously cause the obstruction of any public highway or
street within the corporate boundaries of the village, by the blocking of
railroad tracks crossing said streets for a period of time in excess of ten
(10) minutes. (Ord. 698, 3-25-1970)
Violation of this section shall subject the offending railroad corporation or
any officer, employee or agent thereof to a fine of not less than one hundred
dollars ($100.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 698, 3-25-1970; amd.
Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-56: LITTERING; PUBLIC PLACE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or drop within the public
streets, parkways or sidewalks any trash, garbage, glass, paper, wrappers or
other offensive matter, and any person so doing shall be fined not less than
ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. This section does not apply
to placement of garbage in proper containers for regular pick up by appropriate
collectors. (Ord. 787, 10-18-1973; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-57: LITTERING; PRIVATE PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or drop within private
property, any trash, garbage, glass, paper, wrappers or other offensive matter,
without the permission of the owner of said private property, and any person so
doing shall be fined not less than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes. (Ord. 787, 10-18-1973; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-58: LOITERING:
   (A)   Near Schools: No person shall loiter, picket or demonstrate on a
public way or on private property within six hundred feet (600') of any
secondary or primary school while school is in session or one-half (1/2) hour
before school is in session or one-half (1/2) hour after school sessions have
been concluded.
   (B)   Public Ways: No person shall loiter upon any street, sidewalk, parking
lot, alley or public place where such loitering annoys or disturbs other
persons.
   (C)   Public Places: It shall be unlawful for any person to stand in the
lobby or entry of a restaurant, drive-in or public place or on the sidewalk or
parking lot adjacent thereto after a request to move on by the owner, operator
or manager of said public place or by any police officer. (Ord. 998, 5-27-1981)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person convicted of the above shall be fined not less
than ten dollars ($10.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-
1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes. (Ord. 998, 5-27-1981;
amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-59: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR:
   (A)   Unlawful To Drink; Where: It shall be unlawful for any person to drink
any "alcoholic liquor" as defined by law on any highway, public way or public
place or in or about any motor vehicle upon a highway, public way or public
place in the village.
   (B)   Unlawful To Transport: It shall be unlawful for any person to
transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor in the passenger area of
a motor vehicle upon any highway, public way or public place in the village
except in the original package and with the seal unbroken.
   (C)   Definition: A "public place" shall be defined as a place to which the
general public has a right to resort; not necessarily a place devoted solely to
the uses of the public, but a place which is in point of fact public rather
than private, a place visited by many persons and usually accessible to the
neighboring public. Any place so situated that what passes there can be seen by
any considerable number of persons, if they happen to look. Also, a place in
which the public has an interest as affecting the safety, health, morals and
welfare of the community. A place exposed to the public, and where the public
gather together or pass to and fro, including, but not limited to, parking lots
of shopping centers, restaurants, taverns, food stores, railroad stations and
business establishments.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section shall be
fined not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state
statutes. (Ord. 923, 4-26-1978; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
6-8-60: TAMPERING WITH MOTOR VEHICLES:
   (A)   Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful for any individual:
      1.   To damage a vehicle or to damage or remove any part of a vehicle,
without authority to do so; or
      2.   To tamper with a vehicle or go into it, on it, or work or attempt to
work any of its parts, or set or attempt to set it in motion, without authority
to do so.
   (B)   Penalty: Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00), and shall not be subject to incarceration. (Ord. 1695, 6-24-
2009)
6-8-61: GRAFFITI:
   (A)   Prohibited Acts:
      1.   Defacement: It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to
any natural or manmade surface on any property owned or controlled by the
village of Midlothian or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on
any other property.
      2.   Possession Of Graffiti Implement: It shall be unlawful for any
person to possess a graffiti implement while in any public building or facility
or while upon the grounds of any public or private property with the intent to
use such materials for the purpose of defacement.
      3.   Unlawful Graffiti: It shall be unlawful for the owner and/or
occupant of fixed real or personal property located within public view to place
or to give permission to place graffiti on such real or personal property if
the graffiti violates any village ordinance or incites or is intended to incite
violence by referring to gang or criminal activity, depicts or expresses
obscenity by referring to sexual activity or contains defamatory material about
a public or private person.
   (B)   Definitions:
   GRAFFITI: Any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other
defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted
or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private
property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not
authorized by the owner or occupant of the property or, despite advance
authorization, is otherwise deemed to be unlawful by the village of Midlothian.
   GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT: An aerosol paint container, a broad tipped marker, gum
label, paint stick or graffiti stick, etching equipment or tools, brush or any
other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any natural or
manmade surface.
   (C)   Removal:
      1.   The village of Midlothian declares "graffiti", as defined above, as
a nuisance which is subject to abatement.
      2.   Upon notification from the village, the owner of property upon which
graffiti has been placed in violation of subsection (A) of this section shall
remove said graffiti within ten (10) business days from the date of receipt of
said notice.
      3.   Failure to remove the graffiti within the specified time shall
subject the owner to the nuisance abatement procedures as prescribed by this
code.
   (D)   Penalties:
      1.   Upon a conviction for violating subsection (A)1 of this section,
there shall be imposed a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or the maximum allowed
by state statute. For a second conviction of subsection (A)1 of this section,
the minimum fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). For a third or
subsequent conviction for violating subsection (A)1 of this section, the
minimum fine shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). In addition to any other
penalties provided for herein, the offender may also be ordered to pay
restitution to the property owner for the cost of restoring the property to the
condition that it was in before the graffiti was applied.
      2.   Upon a conviction for violating subsection (A)2 of this section,
there shall be imposed a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or the maximum allowed by state
statute.
      3.   Upon a conviction for violating subsection (A)3 of this section,
there shall be imposed a fine of not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) and not
more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) or the maximum allowed by state
statute.
   (E)   Parental Responsibility:
      1.   The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who resides
with such parent or legal guardian shall be liable to the fullest extent
permitted by law for actual damages for said minor's acts of defacement
occurring within the village. (Ord. 1837, 6-12-2013)
CHAPTER 9
ARRESTS WITHOUT WARRANTS
SECTION:
6-9-1: Authorized Arrests
6-9-2: Settlement Of Claim
6-9-3: Failure To Make Settlement
6-9-4: Prima Facie Proof
6-9-5: Claim Schedule
6-9-1: AUTHORIZED ARRESTS:
Whenever a police officer is authorized to arrest a person without a warrant
because of a violation of a regulation in respect of any of the following
subjects:
   (A)   Prohibiting the parking of a vehicle in a designated area,
   (B)   Restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked,
   (C)   Requiring the purchase and display of a vehicle sticker,
   (D)   Regulating parking in metered zones,
   (E)   Regulating and licensing dogs,
   (F)   Regulating and licensing businesses,
   (G)   Such other violations as shall from time to time be designated by
resolution by the board of trustees,
said police officer may, in lieu of the filing of a complaint in court, in the
first instance issue to such alleged violator a citation:
   (A)   Advising said person that he has violated a specified regulation,
   (B)   Requesting him to make payment in an amount applicable to said alleged
violation as set forth in section 6-9-5 of this chapter as settlement of said
violation claim, and
   (C)   Informing him that upon failure to so settle, a complaint will be
filed in the circuit court of Cook County, charging him with such violation.
(Ord. 620, 12-22-1965)
6-9-2: SETTLEMENT OF CLAIM:
Pursuant to said citation, the person so accused of said violation may settle
and compromise the violation claim in respect of such regulation violation by
paying to the chapter, within a period to be specified in said citation, not
more than seven (7) days of the time said alleged offense was committed.
Such payment shall be made in accordance with the instructions contained in the
aforesaid citation, at the police department, who shall issue a receipt for the
money so received and promptly remit said amount to the village collector to be
credited to the proper municipal fund. (Ord. 620, 12-22-1965)
6-9-3: FAILURE TO MAKE SETTLEMENT:
In the event that the person to whom said citation is issued fails to settle
and pay said violation claim within the prescribed time, or within a period of
time specified in a final notice (if one is served upon him) then the peace
officer is authorized to cause a notice to appear to be served upon said
alleged violator and is authorized to file a complaint and to cause the same to
be prosecuted in the circuit court of Cook County. (Ord. 620, 12-22-1965)
6-9-4: PRIMA FACIE PROOF:
The fact that an automobile or motor vehicle which is illegally operated or
parked is registered with the secretary of state in the name of said alleged
violator; or, in the alternative, in the event that a vehicle sticker issued by
a municipality has been issued in the name of and to said alleged violator,
shall be considered prima facie proof that said alleged violator was in control
of or was the operator of the automobile or motor vehicle at the time of such
alleged violation. (Ord. 620, 12-22-1965)
6-9-5: CLAIM SCHEDULE:
The violation claim described in said citation so to be issued pursuant to the
terms of this chapter, may be settled, compromised and paid in the respective
amounts set forth in the following schedule.
In the event that said payment is made prior to the mailing by the municipality
or by the peace officer of a final notice, the following amounts shall be
accepted as settlement:
   (A)   Five dollars ($5.00) for any violation arising out of regulations
heretofore specified in subsections 6-9-1(A) to (F) of this chapter, inclusive,
and such amount as shall be specified by the resolution designating violations
under subsection 6-9-1(G) of this chapter and in default of any such
specification, then five dollars ($5.00).
   In the event that payment has not been paid prior to the mailing of such
final notice, and in fact, final notice has been mailed, the following amounts
shall be accepted as settlement:
   (B)   Ten dollars ($10.00) for any violation arising out of any ordinance
heretofore specified in subsections 6-9-1(A) to (F) of this chapter, inclusive,
and such amount as shall be specified by the resolution designating violations
under subsection 6-9-1(G) of this chapter and in default of such specification,
then ten dollars ($10.00). (Ord. 620, 12-22-1965)
CHAPTER 10
INTOXICANTS; DRUGS
SECTION:
6-10-1: Unlawful To Supply
6-10-2: Unlawful To Use
6-10-3: Possession Of Cannabis
6-10-4: Drug Paraphernalia
6-10-1: UNLAWFUL TO SUPPLY:
No person shall knowingly sell or offer for sale, deliver or give away to any
person under the age of seventeen (17) years, unless upon written order of
parent or guardian, any substances containing any of the following volatile
solvents, where the seller, offerer or deliverer knows or has reason to believe
that the substance will be used for the purpose of inducing symptoms of
intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior, or in any
manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental processes:
toluol, hexane, trichlorethylene, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone, methyl
cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance which will induce
symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis, irrational behavior,
or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio, visual or mental
processes. For the purposes of this section it shall be presumed that any
delivery of a product containing such a substance in quantity of over one shall
be presumed to be a delivery in violation of this section. (Ord. 615, 11-10-
1965)
6-10-2: UNLAWFUL TO USE:
No person shall inhale, breathe, or drink any compound liquid or chemical
containing toluol, hexane, trichlorethylene, acetone, toluene, ethyl acetate,
methyl ethyl ketone, trichloroethane, isopropanol, methyl isobutyl ketone,
methyl cellosolve acetate, cyclohexanone, or any other substance for the
purpose of inducing symptoms of intoxication, elation, dizziness, paralysis,
irrational behavior, or in any manner change, distort or disturb the audio,
visual or mental processes. For the purpose of this section, any such condition
so induced shall be deemed to be an intoxicated condition; provided, however,
that the provisions of this section shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any person who inhales, breathes, or drinks such material or substance
pursuant to the direction or prescription of any doctor, physician, dentist, or
pediatrist authorized to so direct or prescribe.
   (B)   Any person who inhales, breathes, drinks or otherwise in any manner
used any narcotic, dangerous drug, or other material or substance or
combination thereof, which material or substance or combination thereof, is
defined by any law of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 615, 11-10-1965)
6-10-3: POSSESSION OF CANNABIS:
   (A)   Definition: "Cannabis" includes marijuana, hashish and other
substances which are identified as including any parts of the plant Cannabis
sativa, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof, the resin extracted from any
part of such plant, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or
preparation of such plants, its seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol
(THC) and all other cannibal derivatives, including its naturally occurring or
synthetically produced ingredients, whether produced directly or indirectly by
extraction, or independently by means of chemical synthesis or by a combination
of extraction and chemical synthesis; but shall not include the mature stalks
of such plants, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the
seeds of such plants, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted
therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is
incapable of germination.
   (B)   Possession: It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to possess
any quantity of any substance containing cannabis, except that the effect of
this section shall be limited to persons knowingly possessing less than ten
grams (10 g) of substance containing cannabis.
   (C)   Exemptions: The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Any persons who have been authorized by the department of mental
health and developmental disabilities, with the approval of the department of
law enforcement, to possess and deliver substances containing cannabis; or
      2.   Persons registered under the federal law to conduct research with
cannabis. (Ord. 1613, 4-27-2005)
      3.   Any persons using and/or possessing cannabis in conformity with the
compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act, 410 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 130/1 et seq. (Ord. 1859, 1-22-2014)
   (D)   Penalty: Any person violating the provision of this section shall be
fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense. (Ord. 1613, 4-27-2005)
6-10-4: DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 3 of the Illinois
cannabis control act, as if that definition were incorporated herein.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE: Shall have the meaning ascribed to it in section 102
of the Illinois controlled substances act, as if that definition were
incorporated herein.
   DELIVER OR DELIVERY: The actual, constructive or attempted transfer of
possession, with or without consideration, whether or not there is an agency
relationship.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in section 10 of the
Illinois methamphetamine control and community protection act, which are
intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing into the
human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation of the Illinois
cannabis control act, the Illinois controlled substances act, or the Illinois
methamphetamine control and community protection act. It includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      2.   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      3.   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
cannabis or controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, cocaine, heroin, hashish, or hashish oil into
the human body including, where applicable, the following items:
         (a)   Water pipes;
         (b)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (c)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (d)   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         (e)   Carburetor pipes;
         (f)   Electric pipes;
         (g)   Air driven pipes;
         (h)   Chillums;
         (i)   Bongs;
         (j)   Ice pipes or chillers;
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section.
   (B)   Sale Or Delivery; Penalty; Public Nuisance:
      1.   Any person who keeps for sale, offers for sale, sells, or delivers
for any commercial consideration any item of drug paraphernalia commits a
violation of this section for which a minimum fine of five hundred dollars
($500.00) for each such item shall be imposed.
      2.   Any store, place, or premises from which or in which any item of
drug paraphernalia is kept for sale, offered for sale, sold, or delivered for
any commercial consideration is declared to be a public nuisance.
   (C)   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia:
      1.   A person who knowingly possesses an item of drug paraphernalia with
the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing cannabis
or a controlled substance into the human body, or in preparing cannabis or a
controlled substance for that use, is guilty of a violation of this section for
which the minimum fine shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). This
subsection (C)1 does not apply to a person who is legally authorized to possess
hypodermic syringes or needles under the Illinois hypodermic syringes and
needles act.
      2.   In determining intent under subsection (C)1 of this section, the
trier of fact may take into consideration the proximity of the cannabis or
controlled substances to drug paraphernalia or the presence of cannabis or a
controlled substance on the drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   Exemptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   Items used in the preparation, compounding, packaging, labeling, or
other use of cannabis or a controlled substance as an incident to lawful
research, teaching, or chemical analysis and not for sale.
      2.   Items historically and customarily used in connection with the
planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing,
packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
or inhaling of tobacco or any other lawful substance.
Items exempt under this subsection include, but are not limited to, garden
hoes, rakes, sickles, baggies, tobacco pipes, and cigarette rolling papers.
      3.   Items listed in subsection (A) of this section which are used for
decorative purposes, when such items have been rendered completely inoperable
or incapable of being used for any illicit purpose prohibited by this section.
      4.   A person who is legally authorized to possess hypodermic syringes or
needles under the Illinois hypodermic syringes and needles act. (Ord. 1768, 10-
26-2011)
      5.   Any persons using and/or possessing drug paraphernalia in conformity
with the compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act, 410 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 130/1 et seq. (Ord. 1859, 1-22-2014)
      6.   In determining whether or not a particular item is exempt under this
section, the trier of fact should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
         (a)   The general, usual, customary, and historical use to which the
item involved has been put;
         (b)   Expert evidence concerning the ordinary or customary use of the
item and the effect of any peculiarity in the design or engineering of the
device upon its functioning;
         (c)   Any written instructions accompanying the delivery of the item
concerning the purposes or uses to which the item can or may be put;
         (d)   Any oral instructions provided by the seller of the item at the
time and place of sale or commercial delivery;
         (e)   Any national or local advertising concerning the design, purpose
or use of the item involved, and the entire context in which such advertising
occurs;
         (f)   The manner, place and circumstances in which the item was
displayed for sale, as well as any item or items displayed for sale or
otherwise exhibited upon the premises where the sale was made;
         (g)   Whether the owner or anyone in control of the object is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
         (h)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community. (Ord. 1768, 10-26-2011; amd. Ord. 1859, 1-22-2014)
CHAPTER 11
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF MUNICIPAL CODE VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
6-11-1: Adoption
6-11-2: Definitions
6-11-3: Code Hearing Department
6-11-4: Hearing Procedures Not Exclusive
6-11-5: Instituting Hearing Code Proceedings
6-11-6: Subpoenas; Defaults
6-11-7: Continuances; Representation At Code Hearings
6-11-8: Hearing; Evidence
6-11-9: Qualifications Of Hearing Officers
6-11-10: Findings, Decision And Order
6-11-11: Review Under Administrative Review Law
6-11-12: Judgment On Findings, Decision, And Order
6-11-13: Impact On Existing Administrative Adjudication Systems
6-11-14: Severability
6-11-15: Effective Date
6-11-16: Repealer
6-11-17: Amnesty Program
6-11-1: ADOPTION:
The village of Midlothian hereby adopts 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2.2-
1 et seq., in its current form and as it may be amended from time to time for
adjudication of municipal code violations to the extent permitted by the
Illinois constitution. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context requires otherwise:
CODE: Any municipal ordinance except for: a) building code violations that must
be adjudicated pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 et seq., in
its current form and as may be amended from time to time, and b) any offense
under the Illinois vehicle code or a similar offense that is a traffic
regulation governing the movement of vehicles and except for any reportable
offense under section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code.
HEARING OFFICER: A municipal employee or an officer or agent of the
municipality, other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
   (A)   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or
not a code violation exists;
   (B)   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties
relevant to the existence of a code violation;
   (C)   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   (D)   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether
a code violation exists. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-3: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT:
There is hereby established a code hearing department in the village of
Midlothian municipal government. The function is to expedite the prosecution
and correction of code violations in the manner set forth in this chapter.
The code hearing department may adjudicate any violation of a municipal
ordinance except for: a) building code violations that must be adjudicated
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 et seq., in its current
form and as amended from time to time, and b) any offense under the Illinois
vehicle code or similar offense that is a traffic regulation governing the
movement of vehicles and except for any reportable offense under section 6-204
of the Illinois vehicle code. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-4: HEARING PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE:
This chapter does not preclude the municipality from using other methods to
enforce the provisions of this code. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-5: INSTITUTING HEARING CODE PROCEEDINGS:
When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code violation
finds a code violation to exist, he or she shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates: a) the name and
address of the defendant, b) the type and nature of the violation, c) the date
and time the violation was observed, and d) the names of the witnesses of the
violation.
The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing department
where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report and a
hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose on
the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) days after the violation is reported.
One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files of the
code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one copy of
the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the
municipality in the case so that he or she may prepare evidence of the code
violation for presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy
of the report form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along
with a summons commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. (Ord. 1604,
8-25-2004)
6-11-6: SUBPOENAS; DEFAULTS:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. If on the date set for the hearing the defendant or
his or her attorney fails to appear, the hearing officer may find the defendant
in default and shall proceed with the hearing and accept evidence relevant to
the existence of a code violation. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-7: CONTINUANCES; REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds
for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. The case for the municipality
may be presented by an attorney designated by the municipality or by any other
municipal employee, except that the case for the municipality shall not be
presented by any employee of the code hearing department. The case for the
defendant may be presented by the defendant, his or her attorney, or any other
agent or representative of the defendant. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-8: HEARING; EVIDENCE:
At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply to hearings authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-9: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS:
Prior to conducting proceedings under this chapter, hearing officers shall
successfully complete a formal training program that includes the following:
   (A)   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
   (B)   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they will
administer;
   (C)   Observation of administrative hearings; and
   (D)   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to practice law
in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-10: FINDINGS, DECISION AND ORDER:
At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision
and order shall include: a) the hearing officer's findings of fact; b) a
decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the findings of
fact; and c) an order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a
violation is not proved. A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter
shall not exceed the amount provided for in 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-
2-1 in its current form and as amended from time to time. A copy of the
findings, decision, and order shall be served on the defendant within five (5)
days after it is issued. Service shall be in the same manner that the report
form and summons are served under section 6-11-5 of this chapter. Payment of
any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in the same
manner as set forth in the code, unless the corporate authorities adopting this
chapter provide otherwise. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-11: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the county in which the municipality is located.
The provisions of the administrative review law and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto, shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial review of the
findings, decisions, and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord.
1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-12: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
   (A)   A fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review
law shall be a debt due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law.
   (B)   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the municipality may command a proceeding in the circuit court of
the county in which the municipality is located for purpose of obtaining a
judgment of findings, decision, and order. Nothing in this section shall
prevent a municipality from consolidating multiple findings, decisions, and
orders against a person in such a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action,
the municipality shall file a certified copy of the findings, decision, and
order, which shall be accompanied by a certification that recites facts
sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order was issued in
accordance with this chapter and the applicable municipal ordinances. Service
of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided that
the total amount of fines, other sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings,
decision, and order does not exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings, decision and order
was entered in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the
applicable municipal ordinance and that the defendant had an opportunity for a
hearing under this chapter and for judicial review as provided in this chapter:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the municipality and
against the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision, and
order, plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money;
      2.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the municipality to enforce the order of the hearing officer to
correct a code violation. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-13: IMPACT ON EXISTING ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION SYSTEMS:
This chapter shall not affect the validity of systems of administrative
adjudication that were authorized by state law, including the village of
Midlothian ordinances, and in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-14: SEVERABILITY:
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that one or more sections or
subsections of this chapter is or are invalid, the remaining sections or
subsections hereof shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-
2004)
6-11-15: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by law. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-
2004)
6-11-16: REPEALER:
Any and all ordinances, sections or subsections of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 1604, 8-25-2004)
6-11-17: AMNESTY PROGRAM:
From time to time, the village board may implement an amnesty program for fines
and penalties assessed under this chapter. In order to do so, the village board
shall adopt an ordinance or resolution setting forth the time period within
which the amnesty program will be conducted, the percentage or amounts of fines
and penalties that will be required to be paid and other necessary terms as
determined by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1685, 4-22-2009)
TITLE 7
FIRE REGULATIONS
Fire Limits   1
Fire Prevention Code   2
Fireworks   3
CHAPTER 1
FIRE LIMITS
SECTION:
7-1-1: Fire Limits Designated
7-1-1: FIRE LIMITS DESIGNATED 1 :
No frame building shall be built or constructed within the fire limits of the
village as hereinafter defined, and no frame building within the fire limits
shall be altered, enlarged, added to or repaired further than to make good
ordinary deterioration, unless such enlargement or addition shall be built of
incombustible material. There shall be no frame addition to a brick building
within the fire limits. All buildings within the fire limits must be of masonry
construction and have face brick on all street sides. The fire limits shall be
as follows:
   (A)   That portion of the village now zoned or to be zoned in the future for
C (two-family dwellings), D (apartments), E and F (business), G (industrial),
and all property with existing schools, or all property which is for a future
school site, or which, in the future, ever becomes a school site.
   (B)   All property within the village limits that is one hundred fifty feet
(150') north and south of the centerline of 147th Street and one hundred fifty
feet (150') east and west of the centerline of Cicero and Pulaski Avenues and
one hundred fifty feet (150') west of the centerline of Kedzie Avenue. (Ord.
1162, 9-14-1988)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section 4-14-4 of this code.
CHAPTER 2
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
SECTION:
7-2-1: Adoption Of Fire Prevention Code
7-2-2: Bureau Of Fire Prevention Created
7-2-3: Membership Of Bureau Of Fire Prevention
7-2-4: Definitions
7-2-5: Penalty
7-2-1: ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE:
The village, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions
hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, hereby adopts and
incorporates the 2009 edition of the National Fire Protection Association's
life safety code ("life safety code") and any subsequent amendments to the life
safety code as recommended by the National Fire Protection Association as the
Midlothian fire prevention code. For thirty (30) days previous to passage of
this chapter three (3) copies of said code with amendments thereto have been
filed with and are currently on file with the village clerk of the village. The
life safety code and amendments thereto are hereby adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein and from the date on which this amendment
shall take effect the code and any subsequent amendments thereof shall be in
full force and effect within the limits of the village. (Ord. 1864, 3-12-2014;
amd. Ord. 1942, 9-28-2016)
7-2-2: BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION CREATED:
The fire prevention code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in
the fire department, which is hereby established and which shall be operated
under the supervision of the chief of the fire department. (Ord. 497, 6-14-
1961)
7-2-3: MEMBERSHIP OF BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION:
The chief of the fire department shall designate such members of the fire
department as necessary to the bureau of fire prevention and may detail such
members of the fire department as inspectors as shall from time to time be
necessary. (Ord. 494, 5-24-1961)
7-2-4: DEFINITIONS:
Wherever the word "municipality" is used in the fire prevention code, it shall
be held to mean the village of Midlothian. (Ord. 494, 5-24-1961)
7-2-5: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code
hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith or with any order made thereunder,
or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or
plans submitted and approved thereunder, shall severally for each and every
violation or noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable
as provided for by the general penalty provisions of this code. Every day of
noncompliance or violation shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1154, 5-
25-1988)
CHAPTER 3
FIREWORKS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Possession Or Sale Of Fireworks Prohibited
7-3-2: Discharge Of Fireworks; Permit Required
7-3-3: Fireworks Defined
7-3-1: POSSESSION OR SALE OF FIREWORKS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to possess, display
for sale, sell, advertise, store, explode or discharge any fireworks,
firecrackers, torpedoes, bombs, rockets, Roman candles or pyrotechnics or any
substances or devices which produce a visual and/or audible explosion,
combustion, deflagration or detonation which shall include blank cartridges or
toy cannons, in which explosives are used, within the corporate limits of the
village unless by permit as set out in section 7-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord.
1519, 11-14-2001)
7-3-2: DISCHARGE OF FIREWORKS; PERMIT REQUIRED:
No fireworks shall be discharged or set off within the village, except for
public display, and under a permit issued by the president and board of
trustees. (Ord. 1065, 6-13-1984)
7-3-3: FIREWORKS DEFINED:
The term "fireworks" shall mean and include any explosive composition or any
substance or combination of substances, or article prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by
explosion, combustion, deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank
cartridges, toy cannons in which explosives are used, the type of balloons
which require fire underneath to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky
rockets, Roman candles, bombs or other fireworks of like construction and any
fireworks containing any explosive compound; or any tablets or other device
containing any explosive substance, or containing combustible substances
producing visual effects. The term "fireworks" shall not include snake or
glowworm pellets; smoke devices; sparklers; trick noisemakers known as "party
poppers", "booby traps", "snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and
"auto burglar alarms"; toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in
which paper or plastic caps containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or
less of explosive compound are used, provided they are so constructed that the
hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for the explosion; and
toy pistol paper or plastic caps which contain less than twenty five hundredths
(0.25) grain of explosive mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted
at all times. (Ord. 1065, 6-13-1984)
TITLE 8
HEALTH AND SANITATION
Milk (Rep. by Ord. 798, 1-9-1974)   1
Garbage   2
Septic Tanks; Surface Drainage   3
Nuisances   4
Clean Indoor Air   5
CHAPTER 1
MILK
(Rep. by Ord. 798, 1-9-1974)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE
SECTION:
8-2-1: Definition
8-2-2: License Required And Limitations On Number
8-2-3: License Application
8-2-4: License Fees
8-2-5: Use Of Public Dump Restricted
8-2-6: Garbage Vehicles; Requirements
8-2-7: Receptacle Required
8-2-8: Specifications; Garbage Containers
8-2-9: Location Of Residential Garbage Containers And Temporary Construction
Dumpsters
8-2-10: Containers; Deposit Of Refuse
8-2-11: Burning Of Combustible Materials
8-2-12: Collection Charges
8-2-13: Garbage Bills
8-2-14: Collection Regulations
8-2-15: Branch Pick Up
8-2-16: Dumping In Lakes And The Like Prohibited
8-2-17: Violations
8-2-1: DEFINITION:
The term "private scavenger" shall mean any person engaged in the removal and
disposal of table refuse or animal and vegetable matter usually known as
garbage from restaurants, cafes, stores, business establishments and residences
or the removal and disposal of ashes and cinders. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED AND LIMITATIONS ON NUMBER:
   (A)   No person shall engage in the business of private scavenger without
first having obtained a license so to do.
   (B)   No more than nine (9) persons shall be issued licenses to engage in
the business of private scavenger within the corporate boundaries of the
village at any time.
   (C)   No garbage pick up by any scavenger service shall be made between
seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
An application for a private scavenger license shall be made in writing to the
clerk and shall contain the name and address of the applicant, the number of
vehicles intended to be used in the business, the type of vehicles and the
method of disposal and the place thereof as proposed by the applicant.
Applications for new licenses shall be approved by the committee on public
works and services of the village board. All private scavengers shall be
required to use equipment of a type acceptable to the superintendent of public
works and shall be required to replace old or unsuitable equipment. (Ord. 1817,
12-12-2012)
8-2-4: LICENSE FEES:
The annual license fee shall be one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), plus
seventy five dollars ($75.00) for each truck over one truck used in the
business. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-5: USE OF PUBLIC DUMP RESTRICTED:
Garbage shall under no circumstances be disposed of in any public dump or
public place within the village. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-6: GARBAGE VEHICLES; REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   Any person owning or controlling any vehicle in the village, used for
the collection and removal of refuse or garbage shall cause all such vehicles,
and all implements used in connection with the loading and unloading hereof,
when not in use, to be stored and kept in such place or places and in such
manner as not to create a nuisance; and shall cause all such vehicles and
implements to be thoroughly disinfected and put in an inoffensive condition
when so stored and not in use.
   (B)   Vehicles used for the collection of refuse or garbage must be of the
all metal and totally enclosed type.
   (C)   Such vehicles and implements shall be thoroughly disinfected at least
once each week, whether in use or not, unless the same shall not have been used
since the last disinfection thereof.
   (D)   No person owning or controlling any vehicle used for the collection
and removal of refuse or garbage in the village shall cause or permit any such
vehicle to be so loaded; to be in such defective condition; to be so out of
repair; to be of such faulty construction; or to be so improperly driven or
managed that any refuse or garbage (with which such vehicle is loaded) shall
drop or fall out on any public way or other place in the village. Such vehicle,
and any box, can or other receptacle carried therein or thereon, shall be so
constructed as to be strong and virtually air and water tight so as to prevent
any such refuse or garbage from emitting any odor and so as to prevent any part
of the contents or load thereof from falling, leaking or spilling therefrom. It
shall be the duty of every person in possession or control of any such vehicle
to replace at once on or in such vehicle any part of the contents thereof which
shall or may have fallen, dropped or spilled from such vehicle, or from any box
or receptacle conveyed thereon, upon any public way or other place whatever.
(Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-7: RECEPTACLE REQUIRED:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of every owner, agent, occupant or lessee of any
house, building, flat, apartment, business, school, library, church, lodge hall
or any other premises to maintain in good order and repair, a container for
garbage and to keep their property clean and free from any accumulation of
garbage, refuse or ashes at all times.
   (B)   No person shall burn refuse or garbage of any kind in the village,
except that controlled fires are permitted if they are specifically authorized
by the mayor and village board. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-8: SPECIFICATIONS; GARBAGE CONTAINERS:
   (A)   Residential Garbage Or Refuse Containers For Single-Family Or Two-
Family Dwellings: The garbage container shall be a commercially manufactured
ninety six (96) gallon toter for trash, which is watertight, has a close
fitting cover and is provided with handles. Residents are required to place all
trash (other than bulk items) in the ninety six (96) gallon toter.
   (B)   Recycling Containers: Commercially manufactured sixty five (65) gallon
toters for recycling of glass, aluminum and paper shall be used for such
recyclable materials. Such recycling toters will be picked up every week or
every other week as determined by the village board.
   (C)   Commercial And Apartment Garbage Or Refuse Containers:
      1.   All apartments, businesses, schools, libraries, churches, lodge
halls, institutional, commercial and industrial garbage and refuse shall be
stored in rust resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight metal containers with
tightfitting covers (covers must be used at all times) and adequate handles for
collection purposes. All containers must be designed for use with collection
vehicles.
      2.   All containers must be a minimum size of one and one-half (11/2)
cubic yards and must be contracted to be emptied a minimum of once per week or
more often if garbage overflows the containers. Apartment buildings shall be
required to maintain a one and one-half (11/2) cubic yard container for each
two (2) dwelling units.
      3.   No person other than a private scavenger licensed by the village
shall collect or remove garbage or refuse from any site in the village.
      4.   Storage of all containers shall be at the rear of the building in
such a manner as to be concealed from view from the street or public way of
such building. If it is impractical to store containers from public view, the
village will require a fenced in area so as to hide such containers from public
view. All areas surrounding the containers must be clean and free of garbage or
refuse at all times. The responsibility for this is entirely with the owner,
manager or agent.
   (D)   Use Of Containers Of Another: No person, business or corporation shall
deposit or cause to be deposited any garbage, refuse or any substance in a
garbage or refuse container or in a recycling toter or recycling container
referred to in subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this section, unless said items
belong to the person, business or corporation who owns or leases the toter/
container, or unless said person, business or corporation has written
permission of the owner or lessee of the toter/container.
   (E)   Exemptions: The requirements of this section shall not apply to:
      1.   Village owned refuse containers placed and maintained by the village
for use by the village or by the general public.
      2.   Dumpsters which have been issued a temporary permit for a limited
duration of use. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-9: LOCATION OF RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE CONTAINERS AND TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION
DUMPSTERS:
   (A)   For single- or two-family residential dwellings all refuse, recycling
and landscape toters, as well as all refuse, recycling and landscape containers
("garbage containers") shall be kept in the rear of the principal building on
the lot, except when it is necessary to place the same in the parkway for
purposes of garbage collection. On the day preceding the collection of refuse,
recycling or landscape materials, residents shall be permitted to place garbage
containers in the parkway no earlier than nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Any and all
garbage containers shall be removed from the parkway no later than nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. on the day immediately following the collection of refuse,
recycling or landscape materials. (Ord. 1869, 5-14-2014)
   (B)   Any drop-off/roll-off construction dumpster used on a temporary basis
for construction, roofing, concrete removal, remodeling, cleanup, landscaping
or other uses shall be placed on private property only. If such placement is
impossible or impractical, placement of the construction dumpster on the street
will be allowed by a special permit that must be obtained from the building
department. Permits will be granted only when it is determined by the building
department that the placement of the construction dumpster on private property
is impossible or impractical. The term of the special permit to place a
construction dumpster on the street shall be one week. Extensions of the
permitted term may be made by the building department. Any construction
dumpster that has been positioned on the street must be protected by at least
two (2) barricades which have been equipped with a flashing warning light and
placed in a manner that is conspicuous to traffic approaching from either
direction. The barricades shall be made available at the department of public
works for a nominal fee and a refundable deposit that is equal to the cost of
replacement. It is the obligation of the owner of the property, any contractor
using the construction dumpster and the owner of the construction dumpster to
make sure this section is complied with. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-10: CONTAINERS; DEPOSIT OF REFUSE:
No person shall deposit garbage or refuse of any kind in any street, alley,
parkway or public way, except as provided in this chapter. Refuse which is too
large to be placed in a toter or container may be placed alongside the toter or
container, but in such a way that it cannot be blown about or scattered by the
wind. The size and type of refuse being discarded is governed by a disposal
service contract. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-11: BURNING OF COMBUSTIBLE MATERIALS:
It shall be illegal to burn any garbage, waste or refuse in any fashion not
permitted by section 6-8-15 of this code. (Ord. 1872, 6-11-2014)
8-2-12: COLLECTION CHARGES:
The mayor and the village board shall establish, by resolution or ordinance,
the charges for single-family, residential garbage collection, landscape (yard)
waste and recyclable materials collection and disposal service within the
village. Such collection and disposal service shall not be furnished to
buildings containing multiple dwellings over two (2) units, and any commercial,
industrial or business establishments and the owners of such buildings shall
make private arrangements for the collection and disposal of garbage, refuse
and waste in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-13: GARBAGE BILLS:
The charges shall be monthly, but at the discretion of the village board shall
be billed quarterly and may be included as a separate item on each water bill
rendered by the village. In the case of such billing the holder of each water
account shall be billed for the number of family units being serviced through
that account. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-14: COLLECTION REGULATIONS:
The following rules relating to garbage collections are hereby adopted:
   (A)   Proper Disposal: Garbage shall be drained of liquid and securely
wrapped before being placed in containers. It is not necessary to separate.
   (B)   Excess Waste: Waste over and above the quantities noted herein will be
picked up on request at a reasonable additional charge.
   (C)   Holidays: When the pick up day falls on a holiday, the waste will be
picked up on the next scheduled working day.
   (D)   Electronic Waste: Electronic waste will not be picked up and shall not
be placed for pick up in any refuse, landscape, or recycling toter or any
refuse, landscape, or recycling container or otherwise placed for pick up.
   (E)   Recyclables; Illegal Pick Up:
      1.   Recyclable materials (glass, aluminum and paper) shall be placed in
commercially manufactured sixty five (65) gallon toters for pick up every week
or every other week as determined by the village board.
      2.   It shall be illegal for anyone but the designated licensed scavenger
to pick up any recyclable items which are placed at the curb in appropriate
recycling containers. Anyone seen illegally picking up said recyclables or
having said recyclables in their possession shall be issued a citation unless
said person can prove that the recyclables are theirs.
   (F)   Landscape Waste: Approved containers for landscape waste may include
either a thirty three (33) gallon or equivalent reusable container (with an
affixed adhesive label which reads "Yard Waste") or kraft type paper bags.
Toters may also be leased from the village's contracted waste/landscape hauler.
(Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-15: BRANCH PICK UP:
   (A)   No branches may be placed on the parkway nor will any branches be
picked up from the parkway except when authorized by the village board because
of acts of nature. Special pick ups may be paid for by the village residents by
calling the village scavenger authorized for residential pick up.
   (B)   Any person who places branches on the village parkway other than at
the times designated by the village board or without complying with the
regulations for a special pick up shall be in violation of this section. Any
person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less than twenty
five dollars ($25.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each
day the branches are on the parkway shall be considered a separate violation of
this section. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-16: DUMPING IN LAKES AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to deposit or throw any refuse or garbage or other
material of any kind in any lake, creek, stream, pond, or other body of water
within the village. (Ord. 1817, 12-12-2012)
8-2-17: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   Upon discovery of a violation of this chapter regarding excess garbage
or refuse, the village, by any duly authorized agent, shall serve or cause to
be served a notice of violation upon the owner or occupant of any premises on
which garbage is overflowing or the surrounding areas are not clean and free of
garbage, and shall demand the abatement of the nuisance within twenty four (24)
hours.
   (B)   In the event the nuisance referred to in subsection (A) of this
section is not abated within twenty four (24) hours, the village may proceed to
abate the nuisance by removal of the garbage. The owner or occupant shall be
responsible for all costs of such abatement including all legal and
administrative fees. The minimum charge for such abatement shall be two hundred
dollars ($200.00).
   (C)   Upon discovery of any other violations of this chapter, the village,
by any duly authorized agent, shall serve or cause to be served a notice of
violation upon the violator.
   (D)   Any person convicted of violating this section shall be fined not less
than fifty dollars ($50.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00). Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
violation of this section.
   (E)   Neither the village or any of its agents shall be liable for any
damage to property occasioned in the enforcement of this section. (Ord. 1817,
12-12-2012)
CHAPTER 3
SEPTIC TANKS; SURFACE DRAINAGE
SECTION:
8-3-1: Use Of Septic Tanks Prohibited
8-3-2: Obstructing Surface Drainage
8-3-1: USE OF SEPTIC TANKS PROHIBITED:
The use of septic tanks or any similar method of sewerage treatment in the
village is hereby prohibited; provided, that the provisions of this chapter
shall have no application in any portion of the village where connections
cannot be made to the sewer system of the village. (Ord. 192, 8-27-1940)
8-3-2: OBSTRUCTING SURFACE DRAINAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect any building, structure, or
retaining wall, or to deposit any filling of earth, ashes, rubbish, rubble,
concrete, masonry or any kind of dump in a natural or artificially created
drainage course so as to interfere with, block, divert or hinder the drainage
of surface waters. (Ord. 508, 10-11-1961)
CHAPTER 4
NUISANCES
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definition; Prohibition
8-4-2: Nonsummary Abatement; Notice
8-4-3: Nonsummary Abatement
8-4-4: Summary Abatement
8-4-5: Cost Of Abatement; Lien
8-4-6: Penalty
8-4-7: Reward
8-4-1: DEFINITION; PROHIBITION:
The following acts, conduct and conditions are hereby declared and defined to
be "nuisances", and when committed, performed or permitted to exist by any
individual, firm, association or corporation within the territorial limits of
the village are hereby declared to be unlawful and prohibited:
   (A)   Nuisance Defined: Any act or offense which is a nuisance according to
the common law of the state of Illinois, or declared or defined to be a
nuisance by the ordinances of the village. In addition, the officials of the
municipality shall be authorized to abate any nuisance which, while not
specifically defined within this chapter, shall constitute the unreasonable,
unwarrantable or unlawful use by a person of property, real or personal, or
from his own improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct which works an
obstruction or injury to a right of another, or of the public, and produces
such material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt that the law will
presume an actionable nuisance. Nuisances may be abated which are public or
which are both public and private in nature.
   (B)   Dead Animals: To cause or suffer the carcass of any animal or any
offal, filth or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or to remain in
any place under his ownership or control to the prejudice of others.
   (C)   Offal: To throw or deposit any offal or other offensive matter, or the
carcass of any dead animal in any watercourse, lake, pond, spring, well or
common sewer, street or public highway.
   (D)   Water Pollution: To corrupt or render unwholesome or impure the water
of any spring, river, stream, pond or lake, to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (E)   Obstruction Of Public Places: To obstruct or encroach upon public
highways, private ways, streets, alleys, commons, landing places and ways to
burying places.
   (F)   Noxious Smells: To erect, continue or use any building or other place
for the exercise of any trade, employment or manufacture, which, by occasioning
noxious exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise, is offensive or dangerous
to the health of individuals, or of the public.
   (G)   Billposting: To advertise wares or occupation by painting notices of
the same on, or affixing them to fences, walls, windows, building exteriors,
utility poles or on hydrants, other public or private property, or on rocks or
other natural objects, without the consent of the owner, or if in the highway
or other public place, without permission of the proper authorities.
   (H)   Garbage And Waste: To dump, abandon, deposit, dismantle or burn upon
any public property or right of way, highway, park, street or parkway anywhere
in the village, any trash, garbage, ashes, junk, junked or wrecked motor
vehicles or parts thereof, or miscellaneous waste.
   (I)   Outside Storage: To store, keep or maintain outside of a closed
building, any junk, parts, machinery or equipment not in an operable condition,
or motor vehicle not in an operable condition, where such inoperable motor
vehicle is an actual danger or detriment to life, safety, health or peaceful
enjoyment of the property of surrounding landowners; provided, however, that
this provision shall not apply to a properly licensed junkyard or other
permitted outdoor storage use which is in full compliance with all of the
ordinances of the village governing the same.
   (J)   Unfit Dwellings: To own, maintain or keep a dwelling unit unfit for
human habitation or dangerous or detrimental to life, safety or health because
of lack of repair, defects in the plumbing system, lighting or ventilation, the
existence of contagious diseases or unsanitary conditions likely to cause
sickness among persons residing in said premises or residing in proximity
thereof.
   (K)   Rat Harborage: To store or place any materials in a manner which may
harbor rats.
   (L)   Noise: To produce or permit to be produced, whether on public or
private property, any offensive noise to the disturbance of the peace or quiet
of any person residing in the vicinity.
   (M)   Diseased Animals: All diseased animals running at large.
   (N)   Stagnant Water: To obstruct any gutter or watercourse so as to cause
water to stagnate therein, or to permit foul or stagnant water to stand upon
any premises.
   (O)   Offensive Substances: To cause, permit or suffer any garbage or
offensive substance of any kind to be collected, deposited or remain in any
place in the village other than as prescribed in the garbage refuse and debris
regulations contained in this code.
   (P)   Dust Prevention: Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the
wind from such sources as storage areas, yards, roads and the like, shall be
kept to a minimum by landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, cutting of weeds or
other appropriate means.
   (Q)   Pest Infestations: All infestations of flies, fleas, roaches, lice,
ticks, rats, mice, fly maggots, mosquito larvae, rodents, insects, vermin and
pest birds.
   (R)   Noxious Plants: To permit the growth upon any premises of any noxious
plants.
   (S)   Unsafe Buildings: To construct or maintain any building or structure
which is in an unsanitary, unsafe or dangerous condition, or to maintain or
permit any building or part thereof to be or remain in an unsanitary condition
by reason of the basement or cellar being damp or wet or the floor of such
basement or cellar being covered with stagnant water, or by reason of the
presence of sewer gas, or which by reason of any other unsanitary, unsafe or
dangerous condition endangers the health or safety of any person.
   (T)   Barbed Wire: The use of "barbed wire" for fencing or screening of any
type in a residentially zoned district.
   (U)   Bathtub Barbecuing: Barbecuing or cooking of any type in indoor
bathtub.
   (V)   Abandoned Refrigerators: It shall be unlawful for any person to leave
or permit to remain outside of any dwelling, building or other structure, or
within any occupied or abandoned building, dwelling or other structure under
his or its control, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned,
unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or other container which has an
airtight door or lid, snap lock or other locking device which has not been
removed from said icebox, refrigerator or container.
   (W)   Open Excavations: It shall constitute a nuisance to allow any building
foundation or excavation to remain open and unclosed for a period in excess of
thirty (30) days. Such an excavation or foundation may be filled in by order of
the board of trustees after said thirty (30) day period.
   (X)   Potable Water: It shall constitute a public nuisance if any building
used for residential purposes does not have a clean, potable and adequate
supply of running water. (Ord. 999, 5-27-1981)
   (Y)   Weeds:
      1.   Duty Of Property Owners To Cut Weeds: It is the duty of each owner
of real property located within the village not to permit weeds, whether
growing or not, to stand on his property at a height greater than eight inches
(8") from the ground. Any real estate containing weeds having attained a height
of eight inches (8") or more is hereby declared a nuisance. Each property owner
shall take such action as is lawful and as often as is necessary to cut weeds
and remove them, such that they will not exceed the maximum permitted height.
      2.   Notice To Owner To Cut Weeds: In the event that a property owner
permits weeds on his property to exceed the maximum height, the village clerk
shall serve written notice upon him to comply with the provisions of subsection
(Y)1 of this section within five (5) days from the date of such notice.
      3.   Action By Village Upon Failure Of Owner To Cut Weeds: If a property
owner fails to comply with the provisions of subsection (Y)1 of this section,
and the village clerk has given the notice provided for in subsection (Y)2 of
this section, at the expiration of the five (5) day period set forth in such
notice the village may enter upon the property and cut the weeds. The village
clerk shall keep accurate records of the cost incurred by the village in so
doing, whether such cost arises out of a contract entered into by the village
with others to cut the weeds, or whether the cost arises out of the assignment
of village employees to cut the weeds. As soon as reasonably may be after weeds
are cut by the village and the cost thereof is determined, the village clerk
shall send a written demand to the property owner to reimburse the village for
such cost.
      4.   Lien Upon Real Property: The cost to the village of cutting weeds on
the property of an owner who has failed to comply with subsection (Y)1 of this
section is a lien in favor of the village against such property. If, after the
demand for payment provided for in subsection (Y)3 of this section has been
sent by the village, the property owner does not pay to the village the amount
demanded, the village clerk shall cause the notice of such lien to be recorded
in the office of the Cook County recorder (or, if the property is subject to
the Torrens registration system, then in the office of the Cook County
registrar of titles) not later than sixty (60) days after such cost is
incurred. The notice shall contain a sworn statement setting out: a) a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof; b) the
amount of money representing the cost and expenses incurred or payable; and c)
the date or dates when such cost and expenses were incurred by the village.
      5.   Release Of Lien Upon Payment: Upon payment to the village of the
amount demanded in the notice provided for in subsection (Y)3 of this section,
if the village has recorded or registered a notice of lien as provided in
subsection (Y)4 of this section, the village clerk shall execute and deliver to
the property owner a release of such lien, which release may be recorded or
registered by the property owner. (Ord. 1142, 10-14-1987)
   (Z)   Inoperable Motor Vehicles:
      1.   The village does hereby declare all inoperable motor vehicles,
whether on public or private property and in view of the general public, to be
a nuisance and fines may be levied for the failure of any person to obey a
notice received from the village which states that such person is to dispose of
any inoperable motor vehicles under his control, and the village hereby
authorizes the police department to have the inoperable motor vehicle or parts
thereof removed after seven (7) days from the issuance of a village notice. The
owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for all towing and storage charges.
However, nothing in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use, to operable historic vehicles over twenty
five (25) years of age, or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of
business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
      2.   As used in this section, "inoperable motor vehicle" means any motor
vehicle from which, for a period of at least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels
or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts
have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is
incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle"
shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable
of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations. (Ord. 1150, 3-9-1988)
8-4-2: NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT; NOTICE:
Except where otherwise provided by the ordinances of the village, any officer
of the village possessing police powers may serve or cause to be served a
notice, in writing, upon the owner, agent, occupant or person in possession,
charge or control of any lot, building or premises or item of personalty in or
upon which any nuisance, requiring them or either or both of them to abate the
same within a specified reasonable time. It shall not be necessary in any case
for the notice to specify the manner in which any nuisance shall be abated
unless he shall deem it advisable so to do. Such notice may be served or given
by any officer who is so directed. (Ord. 999, 5-27-1981)
8-4-3: NONSUMMARY ABATEMENT:
If the person so served and notified does not abate the nuisance within the
specified reasonable time, the corporate authorities may proceed to abate the
nuisance in any or all manner allowable by law, including, without limiting the
generality thereof, the following:
   (A)   Seeking to impose a monetary penalty as defined by section 8-4-6 of
this chapter by instituting an ordinance enforcement action.
   (B)   Seeking to enjoin the continuation of the nuisance by the filing of a
lawsuit in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 999, 5-27-1981)
8-4-4: SUMMARY ABATEMENT:
Whenever, in the opinion of an officer of the village possessing police powers,
the maintenance or continuation of a nuisance creates an imminent threat of
serious injury to persons or serious damage to personal or real property, or if
the nuisance can be abated summarily without or with only minor damage to the
items or premises which are creating the nuisance, and the continuation of the
nuisance poses a substantial threat of injury to persons or property or a
substantial interference with the quiet enjoyment of the life normally present
in the community, such officer shall proceed to abate such nuisance; provided,
further, that whenever the owner, occupant, agent or person in possession,
charge or control of the real or personal property which has become a nuisance
is unknown or cannot readily be found, the municipal officer with police power
may proceed to abate such nuisance without notice. Where the abatement of the
nuisance requires continuing acts by the corporate authorities beyond the
initial summary abatement and any other additional emergency abatements, it
shall seek abatement of such nuisance on a permanent basis through judicial
process as soon as reasonably possible. (Ord. 999, 5-27-1981)
8-4-5: COST OF ABATEMENT; LIEN:
In either case provided by the two (2) previous sections, the expense of such
abatement shall be collected from the person who may have created, continued or
suffered such nuisance to exist. The village may file a lien for the cost
against any real estate whereupon the nuisance existed. (Ord. 999, 5-27-1981)
8-4-6: PENALTY:
Any individual, firm or association or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be fined not more than the
penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by
state statutes for each offense. Each day that a violation is allowed to exist
shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 999, 5-27-1981; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-
13-1995)
8-4-7: REWARD:
   (A)   The village board recognizes that it is in the best interests of the
village to help abate nuisance or trespass on village property or property of
others within the village. To further this goal, the village will provide a
reward to anyone supplying information leading to the conviction of any person
involved in creating a nuisance or trespass on property of the village or of
any private person or business.
   (B)   The village board offers a reward of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for
anyone providing information or evidence leading to the conviction in a court
of law of any individual who causes a nuisance or trespass on the property of
the village or a private person or business. In the instance of one or more
individuals providing the evidence or testimony, the reward will be shared.
   (C)   A nuisance is any action as set forth in this chapter, and includes,
but is not limited to, dumping or depositing anything of an offensive nature on
a public way or on private property. (Ord. 1551, 7-24-2002)
CHAPTER 5
CLEAN INDOOR AIR
SECTION:
8-5-1: Findings
8-5-2: Definitions
8-5-3: Smoking Prohibitions
8-5-4: Posting Of Signs; Removal Of Ashtrays
8-5-5: Designation Of Other Nonsmoking Areas
8-5-6: Exemptions
8-5-7: Enforcement; Complaints
8-5-8: Violations
8-5-9: Injunctions
8-5-10: Discrimination Prohibited
8-5-11: Entrances, Exits, Windows And Ventilation Intakes
8-5-1: FINDINGS:
The village board makes the following findings:
   (A)   That the Illinois general assembly has passed the smoke free Illinois
act 1  which prohibits smoking in all public places, government buildings,
government owned vehicles and places of employment, with certain specified
exceptions.
   (B)   That section 65 of the smoke free Illinois act 2  allows any nonhome
rule municipality to regulate smoking, as long as such regulations or ordinance
is not less restrictive than the smoke free Illinois act.
   (C)   That the village board adopts the findings of the Illinois general
assembly as annunciated in the smoke free Illinois act as follows:
      The General Assembly finds that tobacco smoke is a harmful and dangerous
carcinogen to human beings and a hazard to public health. Secondhand tobacco
smoke causes at least 65,000 deaths each year from heart disease and lung
cancer according to the National Cancer Institute. Secondhand tobacco smoke
causes heart disease, stroke, cancer, sudden infant death syndrome, low birth
weight in infants, asthma and exacerbation of asthma, bronchitis and pneumonia
in children and adults. Secondhand tobacco smoke is the third leading cause of
preventable death in the United States. Illinois workers exposed to secondhand
tobacco smoke are at increased risk of premature death. An estimated 2,900
Illinois citizens die each year from exposure to secondhand tobacco smoke.
      The General Assembly also finds that the United States Surgeon General's
2006 report has determined that there is no risk-free level of exposure to
secondhand smoke; the scientific evidence that secondhand smoke causes serious
diseases, including lung cancer, heart disease, and respiratory illnesses such
as bronchitis and asthma, is massive and conclusive; separating smokers from
nonsmokers, cleaning the air, and ventilating buildings cannot eliminate
secondhand smoke exposure; smoke free workplace policies are effective in
reducing secondhand smoke exposure; and smoke free workplace policies do not
have an adverse economic impact on the hospitality industry.
      The General Assembly also finds that the Environmental Protection Agency
has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels in
businesses by high rates of ventilation. Air cleaners, which are capable only
of filtering the particulate matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the
known toxins in secondhand smoke. The American Society of Heating,
Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) bases its ventilation
standards on totally smoke free environments because it cannot determine a safe
level of exposure to secondhand smoke, which contains cancer causing chemicals,
and ASHRAE acknowledges that technology does not exist that can remove
chemicals that cause cancer from the air. A June 30, 2005 ASHRAE position
document on secondhand smoke concludes that, at present, the only means of
eliminating health risks associated with indoor exposure is to eliminate all
smoking activity indoors.
(Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 410 ILCS 82/1 et seq.
2 2. 440 ILCS 82/65.
8-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms shall mean:
BAR: An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for
consumption by guests on the premises and that derives no more than ten percent
(10%) of its gross revenue from the sale of food consumed on the premises.
"Bar" includes, but is not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges,
adult entertainment facilities, and cabarets.
EMPLOYEE: A person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct
or indirect monetary wages or profits or a person who volunteers his or her
services for a nonprofit entity.
EMPLOYER: A person, business, partnership, association, or corporation,
including a municipal corporation, trust, or nonprofit entity that employs the
services of one or more individual persons.
ENCLOSED AREA: All space between a floor and a ceiling that is enclosed or
partially enclosed with: a) solid walls or windows, exclusive of doorways; or
b) solid walls with partitions and no windows, exclusive of doorways, that
extend from the floor to the ceiling, including, without limitation, lobbies
and corridors.
ENCLOSED OR PARTIALLY ENCLOSED SPORTS ARENA: Any sports pavilion, stadium,
gymnasium, health spa, boxing arena, swimming pool, roller rink, ice rink,
bowling alley, or other similar place where members of the general public
assemble to engage in physical exercise or participate in athletic competitions
or recreational activities or to witness sports, cultural, recreational, or
other events.
GAMING EQUIPMENT OR SUPPLIES: Gaming equipment/supplies as defined in the
Illinois gaming board rules of the Illinois administrative code.
GAMING FACILITY: An establishment utilized primarily for the purpose of gaming
and where gaming equipment or supplies are operated for the purpose of accruing
business revenue.
HEALTHCARE FACILITY: An office or institution providing care or treatment of
diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical,
physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to,
hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals, weight control clinics, nursing homes,
homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons,
chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, dentists, and all specialists
within these professions. "Healthcare facility" includes all waiting rooms,
hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within healthcare
facilities.
PLACE OF EMPLOYMENT: Any area under the control of a public or private employer
that employees are required to enter, leave, or pass through during the course
of employment, including, but not limited to, entrances and exits to places of
employment, including a minimum distance, as set forth in section 8-5-11 of
this chapter, of fifteen feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open,
and ventilation intakes that serve an enclosed area where smoking is
prohibited; offices and work areas; restrooms; conference and class rooms;
break rooms and cafeterias; and other common areas. A private residence or home
based business, unless used to provide licensed childcare, foster care, adult
care, or other similar social service care on the premises, is not a "place of
employment".
PRIVATE CLUB: A not for profit association that: a) has been in active and
continuous existence for at least three (3) years prior to the effective date
of the smoke free Illinois act, whether incorporated or not; b) is the owner,
lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club
purposes at all times; c) is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal,
social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for
pecuniary gain; and d) only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its
operation. For purposes of this definition, "private club" means an
organization that is managed by a board of directors, executive committee, or
similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting, has established
bylaws, a constitution, or both, to govern its activities, and has been granted
an exemption from the payment of federal income tax as a club under 26 USC 501.
PRIVATE RESIDENCE: The part of a structure used as a dwelling, including,
without limitation: a private home, townhouse, condominium, apartment, mobile
home, vacation home, cabin, or cottage. For the purposes of this definition, a
hotel, motel, inn, resort, lodge, bed and breakfast or other similar public
accommodation, hospital, nursing home, or assisted living facility shall not be
considered a private residence.
PUBLIC PLACE: That portion of any building or vehicle used by and open to the
public, regardless of whether the building or vehicle is owned in whole or in
part by private persons or entities, the state of Illinois, or any other public
entity and regardless of whether a fee is charged for admission, including a
minimum distance, as set forth in section 8-5-11 of this chapter, of fifteen
feet (15') from entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes
that serve an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited. A "public place" does
not include a private residence unless the private residence is used to provide
licensed childcare, foster care, or other similar social service care on the
premises. A "public place" includes, but is not limited to, hospitals,
restaurants, retail stores, offices, commercial establishments, elevators,
indoor theaters, libraries, museums, concert halls, public conveyances,
educational facilities, nursing homes, auditoriums, enclosed or partially
enclosed sports arenas, meeting rooms, schools, exhibition halls, convention
facilities, polling places, private clubs, gaming facilities, all government
owned vehicles and facilities, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased,
or operated by the state or state subcontract, healthcare facilities or
clinics, enclosed shopping centers, retail service establishments, financial
institutions, educational facilities, ticket areas, public hearing facilities,
public restrooms, waiting areas, lobbies, bars, taverns, bowling alleys,
skating rinks, reception areas, and no less than seventy five percent (75%) of
the sleeping quarters within a hotel, motel, resort, inn, lodge, bed and
breakfast, or other similar public accommodation that are rented to guests, but
excludes private residences.
RESTAURANT:
   (A)   An eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops,
cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, that
gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees; and
   (B)   A kitchen or catering facility in which food is prepared on the
premises for serving elsewhere. "Restaurant" includes a bar area within the
restaurant.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: The carrying, smoking, burning, inhaling, or exhaling of any
kind of lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette, hookah, weed, herbs, or any other
lighted smoking equipment. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-3: SMOKING PROHIBITIONS:
No person shall smoke in a public place or in any place of employment or within
fifteen feet (15') of any entrance to a public place or place of employment. No
person may smoke in any vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the state or a
political subdivision of the state. Smoking is prohibited in indoor public
places and workplaces unless specifically exempted by section 8-5-6 of this
chapter. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-4: POSTING OF SIGNS; REMOVAL OF ASHTRAYS:
   (A)   "No Smoking" signs or the international "no smoking" symbol,
consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a
red circle with a red bar across it, shall be clearly and conspicuously posted
in each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited by
this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of
that place.
   (B)   Each public place and place of employment where smoking is prohibited
by this chapter shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly
stating that smoking is prohibited.
   (C)   All ashtrays shall be removed from any area where smoking is
prohibited by this chapter by the owner, operator, manager, or other person
having control of the area. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-5: DESIGNATION OF OTHER NONSMOKING AREAS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any employer, owner,
occupant, lessee, operator, manager, or other person in control of any public
place or place of employment may designate a nonenclosed area of a public place
or place of employment, including outdoor areas, as an area where smoking is
also prohibited provided that such employer, owner, lessee or occupant shall
conspicuously post signs prohibiting smoking in the manner described in
subsections 8-5-4(A) and (B) of this chapter. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-6: EXEMPTIONS:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, smoking is allowed in the
following areas:
   (A)   Private residences or dwelling places, except when used as a
childcare, adult daycare, or healthcare facility or any other home based
business open to the public.
   (B)   Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long term care
facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers
and have requested in writing to be placed or to remain in a room where smoking
is permitted and the smoke shall not infiltrate other areas of the nursing
home.
   (C)   Hotel and motel sleeping rooms that are rented to guests and are
designated as smoking rooms, provided that all smoking rooms on the same floor
must be contiguous and smoke from these rooms must not infiltrate into
nonsmoking rooms or other areas where smoking is prohibited. Not more than
twenty five percent (25%) of the rooms rented to guests in a hotel or motel may
be designated as rooms where smoking is allowed. The status of rooms as smoking
or nonsmoking may not be changed, except to permanently add additional
nonsmoking rooms. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-7: ENFORCEMENT; COMPLAINTS:
   (A)   The village health department and police department shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter and may assess fines pursuant to section 8-5-8 of
this chapter.
   (B)   Any person may register a complaint with the village health department
and/or police department for a violation of this chapter.
   (C)   Violations of this chapter shall be administered pursuant to title 6,
chapter 11 of this code. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-8: VIOLATIONS:
   (A)   A person, corporation, partnership, association or other entity who
violates section 8-5-3 of this chapter shall be fined pursuant to this section.
Each day that a violation occurs is a separate violation.
   (B)   A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited under
section 8-5-3 of this chapter shall be fined in an amount that is not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00).
   (C)   A person who owns, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or
place of employment that violates section 8-5-3 of this chapter shall be fined:
1) not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first violation;
2) not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the second violation within
one year after the first violation; and 3) not less than two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each additional violation within one year after
the first violation.
   (D)   A fine imposed under this section shall be allocated as follows:
      1.   One-half (1/2) of the fine shall be distributed to the Illinois
department of public health; and
      2.   One-half (1/2) of the fine shall be distributed to the village.
(Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-9: INJUNCTIONS:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit, modify, prevent
or otherwise affect the ability of the Illinois department of public health,
any state certified local public health department, the village police
department or any individual personally affected by repeat violations to
institute, in a circuit court, an action to enjoin violations of the smoke free
Illinois act or this chapter. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-10: DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED:
No individual may be discriminated against in any manner because of the
exercise of any rights afforded by this chapter. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
8-5-11: ENTRANCES, EXITS, WINDOWS AND VENTILATION INTAKES:
Smoking is prohibited within a minimum distance of fifteen feet (15') from
entrances, exits, windows that open, and ventilation intakes that serve an
enclosed area where smoking is prohibited under this chapter so as to ensure
that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, exits, open
windows, or other means. (Ord. 1660, 1-23-2008)
TITLE 9
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
Sidewalks   1
Culverts   2
Numbering Buildings   3
Weeds (Rep. by Ord. 800, 1-23-1974)   4
Removal Of Snow And Ice   5
Excavations   6
Public Weighmasters   7
Removal Of Shopping Carts   8
Distribution Of Printed Matter   9
Pedestrians Soliciting Rides Or Business On Roadways   10
Street Improvement Regulations   11
Construction Of Utility Facilities In Rights-Of-Way   12
Trees And Shrubs   13
Small Wireless Facilities   14
CHAPTER 1
SIDEWALKS
SECTION:
9-1-1: Sidewalk Construction; Permit; Fee
9-1-2: Construction Requirements
9-1-3: One-Course Sidewalks
9-1-4: Two-Course Sidewalks
9-1-5: Cement; Type
9-1-6: Sidewalk Widths
9-1-7: Installation Required
9-1-1: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT; FEE:
Any person desiring to install any Portland cement concrete sidewalk on any
public street or place in the village shall, before beginning such work, obtain
a permit to install the same from the clerk, and before such permit shall be
issued, the person shall pay for such permit a sum equal to forty cents ($0.40)
per linear foot of sidewalk to be installed; provided, however, that the
minimum fee for such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00).
It shall be unlawful to construct or install any sidewalk during any period
beginning October 1 and ending April 30. (Ord. 929, 5-24-1978)
9-1-2: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
All sidewalks hereafter constructed in the village shall be either one-course
or two-course Portland cement concrete sidewalks which shall conform in all
respects to the specifications hereinafter set forth for one-course sidewalks
or two-course sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be built to the grade established
therefor by the engineer, and such grade shall be given by means of stakes set
by the engineer. (Ord. 27, 1928)
9-1-3: ONE-COURSE SIDEWALKS:
One-course sidewalks shall be constructed as follows: A subgrade shall be
prepared by cutting down or filling up the surface of the ground to an
elevation which, after being thoroughly compacted, shall be five inches (5")
below the sidewalk grade. Wherever filling is necessary, it shall be done with
earth, or other material equally as good for filling purposes, free from animal
or vegetable matter, thoroughly compacted, and placed in layers not more than
twelve inches (12") in thickness.
Upon the subgrade shall be placed a layer of Portland cement concrete five
inches (5") in thickness. The concrete shall consist of one part Portland
cement, two (2) parts torpedo sand and three (3) parts crushed stone or gravel
measuring not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") nor more than one and one-half
inches (11/2") in any dimension, all of which shall be free from dust, loam and
dirt or other foreign substance. The materials shall be thoroughly mixed with
water in a batch mixer or mixed by hand, in which event the cement and sand
shall be thoroughly mixed dry, into which shall be incorporated the three (3)
parts of stone as specified herein, after which the mixture shall be moistened
with water and the whole mass thoroughly mixed and placed on the foundation and
rammed until solid. The concrete shall be struck off and finished in such a
manner as to ensure a smooth and even surface. (Ord. 27, 1928)
9-1-4: TWO-COURSE SIDEWALKS:
Two-course sidewalks shall be constructed as follows: A subgrade shall be
prepared by cutting down or filling up the surface of the ground to an
elevation which, after being thoroughly compacted, shall be five inches (5")
below the sidewalk grade. Wherever filling is necessary, it shall be done with
earth or other material equally as good for filling purposes, free from animal
or vegetable matter, thoroughly compacted, and placed in layers not more than
twelve inches (12") in thickness.
Upon the subgrade shall be placed a layer of Portland cement concrete four and
one-fourth inches (41/4") in thickness. The concrete shall consist of one part
Portland cement, two and one- half (21/2) parts torpedo sand and four (4) parts
crushed stone or gravel, measuring not less than one-fourth inch (1/4") nor
more than one and one-half inches (11/2") in any dimension, all of which shall
be free from dust, loam and dirt or other foreign substances. The materials
shall be thoroughly mixed with water in a batch mixer, or mixed by hand, in
which event the cement and sand shall be thoroughly mixed dry, into which shall
be incorporated the four (4) parts of stone as specified herein, after which
the mixture shall be moistened with water and the whole mass thoroughly mixed
and placed on the foundation and rammed until solid. Before the layer last
described has set, a finishing layer of Portland cement concrete three-fourths
inch (3/4") in thickness shall be placed thereon. The layer shall consist of
two (2) parts Portland cement and three (3) parts torpedo sand, thoroughly
mixed dry, then moistened with water and mixed again to form a mortar which
shall be spread in such a manner as to ensure a smooth and even surface after
being thoroughly troweled. (Ord. 27, 1928)
9-1-5: CEMENT; TYPE:
The Portland cement to be used shall be so ground that ninety two percent (92%)
will pass through a standard number 100 sieve having ten thousand (10,000)
meshes per square inch. Briquettes made from a mortar composed of one part
Portland cement and two (2) parts torpedo sand, exposed to the air for one day
and immersed in water for six (6) days, shall develop an ultimate strength of
two hundred (200) pounds per square inch. (Ord. 27, 1928)
9-1-6: SIDEWALK WIDTHS:
All sidewalks hereafter constructed shall be constructed with the following
widths:
   (A)   Eight feet (8') when fronting on property which is zoned for business
purposes.
   (B)   Five feet (5') when fronting on property which is zoned for other than
business purposes 1 . (Ord. 288, 7-14-1948)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-84-1 et seq.
9-1-7: INSTALLATION REQUIRED:
Sidewalks will be required to be installed on all new construction of homes,
apartments, businesses, industrial or recreational use. Sidewalks shall also be
required where they do not exist on any remodeling projects where in the
determination of the building superintendent, the interest of the village would
require installation of the sidewalk. The construction of the cement sidewalk
would be on the full street frontage of the lot or lots to be improved and on
the side lots frontage on corner lots. Sidewalks shall be built and located in
accordance with the regulations and ordinances of this code. (Ord. 874, 2-23-
1977)
CHAPTER 2
CULVERTS
SECTION:
9-2-1: Obstructing Ditches
9-2-2: Installation Of Culverts; Permit
9-2-3: Application For Permit
9-2-4: Culverts; Dimension Requirements
9-2-5: Investigation Of Application
9-2-1: OBSTRUCTING DITCHES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to fill, partially fill or obstruct any
highway drainage ditch in the village. (Ord. 446, 11-12-1958)
9-2-2: INSTALLATION OF CULVERTS; PERMIT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to install any culvert in or driveway over
any highway drainage ditch in the village without securing a permit therefor in
accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 446, 11-12-1958)
9-2-3: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT:
Any person desiring to install a driveway over or to install a culvert in any
highway drainage ditch shall make application for a permit therefor to the
clerk. The application for permit shall describe the location of the property
and the location of the driveway or culvert to be installed. The application
shall be referred to the superintendent of public works, who shall inspect the
premises and determine the proper size, type and depth of the culvert. (Ord.
446, 11-12-1958)
9-2-4: CULVERTS; DIMENSION REQUIREMENTS:
Culverts in highway ditches shall be not less than twelve inches (12") in
diameter and such greater diameter as may be determined necessary for the
location by the superintendent of public works.
Culverts under driveways shall be constructed of reinforced concrete or
corrugated steel. Culverts shall be at least twelve feet (12') in length. (Ord.
446, 11-12-1958)
9-2-5: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION:
The superintendent of public works shall make a report on each application and
shall issue a permit in accordance with his findings. No charge shall be made
for permits issued under the provisions of this chapter 1 . (Ord. 446, 11-12-
1958)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-11.
CHAPTER 3
NUMBERING BUILDINGS
SECTION:
9-3-1: Numbering Required
9-3-2: Numbering Base Designated
9-3-3: Number Spaces; Designation
9-3-4: Street Prefixes Designated
9-3-5: Assignment Of Numbers
9-3-6: Size Of Numbers
9-3-7: Alteration Of Number Without Consent Prohibited
9-3-8: Reassignment Of Numbers
9-3-1: NUMBERING REQUIRED:
It shall be the duty of the owner, agent or person in possession of every
building in the village to number it in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord.
198, 1-28-1941)
9-3-2: NUMBERING BASE DESIGNATED:
All lots or houses located on the north and south streets or on streets running
in a northerly or southerly direction shall be numbered from 147th Street as a
base, beginning with number 14700 at the north line of 147th Street, and
decreasing towards the north, and beginning with number 14701 at the south line
of 147th Street and increasing towards the south.
All lots or houses located on east and west streets running in an easterly or
westerly direction shall be numbered from Crawford Avenue (40th Avenue) as a
base, beginning with number 4000 at the east line of Crawford Avenue and
decreasing towards the east, and beginning with 4001 at the west line of
Crawford Avenue and increasing towards the west. (Ord. 198, 1-28-1941)
9-3-3: NUMBER SPACES; DESIGNATION:
There shall be assigned to each mile eight hundred (800) numbers, or one
hundred (100) numbers to each one-eighth (1/8) of a mile on all streets, and
such numbers shall change from any one hundred (100) to the succeeding one
hundred (100) at the intersecting street nearest to the one-eighth (1/8) mile
lines. The even numbers on north and south streets, or streets running in a
northerly or southerly direction shall be on the west side of the streets. The
even numbers on east and west streets, or streets running in an easterly or
westerly direction, shall be on the north side of the streets. (Ord. 198, 1-28-
1941)
9-3-4: STREET PREFIXES DESIGNATED:
All north and south streets, or streets running in a northerly or southerly
direction, shall bear the prefix "South".
All east and west streets, or streets running in an easterly or westerly
direction, shall bear the prefix "West". (Ord. 198, 1-28-1941)
9-3-5: ASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
The clerk shall assign or cause to be assigned to each lot or part of lot,
residence, apartment or place of business, its legal number.
The clerk shall inform the owner, agent, or person in possession of such
premises, as to the number thereof at any reasonable time upon request. (Ord.
198, 1-28-1941)
9-3-6: SIZE OF NUMBERS:
Each of the figures of every number on any residence or apartment building
shall be not less than three inches (3") in length, and on any store or place
of business not less than five inches (5") in length. All numbers shall be
placed in a conspicuous place on or near the entrance to the building to which
the same are attached. (Ord. 198, 1-28-1941)
9-3-7: ALTERATION OF NUMBER WITHOUT CONSENT PROHIBITED:
Whenever any house or building shall have been numbered or renumbered in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the number shall not be changed
or altered without the consent of the clerk. (Ord. 198, 1-28-1941)
9-3-8: REASSIGNMENT OF NUMBERS:
In all cases where house numbers have been assigned on any street in pursuance
of this chapter, it shall be the duty of the clerk to adjust and reassign such
numbers as the same may be required from time to time; and in all cases where
there is a mistake or conflict in numbers, the clerk shall direct and make the
proper adjustment of the same 1 . (Ord. 198, 1-28-1941)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-18.
CHAPTER 4
WEEDS
(Rep. by Ord. 800, 1-23-1974)
CHAPTER 5
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE
SECTION:
9-5-1: Removal Required
9-5-2: Removal Time Limited
9-5-3: When Removal Impossible; Use Of Sand
9-5-1: REMOVAL REQUIRED:
Every owner, occupant or other person having charge of any building or lot of
ground in the village abutting upon any street or public place, shall remove
the snow and ice from the sidewalk in front of the building or lot of ground.
If the sidewalk is of greater width than five feet (5'), it shall not be
necessary for the owner, occupant or other person having charge of the building
or lot to remove snow and ice from the same for a space wider than five feet
(5'). (Ord. 122, 12-12-1933)
9-5-2: REMOVAL TIME LIMITED:
The snow which falls or accumulates during the day, except Sunday, before four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. shall be removed within three (3) hours after the same has
fallen or accumulated. Snow which falls or accumulates on Sunday and after four
o'clock (4:00) P.M. and during the night on other days shall be removed before
ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. on the following morning. (Ord. 122, 12-12-1933)
9-5-3: WHEN REMOVAL IMPOSSIBLE; USE OF SAND:
In case the snow and ice on the sidewalk shall be frozen so hard that it cannot
be removed without injury to the pavement, the owner, or occupant or other
person having charge of any building or lot of ground as aforesaid, shall
within the time specified in the last section, cause the sidewalk abutting on
the premises to be strewed with ashes, sand, sawdust or some similar suitable
material and shall as soon thereafter as the weather will permit, thoroughly
clean the sidewalk 1 . (Ord. 122, 12-12-1933)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-13.
CHAPTER 6
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
9-6-1: Excavations; Estimate Of Expense; Permit
9-6-2: Bond Required
9-6-3: Applications For Permit
9-6-4: Supervision Of Excavations
9-6-5: Costs
9-6-6: Refund Of Surplus Deposit
9-6-7: Unlawful Injury To Streets
9-6-1: EXCAVATIONS; ESTIMATE OF EXPENSE; PERMIT:
Before a permit shall be granted to any person to open any street, sidewalk,
alley or public place in the village for any purpose, a permit fee as set forth
in section 4-3-12 of this code shall be paid, but for anything not covered by
said section, an estimate of the cost of inspection as hereinafter provided and
of restoring the pavement or the surface of the street, sidewalk, alley or
public place to a condition equally as good as before having been opened, to
the satisfaction of the superintendent of streets, with a fair additional sum
as margin for contingent damages to be determined by the superintendent of
streets, shall be made by the clerk, who, before issuing the same, shall
collect the amount of the estimate and the fee for the permit, which fee is
hereby fixed at the sum of fifteen dollars ($15.00). (Ord. 931, 5-24-1978)
9-6-2: BOND REQUIRED:
No permit shall be issued to any person, permitting the obstruction of any
street or sidewalk or the tearing up, removing or repairing of any street or
sidewalk, or any part thereof, until the person, making application for such
permit shall first have executed to the village a good and sufficient bond in
an amount as set forth in section 4-3-12 of this code. Said bond is conditioned
to indemnify, save and keep harmless the village from any loss, cost, damage,
expense or liability of any kind whatsoever, which it may suffer, or which it
may be put to, or which may be recovered from it from or on account of the
issuance of the permit, or because of any act done by virtue of the authority
given in the permit, or for any damage, loss or expense to any person caused by
or because of the obstruction of any street or sidewalk, or by the tearing up,
removing or repairing of such street or sidewalk, or any part thereof. (Ord.
931, 5-24-1978)
9-6-3: APPLICATIONS FOR PERMIT:
The superintendent of streets shall not issue any permit for the opening of any
street, alley or public way by any person until he shall have been fully
advised of the time, place and character of the opening and the purpose thereof
and until the permit has been ordered to be issued by the president and board
of trustees; and all applications for permits shall be in writing and shall be
accompanied by a plat or pencil tracing or sketch, showing the location,
character and dimensions of the proposed opening. (Ord. 96, 3-24-1932)
9-6-4: SUPERVISION OF EXCAVATIONS:
All work done under the authority of the permit shall be supervised and
inspected by the superintendent of streets, and immediately after the
completion of the work done under such authority shall, with village workmen,
immediately put back, restore and replace in proper place and condition any
pavement displaced by reason of such work, and shall restore and replace the
surface of any street, alley or public way which may be opened or otherwise
disturbed; all of the work to be done in such manner as shall be satisfactory
to the superintendent of streets and subject at all times to the approval of
the board of trustees. (Ord. 96, 3-24-1932)
9-6-5: COSTS:
The costs of the supervision and inspection and of restoring the pavement or
street as hereinabove provided shall be determined by the superintendent of
streets and approved by the board of trustees and shall be deducted from the
amount deposited with the clerk as hereinabove provided. (Ord. 96, 3-24-1932)
9-6-6: REFUND OF SURPLUS DEPOSIT:
After completion of the work to the satisfaction of the superintendent of
streets and the board of trustees, the superintendent shall certify to the
clerk and to the board of trustees the amount of any surplus remaining from the
amount deposited in such case and such surplus shall thereupon be paid to the
proper claimant. (Ord. 96, 3-24-1932)
9-6-7: UNLAWFUL INJURY TO STREETS:
No person shall injure or tear up any pavement, sidewalk or crosswalk, or any
part thereof, dig any hole, ditch, drain, or dig or remove any sod, stone,
earth, sand or gravel from any street, alley or public ground in the village
without having first obtained written permission from the superintendent of
streets given in accordance with the provisions of this chapter 1 . (Ord. 96,
3-24-1932)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-80-7.
CHAPTER 7
PUBLIC WEIGHMASTERS
SECTION:
9-7-1: Appointment
9-7-2: Application; Bond; License
9-7-3: Deputy Weighmaster
9-7-4: Scales
9-7-5: Change Of Location Of Scales
9-7-6: Weigh All Commodities
9-7-7: Charges For Weighing
9-7-8: Seal
9-7-9: Weight Certificates
9-7-10: Records
9-7-11: Street Scales Prohibited
9-7-12: False Weights
9-7-13: Certificate To Be Delivered Or Posted
9-7-14: Alteration Of Certificate Prohibited
9-7-15: Reweighing Commodities Owned By Weighmaster
9-7-16: Reweighing Commodities Not Owned By Weighmaster
9-7-17: Obstructing Reweighing Operation
9-7-18: Net Weight
9-7-19: Weighmaster May Weigh Own Commodities
9-7-20: Commodities Sold In Load Lots
9-7-1: APPOINTMENT:
Any person owning a scale suitable for weighing any commodity, produce or
article of merchandise in load lots, when contained in any wagon truck or other
vehicle, or in any quantity less than load lots when not contained in any
wagon, truck or other vehicle, shall be eligible for appointment as a public
weighmaster in the village after complying with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-2: APPLICATION; BOND; LICENSE:
Every applicant for a license as public weighmaster shall file with the clerk
an application in writing signed by the applicant, and setting forth the
location of his place of business, and such other information as may be
required by the clerk. The application shall also contain the following
agreement:
   The applicant hereby agrees and consents as a condition of the issuance of a
license hereunder, that in case the applicant as a public weighmaster weighs
any load lot of any commodity, produce or article of merchandise sold in load
lots by weight, sold or delivered by the applicant or by any person directly or
indirectly interested with the applicant, in the operation of the public scale
of the applicant, the Chief of Police, or his agent, or the purchaser or
consignee shall have the right to reweigh or cause to be reweighed as provided
in this Chapter, any such load lot. This condition is accepted by the applicant
with the understanding that the same shall, upon the issuance of a license
hereunder at once become binding upon him.
The applicant shall also execute and present with his application a bond to the
village in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with such surety as may
be approved by the board of trustees, conditioned upon the performance of the
duties as public weighmaster, and for the payment of any fines which may be
imposed upon him for violations of any such duties. Upon compliance with these
conditions and upon payment of the sum of twenty dollars ($20.00) as an annual
license fee, the clerk shall issue a license authorizing the applicant to act
as a public weighmaster.
The license so issued shall contain apt words indicating that the same is
issued subject to the conditions and agreements herein set forth, and any
person violating any of these conditions shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor. (Ord. 913, 4-12-1978)
9-7-3: DEPUTY WEIGHMASTER:
Each public weighmaster shall have the power to appoint all necessary deputies
to attend such weights and scales, the deputies to furnish a bond in the same
amount as the public weighmaster and conditioned in the same manner. Each
deputy weighmaster must pay an annual fee of ten dollars ($10.00). Each public
weighmaster shall be answerable for all acts of the deputy weighmaster; but the
weighmaster's responsibilities hereunder shall not relieve the deputy's
liability for his own acts. The weighmaster may cancel such appointment at any
time but he must notify the chief of police of such cancellations. (Ord. 913,
4-12-1978)
9-7-4: SCALES:
Every public weighmaster licensed hereunder shall provide his own scale, which
shall be approved by the chief of police, and the weighmaster shall keep them
adjusted and repaired at his own expense. They shall be inspected by the chief
of police every six (6) months or more often if necessary. (Ord. 170, 11-22-
1938)
9-7-5: CHANGE OF LOCATION OF SCALES:
Weighmasters or deputies are entitled to weigh only over scales mentioned in
the application, and for each new scale a new entry must be made on the
application, and the chief of police notified. If the location of any scale is
changed, the clerk shall issue a transfer upon payment of a transfer fee of two
dollars ($2.00). (Ord. 913, 4-12-1978)
9-7-6: WEIGH ALL COMMODITIES:
The public weighmaster or his deputy shall weigh all commodities tendered for
weighing at any reasonable time except holidays and Sundays. (Ord. 170, 11-22-
1938)
9-7-7: CHARGES FOR WEIGHING:
Public weighmasters when not the owner of the commodities being weighed by them
shall be entitled to charge a sum not in excess of ten cents ($0.10) for each
load or part of load when contained in any vehicle, or any commodity or article
weighed by them over such scales. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-8: SEAL:
Every weighmaster shall procure a seal, in form to be approved by the clerk,
which shall show his name, and shall stamp each certificate issued by him with
such seal. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-9: WEIGHT CERTIFICATES:
Each public weighmaster shall make out in triplicate a weight certificate on
each load weighed by him or his deputy, containing the following information:
   (A)   The commodity or article weighed.
   (B)   Name of weighmaster or deputy.
   (C)   Name of person for whom weighing was done.
   (D)   Name of driver of vehicle, or name of person bringing material to be
weighed to scales.
   (E)   Kind of vehicle.
   (F)   Address of cosignee.
   (G)   Gross weight of vehicle and driver.
   (H)   Tare weight of vehicle and driver.
   (I)   Net weight of article.
Any weighmaster shall not in any case state the tare weight of a vehicle until
he has ascertained it himself; except in cases of a divided load. (Ord. 170,
11-22-1938)
9-7-10: RECORDS:
Each weighmaster must keep a copy of every certificate which shall be numbered,
and shall constitute the record of his business. Each certificate must be
accounted for and kept for a period of at least two (2) years, and be open to
the inspection of the chief of police. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-11: STREET SCALES PROHIBITED:
No one except public weighmasters licensed hereunder shall weigh any commodity
or article for a fee or reward, and no one shall use or keep a scale in any
public place, street, or alley without permission to do so from the board of
trustees. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-12: FALSE WEIGHTS:
No public weighmaster shall issue a certificate giving a false weight for the
article weighed and upon conviction of a false weight certificate issuance, he
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and the board of trustees may in its
discretion cancel his license.
Any person requesting a false certificate from any public weighmaster shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-13: CERTIFICATE TO BE DELIVERED OR POSTED:
A copy of the weight certificate shall be delivered to the purchaser, or if
there is no one at the place of delivery to receive the delivery, shall be
posted in a conspicuous place at the place of delivery before the article or
commodity so weighed and described in the certificate shall be unloaded. The
remaining copy shall be retained by the seller. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-14: ALTERATION OF CERTIFICATE PROHIBITED:
No person shall alter any certificate or attempt to use it for any load other
than that for which it was issued. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-15: REWEIGHING COMMODITIES OWNED BY WEIGHMASTER:
Upon request to the chief of police, any purchaser of any goods owned or sold
by the public weighmaster and weighed by him, may take the goods under the
supervision of the public weighmaster to another scale approved by the chief of
police and there reweigh the same. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-16: REWEIGHING COMMODITIES NOT OWNED BY WEIGHMASTER:
Any person upon request to the chief of police shall be permitted to take his
load to another scale for the purpose of reweighing his load, but on the
following conditions: gross load to be weighed immediately and tare weight to
be ascertained immediately after delivery of load; the reweighing must take
place on a scale approved by the chief of police. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-17: OBSTRUCTING REWEIGHING OPERATION:
Any person having his goods reweighed who does not follow the foregoing
provisions or who in any way obstructs the chief of police shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-18: NET WEIGHT:
When any commodity, produce or article is sold subject to the public
weighmaster's weights, the net weight shown in the weight certificate issued by
the weighmaster shall be taken to be the true net weight of the same, subject
to the right of reweighing as herein provided. Net weight within the meaning of
this chapter shall be the actual weight of the commodity, produce or article
excluding the weight of the vehicle, if any, in which it is loaded, and
excluding the weight of the horse and driver of such vehicle, as the case may
be, if such horses and driver or either of them are weighed as part of the tare
weight. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-19: WEIGHMASTER MAY WEIGH OWN COMMODITIES:
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a public weighmaster from engaging in the
business of selling any article, commodity or produce which is ordinarily
delivered by vehicle or from weighing the same. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
9-7-20: COMMODITIES SOLD IN LOAD LOTS:
Every load of any commodity, produce or other article of merchandise sold in
load lots by weight, delivered by wagon, truck or other vehicle, shall be
weighed by a public weighmaster. (Ord. 170, 11-22-1938)
CHAPTER 8
REMOVAL OF SHOPPING CARTS
SECTION:
9-8-1: Abandoned Carts
9-8-2: Removal Of Carts
9-8-3: Posting Of Ordinance
9-8-4: Penalty
9-8-1: ABANDONED CARTS:
No person shall abandon or leave unattended any grocery cart or shopping cart
upon any public street, sidewalk, or public way within the village or upon the
private property of any person adjoining or abutting any public way or sidewalk
within the village other than on premises where said carts were originally
obtained. (Ord. 714, 1-27-1971)
9-8-2: REMOVAL OF CARTS:
No person shall remove or license or permit the removal of grocery carts or
shopping carts from the premises and parking lots from the establishments which
furnished said carts. (Ord. 714, 1-27-1971)
9-8-3: POSTING OF ORDINANCE:
A copy of this chapter shall be posted in a conspicuous place in every place of
business or establishment which provides grocery carts or shopping carts for
use by its customers or patrons. (Ord. 714, 1-27-1971)
9-8-4: PENALTY:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
be subject to a fine not exceeding the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of
this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for such offense. (Ord. 822,
10-9-1974; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 9
DISTRIBUTION OF PRINTED MATTER
SECTION:
9-9-1: Prohibited Conduct
9-9-2: Responsibility For Prohibited Distribution
9-9-3: Penalty
9-9-1: PROHIBITED CONDUCT:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hand any circular, pamphlet,
handbill, folder, advertising material or other printed matter whatsoever to
the occupant of any vehicle operated or standing in the public way, or to place
or thrust such circular, pamphlet, handbill, folder, advertising material or
other printed matter whatsoever into, upon or under the windshield wiper of an
unoccupied vehicle standing in the public way without village permission.
   (B)   It shall also be unlawful for any person to do the above on private
property without obtaining in advance the written permission of the owner of
the property.
   (C)   Any materials which are discarded or which litter the area shall be
the responsibility of those doing the distribution and/or the sponsors of the
material.
   (D)   1. The owners and/or advertisers who use newsracks, newspaper vending
machines, vending machines, display racks or holders (hereinafter referred to
as "dispensing device"), for distribution of flyers, pamphlets, brochures,
papers, handbills, folders, advertising materials or any printed materials or
products that can be removed from the dispensing device must provide cleanup of
their materials which may be discarded by anyone.
The owners of the dispensing device and/or the person or company whose name or
names appear on the material or product shall be responsible for any littering
or discarded material from their dispensing device.
      2.   Any dispensing device placed in the village must have the name,
address and phone number of the owner permanently affixed to the dispensing
device or it may be removed from its location by the village.
      3.   No dispensing device described in subsection (D)1 of this section
may be attached or secured to any other dispensing device or to any tree,
utility pole, light pole, telephone, traffic control device, sign, bus shelter,
street sign, guard rail, bridge railing or other public property. No dispensing
device may be placed on village property where it impairs pedestrian traffic or
the visibility of traffic or the use of fire hydrants or crosswalk, and the
owner of any dispensing device placed on private property must provide the
village with written proof of permission from the owner of the property.
      4.   No dispensing device shall be placed in an A or B residential zoning
district of the village.
      5.   All dispensing devices must remain in good working order, in a safe
and clean condition and must be free of graffiti and must have no broken parts.
      6.   No dispensing device shall remain unused for ten (10) days or more.
      7.   (a) In the event any dispensing device is in violation of any of the
provisions of this chapter, the village clerk's office shall send by certified
mail with return receipt requested, a written notice to the address of the
owner or user of the dispensing device. The notice shall state a description of
why the dispensing device is in violation of the requirements of this chapter;
that the owner and/or advertiser and/or user is ordered to cause immediate
compliance or removal of the dispensing device, and that the dispensing device
will be removed by the village after a date designated in the notice. The date
shall be no less than ten (10) days after the date the notice is mailed.
         (b)   If any dispensing device is still in violation of this chapter
after the ten (10) day period described above, the village shall cause removal
of the dispensing device.
         (c)   The owner of any dispensing device removed in accordance with
the terms of this chapter shall be responsible for all the expenses of the
removal and the storage of such dispensing device. Should the dispensing device
fail to be claimed or should the owner fail to pay any money due the village,
such dispensing device shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be
disposed of after thirty (30) days. This does not release any violator of this
chapter from the penalty provisions of section 9-9-3 of this chapter. (Ord.
1335, 10-26-1994)
9-9-2: RESPONSIBILITY FOR PROHIBITED DISTRIBUTION:
Whenever any printed matter is distributed in violation of the provisions of
this chapter, the person whose name appears thereon as the sponsor of such
printed matter and the owner of any dispensing device shall be prima facie
responsible for such violation and subject to the penalty therefor. Further,
the person or persons making the distribution or littering or discarding the
material may also be responsible. (Ord. 1335, 10-26-1994)
9-9-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 1335, 10-26-1994; amd. Ord.
1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 10
PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS ON ROADWAYS
SECTION:
9-10-1: Pedestrians Soliciting Rides Or Business
9-10-2: Solicitation For Contributions
9-10-3: Penalty
9-10-1: PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS:
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a highway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a highway. (Ord. 1765, 9-28-2011)
9-10-2: SOLICITATION FOR CONTRIBUTIONS:
A not for profit organization, which has been designated as a 501(c)(3)
organization by the internal revenue service ("soliciting agency") may solicit
for contributions upon obtaining a solicitation license from the village. Such
license shall be issued by the village president or his designee to such
soliciting agency, if such soliciting agency has met the following
requirements:
   (A)   No person shall stand in a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except as expressly permitted by
this section.
   (B)   The location and time of such solicitations by the soliciting agency
may take place based on the safety of the solicitors and the safety of
motorists. An application for a solicitation license under this section must
contain the roadways, days and times which solicitation is requested by the
soliciting agency. The determination of the safety of solicitors and the safety
of motorists shall be determined by the village president or his designee in
his sole discretion, based on the information provided in the solicitation
application. The decision shall also take into account the orderly flow of
traffic and may not allow interference with the operation of official traffic
control devices.
   (C)   The soliciting agency shall:
      1.   Be registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization
as provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor", approved by July 26, 1963, as amended;
      2.   Be engaged in a statewide fundraising activity;
      3.   Be registered by the internal revenue service as a 501(c)(3) entity;
      4.   Be insured with minimum limits of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per
accident;
      5.   Provide a certificate of insurance naming the village of Midlothian
as an additional insured;
      6.   Not allow the individual solicitors to be under the age of eighteen
(18) years;
      7.   File annual reports with the Illinois attorney general and provide a
copy of the most recent report filed to the village with the soliciting
agency's application;
      8.   Be soliciting for contributions for services which directly benefit
the residents of the village;
      9.   Not obstruct traffic while soliciting;
      10.   Be liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (D)   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be eighteen (18)
years of age or more and shall be wearing a high visibility vest.
   (E)   The soliciting agency shall provide a minimum of two (2) signs at each
location at which solicitation occurs. Such signs shall identify the soliciting
agency and the entity for which solicitation is being made. Each sign shall be
a minimum of two feet (2') wide and two feet (2') in height. (Ord. 1769, 11-9-
2011)
9-10-3: PENALTY:
Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be fined a sum
not to exceed the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes for any one offense. (Ord. 1765, 9-28-2011)
CHAPTER 11
STREET IMPROVEMENT REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-11-1: Pulaski Road Improvement
9-11-1-1: Discharge Of Sanitary And Industrial Waste In Storm Sewers Restricted
9-11-1-2: Encroachment On Improvement Right Of Way
9-11-1-3: Parking Prohibited
9-11-1: PULASKI ROAD IMPROVEMENT:
9-11-1-1: DISCHARGE OF SANITARY AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE IN STORM SEWERS
RESTRICTED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause the discharge of sanitary and
industrial waste into any storm sewer constructed as a part of the Pulaski Road
improvement in the village, more particularly described as the improvement of
Pulaski Road (Crawford Avenue), south of 148th Street to 127th Street (FAUS
project M5003(19)); and further, it shall be illegal for any additional storm
sewer water connections to be made into any storm sewers constructed as a part
of the approved plan. (Ord. 1002, 8-12-1981)
9-11-1-2: ENCROACHMENT ON IMPROVEMENT RIGHT OF WAY:
   (A)   In order to facilitate the Pulaski Road improvement as described in
section
9-11-1-1 of this chapter, it is necessary for the municipality to adopt an
ordinance regulating encroachments on the right of way for said improvement in
accordance with the following definitions:
   CONSTRUCTION EASEMENT AREA: That area lying between the project right of way
limits and the platted street limits within which the municipality, by
concurrence in the establishment of the project right of way lines, will permit
the county to enter to perform all necessary construction operations.
   ENCROACHMENT: Any building, fence, sign or any other structure or object of
any kind (with the exception of utilities and public road signs), which is
placed, located or maintained, in, or under or over any portion of the project
right of way or the roadway right of way where no project right of way line has
been established.
   PERMISSIBLE ENCROACHMENT: Any existing awning, marquee, advertising sign or
similar overhanging structure supported from a building immediately adjacent to
the limits of the platted street where there is a sidewalk extending to the
building line and which does not impair the free and safe flow of traffic on
the highway; the permissive retention of overhanging signs is not to be
construed as being applicable to those signs supported from poles constructed
outside the project right of way line and not confined by adjacent buildings.
   PROJECT RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas within the project right of way lines
established jointly by the municipality, county, state or the federal highway
administration which will be free of encroachments except as herein defined.
   ROADWAY RIGHT OF WAY: Those areas existing or acquired by dedication or by
fee simple for highway purposes; also, the areas acquired by temporary easement
during the time the easement is in effect.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected,
to retain or cause to be retained any "encroachment" (hereinbefore defined)
except as provided in subsection (D) of this section, within the limits of the
project right of way or roadway right of way where no project right of way
lines have been established.
   (C)   Project right of way lines have been established at the following
locations:
See Plan.
   (D)   Revocable permits have been issued by the municipality for the
temporary retention of the following permissible encroachments (hereinabove
defined):
See Plan.
   (E)   This section is intended to and shall be in addition to all other
sections, rules and regulations concerning encroachments and shall not be
construed as repealing or rescinding any other sections or part of any section
unless in direct conflict therewith. (Ord. 1003, 8-12-1981)
9-11-1-3: PARKING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or cause to be parked a motor
vehicle on the above described improvement, within the corporate limits of the
village, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic control device or
for loading or unloading of passengers for a period not longer than three (3)
minutes or for loading and unloading of property for a period of not longer
than fifteen (15) minutes. (Ord. 1004, 8-12-1981)
CHAPTER 12
CONSTRUCTION OF UTILITY FACILITIES IN RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
9-12-1: Purpose And Scope
9-12-2: Definitions
9-12-3: Annual Registration Required
9-12-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
9-12-5: Action On Permit Applications
9-12-6: Effect Of Permit
9-12-7: Revised Permit Drawings
9-12-8: Insurance
9-12-9: Indemnification
9-12-10: Security
9-12-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
9-12-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
9-12-13: General Construction Standards
9-12-14: Traffic Control
9-12-15: Location Of Facilities
9-12-16: Construction Methods And Materials
9-12-17: Vegetation Control
9-12-18: Removal, Relocation Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
9-12-19: Cleanup And Restoration
9-12-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
9-12-21: Variances
9-12-22: Penalties
9-12-23: Enforcement
9-12-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
   (B)   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation,
to:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased stormwater runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the village residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   (C)   Facilities Subject To Chapter: This chapter applies to all facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way within
the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully established prior to the
effective date hereof may continue to be maintained, repaired and operated by
the utility as presently constructed and located, except as may be otherwise
provided in any applicable franchise, license or similar agreement.
   (D)   Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   (E)   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   (F)   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   (G)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   (H)   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear runout area.
The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and on the
roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the "AASHTO Roadside Design
Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The village code of the village of Midlothian.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way, or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
ENGINEER: The village engineer or his or her designee.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
village superintendent of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent
risk to the life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological
balance of the environment, including, but not limited to: explosives,
radioactive materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons,
etiology (biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance
determined to be hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or
regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic, including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The "joint utility locating information for excavators" utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under rights of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to facility or for
the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
9-12-4 and 9-12-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, highway, roadway, or other area
disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility easements, in which the village has the right and
authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of facilities other
than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way" shall not include
any real or personal village property that is not specifically described in the
previous two (2) sentences and shall not include village buildings, fixtures
and other structures or improvements, regardless of whether they are situated
in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 9-12-10 of
this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village superintendent of public works or
his or her designee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC sections 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended,
or cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee
payable to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of
the federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following),
as now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this section.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 5/21-201(v) of the Illinois
cable and video competition law of 2007 1 .
VILLAGE: The village of Midlothian.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 1652, 10-
10-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 5/21-201(v).
9-12-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the superintendent of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section 9-12-8 of this chapter, in the
form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   (A)   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this
chapter) any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within
any village right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility; 2)
adds a new facility; 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter);
or 4) materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility
on, over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the village superintendent of public works and
obtaining a permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in
this chapter. No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of
service connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of
the right of way.
   (B)   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village and shall be filed in
such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The applicant may
designate those portions of its application materials that it reasonably
believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or
"confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly.
   (C)   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be
made by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at
a minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone, telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village:
         (a)   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         (b)   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the village and shall
promote protection of the safety and convenience of the public. Compliance with
ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans constitutes compliance with
this section unless the village finds that additional information or assurances
are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section 9-12-8 of this chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 9-
12-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter 1 ; and
      10.   Such additional information as may be reasonably required by the
village.
   (D)   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection (C) of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and the metropolitan water reclamation
district (other local or state entities with jurisdiction) have been satisfied;
or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   (E)   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village within thirty (30) days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (F)   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a fee in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00).
No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity utility that is
paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee pursuant to the
electricity infrastructure maintenance fee law 2 . (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 9-12-21 of this chapter.
2 1. 35 ILCS 645/5-1 et seq.
9-12-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the village
superintendent of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the
application does not conform to the requirements of applicable ordinances,
codes, laws, rules, and regulations, the village superintendent of public works
shall reject such application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the
village superintendent of public works is satisfied that the proposed work
conforms to the requirements of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes,
laws, rules, and regulations, the village superintendent of public works shall
issue a permit therefor as soon as practicable. In all instances, it shall be
the duty of the applicant to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the village
superintendent of public works, that the construction proposed under the
application shall be in full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   (B)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act 1 , a
telecommunications retailer shall notify the village that it intends to
commence work governed by this chapter for facilities for the provision of
telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of plans,
specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the purpose
and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the telecommunications
retailer to the village not less than ten (10) days prior to the commencement
of work requiring no excavation and not less than thirty (30) days prior to the
commencement of work requiring excavation. The village superintendent of public
works shall specify the portion of the right of way upon which the facility may
be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the village superintendent of public works fails
to provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation for
new construction; or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section 9-12-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village an application for a
permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications by a
utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable and
video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village, unless otherwise acted upon by the village,
provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes, ordinances, and
regulations. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
 
Notes
1 2. 220 ILCS 65/4.
9-12-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in the rights of way.
   (B)   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   (C)   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village
representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall
be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   (D)   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and regulations.
(Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village within ninety (90)
days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or plans
shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section 9-12-21 of this chapter.
If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall
either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that
it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord.
1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-8: INSURANCE:
   (A)   Required Coverages And Limits:
      1.   Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or similar
agreement, each utility occupying right of way or constructing any facility in
the right of way shall secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring the utility as named insured and naming the village, and its
elected and appointed officers, officials, agents, and employees as additional
insureds on the policies listed in subsections (A)1(a) and (A)1(b) of this
section:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products-completed operations coverage with
limits not less than:
            (1)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or
death to each person;
            (2)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
            (3)   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
         (b)   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with
a combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
         (c)   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
         (d)   Employers' liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
      2.   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the
contractors and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   (B)   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section
may be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess
or umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   (C)   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village within ten (10) days following
receipt of a written request therefor from the village.
   (D)   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages:
      1.   The insurance policies required by this section shall contain the
following endorsement:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the
intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt by the
Village, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt requested, of a
written notice addressed to the Village President of such intent to cancel or
not to renew.
      2.   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village of said notice,
and in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the
utility shall obtain and furnish to the village evidence of replacement
insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   (E)   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection (A) of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection (A), or the requirements of subsections (B), (C) and
(D) of this section. A utility that elects to self- insure shall provide to the
village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self-insure
the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under subsection (A) of
this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private self-insurer"
under the workers' compensation act.
   (F)   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   (G)   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
(Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officials and officers, employees, agents and representatives
harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands, judgments,
damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and costs of
suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise out of or
result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions, failures to
act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers, employees,
agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of facilities or
occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering service over the
facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized, allowed or
prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar agreement;
provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations hereunder shall not
apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages, losses or expenses
arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct or breach of this
chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees, agents or
representatives. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-10: SECURITY:
   (A)   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and
in an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be
continuously maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole
cost and expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit.
The security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   (B)   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village in
the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a form
acceptable to the village, or an unconditional letter of credit in a form
acceptable to the village. Any surety bond or letter of credit provided
pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   (C)   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the village superintendent of public works, and may
also include reasonable, directly related costs that the village estimates are
likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform such restoration. Where
the construction of facilities proposed under the permit will be performed in
phases in multiple locations in the village, with each phase consisting of
construction of facilities in one location or a related group of locations, and
where construction in another phase will not be undertaken prior to substantial
completion of restoration in the previous phase or phases, the village
superintendent of public works may, in the exercise of sound discretion, allow
the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall be applicable to
each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of the security
fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount that would
have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any single
phase.
   (D)   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund;
provided, that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   (E)   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection (C) of this section.
   (F)   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village; provided, that any
such withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance
required in subsection (C) of this section.
   (G)   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation;
provided, that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be
refunded to the permittee.
   (H)   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-
2007)
9-12-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   (A)   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   (B)   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   (C)   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension:
      1.   Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
         (a)   Immediately provide the village with evidence that no cause
exists for the revocation or suspension;
         (b)   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the village within five (5) working days after receipt of the
written notice of revocation; or
         (c)   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within the rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the village, providing written proof of such
removal to the village within ten (10) days after receipt of the written notice
of revocation.
      2.   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the
time periods provided in this subsection.
   (D)   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection (A)
of this section.
   (E)   Failure Or Refusal Of Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails to
comply with the provisions of subsection (C) of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   (A)   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village no less
than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility in the
right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the utility
or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed by the
former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   (B)   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village rights of
way.
   (C)   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 1652, 10-
10-2007)
9-12-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   (A)   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall
be consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations,
and commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction
principles, sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles
and standards set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from
time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices";
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   (B)   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the village superintendent of public works shall determine, in the
exercise of sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such
decision shall be final. If requested, the village superintendent of public
works shall state which standard or principle will apply to the construction,
maintenance, or operation of a facility in the future. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   (A)   Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   (B)   Warning Signs, Protective Devices And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the rights of way.
   (C)   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   (D)   Notice When Access Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section 9-12-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   (E)   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   (A)   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the village superintendent of public works
determines that the proposed location will require the relocation or
displacement of any of the village's utility facilities or will otherwise
interfere with the operation or maintenance of any of the village's utility
facilities.
      2.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      3.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      4.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      5.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   (B)   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way
line and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole
alignment will permit;
         (b)   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable
from the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') (0.6 m) behind the face
of the curb, where available;
         (c)   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') (1.2 m) outside the
outer shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         (d)   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         (e)   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
(0.3 m) of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way
line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         (a)   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') (2.4 m) from and parallel to the
right of way line;
         (b)   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         (c)   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') (1.5 m) from the right of way line, and any
abovegrounded appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the
right of way line or as near as practicable.
   (C)   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90o) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Illinois administrative code section 305);
         (b)   Poles are located within one foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of
way line of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         (c)   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         (a)   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         (b)   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   (D)   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   (E)   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view.
   (F)   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged.
   (G)   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         (a)   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         (b)   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         (c)   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         (d)   The proposed method of attachment;
         (e)   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         (f)   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         (g)   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         (h)   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   (H)   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 1652,
10-10-2007)
9-12-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   (A)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking:
         (a)   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the village
superintendent of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         (b)   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         (c)   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") (0.15 m) in diameter shall be accomplished with an auger and
following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the outside
diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1") (25 mm).
         (d)   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, guided with
auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         (e)   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         (a)   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipe line testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the village superintendent of public works.
         (b)   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         (c)   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         (a)   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation
of facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         (b)   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the superintendent of public works, the utility, at its expense,
shall remove any pavement and backfill material to the top of the installed
facility, place and properly compact new backfill material, and restore new
pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and driveways to the proper grades, as determined by
the superintendent of public works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection (A)4
is permitted under section 9-12-21, the following requirements shall apply:
         (a)   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the superintendent of public works.
         (b)   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         (c)   All saw cuts shall be full depth.
         (d)   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         (a)   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         (b)   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') (0.3 m) of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be
located in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of
the highway.
         (c)   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         (d)   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         (e)   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines
with installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated
only if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or
repair, and 2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         (f)   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                       Minimum Cover
Electric lines                         30 inches (0.8 m)
Communications, cable or video service 18 to 24 inches (0.6 m, as determined by
lines                                  village)
Gas or petroleum products              30 inches (0.8 m)
Water line                             Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                       protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or        Sufficient cover to provide freeze
drainage line                          protection
 
   (B)   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         (a)   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communications lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         (b)   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         (c)   Underground Facilities:
            (1)   Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing; provided,
that special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2)   If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits. Encasement may be eliminated
only if: a) the crossing is installed by the use of "moles", "whip augers", or
other approved methods which compress the earth to make the opening for cable
installation, or b) the installation is by the open trench method which is only
permitted prior to roadway construction.
            (3)   Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         (d)   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         (a)   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         (b)   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         (c)   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         (d)   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is
not possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping ("liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Stormwater Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') (305 mm) in
width beyond the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may
be provided by an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or
similar material approved by the superintendent of public works. With the
approval of the superintendent of public works, shrubbery surrounding the
appurtenance may be used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for
ground mounted appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the
surroundings.
   (C)   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the village superintendent
of public works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire,
poles, cross arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of
way prior to and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the
public or an obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way
and other property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval
must be obtained from the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   (D)   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the superintendent of public
works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) P.M. Monday
through Saturday, inclusive.
   (E)   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act 1 . (Ord. 1652,
10-10-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 220 ILCS 50/1 et seq.
9-12-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   (A)   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   (B)   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same shall not be considered a normal maintenance operation, but
shall require the application for, and the issuance of, a permit, in addition
to any other permit required under this chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be accomplished by competent
workers with supervision who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   (C)   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   (D)   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in subsection (D)2 of this section, no utility
shall spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or
vegetation in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth,
insects or disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the superintendent of public works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   (A)   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or
upon, the rights of way.
   (B)   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the rights of way
shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and subject to
removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   (C)   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   (D)   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village within
ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may direct the
utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the village
superintendent of public works determines that such removal will be in the best
interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
by giving notice of abandonment to the village, the abandoning utility shall be
deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion of the
facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the village superintendent of public works.
Such cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the village superintendent of public works for good cause shown.
(Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   (B)   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify
noncompliance with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
village superintendent of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of
the emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for
protection of the traveling public and what will be required to make the
necessary repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with
the free movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   (C)   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village a
description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty eight
(48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-21: VARIANCES:
   (A)   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the village
superintendent of public works as a part of the permit application. The request
shall identify each provision of this chapter from which a variance is
requested and the reasons why a variance should be granted.
   (B)   Authority To Grant Variances: The village superintendent of public
works shall decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this
chapter identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   (C)   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The village superintendent of
public works may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the
variance has demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   (D)   Additional Conditions For Granting Of Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the village superintendent of public works may require
the utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
   (E)   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the village
superintendent of public works under the provisions of this chapter shall have
the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as
it may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted in writing to
the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such order,
requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence its
consideration of the appeal at the board's next regularly scheduled meeting
occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The village
board shall timely decide the appeal. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to fine in accordance
with the penalty provisions of this code. There may be times when the village
will incur delay or other costs, including third party claims, because the
utility will not or cannot perform its duties under its permit and this
chapter. Unless the utility shows that another allocation of the cost of
undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the utility shall bear the
village's costs of damages and its costs of installing, maintaining, modifying,
relocating, or removing the facility that is the subject of the permit. No
other administrative agency or commission may review or overrule a permit
related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may be imposed upon a
utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
9-12-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 1652, 10-10-2007)
CHAPTER 13
TREES AND SHRUBS
SECTION:
9-13-1: Definitions
9-13-2: Purpose
9-13-3: Responsibilities And Duties
9-13-4: Street Tree Species
9-13-5: Residential Parkway Standards
9-13-6: Public Tree Care
9-13-7: Tree Topping
9-13-8: Pruning, Right Of Way Clearance
9-13-9: Abatement Of Public Nuisances
9-13-10: Removal Of Stumps
9-13-11: Interference With The Village
9-13-1: DEFINITIONS:
NUISANCE: The following are hereby declared public nuisances under this
chapter:
   (A)   Any dead or dying tree or shrub, whether located on village owned
property or on private property;
   (B)   Any otherwise healthy tree or shrub, whether located on village owned
property or on private property, which harbors insects or diseases which
reasonably may be expected to injure or harm any tree or shrub;
   (C)   Any tree or shrub or portion thereof, whether located on village owned
property or on private property, which by reason of location or condition
constitutes an imminent danger to the health, safety or welfare of the general
public;
   (D)   Any tree or shrub or portion thereof whether located on village owned
property or on private property which obstructs the free passage of pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or which obstructs a streetlight; and
   (E)   Any tree or shrub or portion thereof whether located on village owned
property or on private property which obstructs the view of any vehicular
traffic in or approaching an intersection.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
SHRUBS: Any plant attaining a height of less than ten feet (10').
STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on land
lying within the right of way lines on the parkway on either side of all
streets, avenues, or ways within the village.
TOPPING: The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches
(3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.
TREES AND SHRUBS: All vegetation, woody or otherwise, except lawn grass and
herbaceous flowers.
VILLAGE OWNED PROPERTY: Property within the village limits which is either: a)
owned by the village in fee simple, or b) impliedly or expressly dedicated to
the village. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this section is to provide for the proper parkway standards and
establishment of new trees, the protection and maintenance of existing trees
and the timely removal of hazardous or infectious diseased trees on both public
and private property. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-3: RESPONSIBILITIES AND DUTIES:
The superintendent of public works, or his/her designee, shall be responsible
for making recommendations to the village president and board of trustees for
the development, maintenance and administration of the village tree program.
It shall be the responsibility of the superintendent of public works to study,
investigate, counsel and develop and/or update annually, and to make
recommendations regarding a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning,
planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs along streets
and in other public areas. The president and board of trustees may request an
annual study. When the president and board of trustees request an annual plan,
such plan will be presented to the president and board of trustees and upon
acceptance and approval of the corporate authorities, shall constitute the
official comprehensive village tree plan for the village. The superintendent of
public works, when requested by the president and board of trustees shall
consider, investigate, make finding, report and recommend upon any special
matter or question coming within the scope of its work. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-4: STREET TREE SPECIES:
Tree species planted in the parkway or on village owned property shall conform
to the official street tree planting list as maintained by the superintendent
of public works and as amended from time to time. No species other than those
included in this list may be planted as street trees without written permission
of the superintendent of public works or his/her designee or the president and
board of trustees. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-5: RESIDENTIAL PARKWAY STANDARDS:
   (A)   Spacing: Parkway trees shall be provided at the equivalent of one tree
for every forty (40) linear feet in the parkway adjacent to any parcel. Where
appropriate parkway trees may be clustered or spaced linearly in the right of
way as determined by the superintendent of public works or his/her designee.
Materials prohibited in parkways, unless approved by the superintendent of
public works, include brick pavers, loose stone, rock, gravel, asphalt, ground
cover and shrubs exceeding thirty six inches (36") in height at maturity, and
concrete, except in conjunction with driveways and walkways.
   (B)   Distance From Curb And Sidewalk And Overhead Wires: Trees shall be
planted on the centerline of parkways or as close to five feet (5') from the
sidewalk as possible so as not to interfere with overhead wires or traffic or
pedestrian safety.
   (C)   Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs: No tree or bush with a
mature height of more than two feet (2') shall be planted within a distance of
thirty three feet (33') of any street corner, measured from the point of the
nearest intersecting curbs or curb lines as extended. No tree shall be planted
closer than six feet (6') of any fire hydrant. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-6: PUBLIC TREE CARE:
The village shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees,
plants and shrubs on village owned property or within any parkway abutting any
street, alley, avenue, lane, and square, as may be necessary to ensure public
safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public
grounds. However, such parkway shall be maintained by the adjacent property
owner unless an agreement for maintenance has been reached with the village.
The superintendent of public works may recommend to the president and board of
trustees the removal of any tree or part thereof which constitutes a public
nuisance or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric
power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements. This section
does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners,
providing that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with
the official street tree species list. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-7: TREE TOPPING:
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm or village
department to engage in tree topping of any street tree or other tree on public
property. Trees located on village owned property or parkways which are
severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility
wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may
be exempted from this chapter at the determination of the superintendent of
public works or the president and board of trustees. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-8: PRUNING, RIGHT OF WAY CLEARANCE:
Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way within the
village shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the
view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of
eight feet (8') above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall
remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which
constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The village, in accordance
with the law, shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private
property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street
from a streetlight or is otherwise a public nuisance. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-9: ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES:
   (A)   Any public nuisance under this chapter that is located on village
owned property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the
superintendent of public works or his/her designee in whatever fashion is
required to cause the abatement of the nuisance within a reasonable time after
its discovery.
   (B)   Any public nuisance under this chapter that is located on private
property shall be pruned, removed or otherwise treated by the property owner or
his/her agent at their sole cost and in whatever fashion is required to cause
the abatement of the nuisance. No property owner may be in violation of this
provision unless and until the following requirements of notice have so been
satisfied:
      1.   The village shall cause a written notice to be sent by registered or
certified mail to the owner of the property upon which the public nuisance
exists;
      2.   The notice shall describe with particularity the tree or shrub that
has been declared to be a public nuisance;
      3.   The notice shall state with particularity the alternative actions
that the property owner may undertake to abate the nuisance;
      4.   The notice will require the elimination of the nuisance within sixty
(60) days of the date of the notice, although upon a showing of good cause,
said period may be extended by the superintendent of the department of public
works.
In the event that the nuisance is not abated within sixty (60) days following
the date of the issuance of the notice required under this section or any
extensions provided by the superintendent of public works, the village is
authorized to cause the abatement of said public nuisance and the reasonable
cost of such abatement shall be filed as a lien against the property on which
the nuisance was located and the property owner upon which the nuisance is
located shall be subject to prosecution for a violation of this section in
accordance with this code.
   (C)   The superintendent of public works is hereby empowered to cause the
immediate abatement of any public nuisance provided that said public nuisance
is determined by the superintendent of public works or his/her designee to
constitute an imminent and serious threat capable of causing death or serious
injury to any person and provided that the owner of the property on which said
public nuisance is located cannot be located or contacted through the
reasonable efforts of the village.
   (D)   The superintendent is hereby empowered to seek from any court of
competent jurisdiction an order directing the immediate abatement of any public
nuisance as defined in this chapter. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-10: REMOVAL OF STUMPS:
All stumps of street trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so
that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground.
(Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
9-13-11: INTERFERENCE WITH THE VILLAGE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
village or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting,
cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying, or removing of any street trees,
trees on village owned property, or trees constituting a public nuisance on
private property. (Ord. 1899, 7-22-2015)
CHAPTER 14
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
9-14-1: Purpose And Scope
9-14-2: Definitions
9-14-3: Regulation Of Small Wireless Facilities
9-14-4: Dispute Resolution
9-14-5: Indemnification
9-14-6: Insurance
9-14-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations,
standards and procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless
facilities on rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the
rights-of-way on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or
industrial use, in a manner that is consistent with the Small Wireless
Facilities Deployment Act.
   (B)   Conflicts With Other Ordinances: This chapter supersedes all
ordinances or parts of ordinances adopted prior hereto that are in conflict
herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
   (C)   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating Federal or State laws
or regulations. (Ord. 1997, 7-25-2018)
9-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
MUNICIPAL UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in
public rights-of-way.
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
1997, 7-25-2018)
9-14-3: REGULATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES:
   (A)   Permitted Use: Small wireless facilities shall be classified as
permitted uses and subject to administrative review, except as provided in
subsection (C)9 of this section regarding height exceptions or variances, but
not subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: 1) in rights-
of-way in any zoning district, or 2) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use.
   (B)   Permit Required: An applicant shall obtain one or more permits from
the Village to collocate a small wireless facility. An application shall be
received and processed, and permits issued shall be subject to the following
conditions and requirements:
      1.   Application Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the
following information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Cell
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
         (a)   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Municipal utility
pole, make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is
defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
         (b)   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or
utility pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its
immediate surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each
proposed small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility
poles or structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the
completed facility;
         (c)   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer,
as that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act
of 1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application
as it is proposed to be installed;
         (d)   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all
other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
         (e)   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
         (f)   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
         (g)   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole owned by an entity other than the Village, the
wireless provider shall provide legally competent evidence of the consent of
the owner of such pole to the proposed collocation.
      2.   Application Process: The Village shall process applications as
follows:
         (a)   The first completed application shall have priority over
applications received by different applicants for collocation on the same
utility pole or wireless support structure.
         (b)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an
existing utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application.
      However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than seventy
five (75) days after the submission of a completed application.
      The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (c)   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that
includes the installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or
deny the application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission
of a completed application.
      However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the permitted activity
on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the Village in writing
of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no sooner than one
hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed application.
      The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day after
submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt of the
deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed approved
notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request within the
time limits as provided under this chapter.
         (d)   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
      If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the provider.
      The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the specific
Code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is based, and
send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the Village denies
an application.
      The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and
resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30)
days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial
shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the Village's review period.
      The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
      Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the deficiencies
cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not apply if the
cure requires the review of a new location, new or different structure to be
collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment associated with the
small wireless facility.
         (e)   Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a
small wireless facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the
applicant shall enter into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the
Village for the initial collocation on a Municipal utility pole by the
application. For subsequent approved permits to collocate on a small wireless
facility on a Municipal utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter
into a License Supplement of the Master Pole Attachment Agreement.
      3.   Completeness Of Application: Within thirty (30) days after receiving
an application, the Village shall determine whether the application is complete
and notify the applicant. If an application is incomplete, the Village must
specifically identify the missing information. An application shall be deemed
complete if the Village fails to provide notification to the applicant within
thirty (30) days after all documents, information and fees specifically
enumerated in the Village's permit application form are submitted by the
applicant to the Village.
   Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice
of incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information.
      4.   Tolling: The time period for applications may be further tolled by:
         (a)   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the
Village; or
         (b)   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar
emergency that causes the delay.
      5.   Consolidated Applications: An applicant seeking to collocate small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at
the applicant's discretion, to file a consolidated application and receive a
single permit for the collocation of up to twenty five (25) small wireless
facilities if the collocations each involve substantially the same type of
small wireless facility and substantially the same type of structure.
   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the Village
may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application and treat
separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application.
      6.   Duration Of Permits: The duration of a permit shall be for a period
of not less than five (5) years, and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent
durations unless the Village makes a finding that the small wireless facilities
or the new or modified utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village
codes or any provision, condition or requirement contained in this chapter.
   If the Act is repealed as provided in section 90 therein, renewals of
permits shall be subject to the applicable Village Code provisions or
regulations in effect at the time of renewal.
      7.   Means Of Submitting Applications: Applicants shall submit
applications, supporting information and notices to the Village by personal
delivery at the Village's designated place of business, by regular mail
postmarked on the date due or by any other commonly used means, including
electronic mail.
   (C)   Collocation Requirements And Conditions:
      1.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Municipal utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's
electric utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Municipal utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
      2.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
chapter. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
      3.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications.
   A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of the type and
frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a public safety
agency's communications equipment.
   Unacceptable interference will be determined by and measured in accordance
with industry standards and the FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable
interference to public safety spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a
public safety agency.
   If a small wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless
provider has been given written notice of the interference by the public safety
agency, the wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the
interference in a manner consistent with the abatement and resolution
procedures for interference with public safety spectrum established by the FCC
including 47 CFR 22.970 through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR
90.675.
   The Village may terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on
such interference if the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code
of Federal Regulations cited in the previous paragraph. Failure to remedy the
interference as required herein shall constitute a public nuisance.
      4.   Electric Distribution Or Transmission System: The wireless provider
shall not collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are
part of an electric distribution or transmission system within the
communication worker safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the
pole.
   However, the antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility
may be located in the communications space on the Village utility pole and on
the top of the pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider
complies with applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole.
   For purposes of this subparagraph, the terms "communications space",
"communication worker safety zone", and "electric supply zone" have the
meanings given to those terms in the National Electric Safety Code as published
by the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers.
      5.   Public Safety: The wireless provider shall comply with all
applicable codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public
safety.
      6.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that are set forth
in a Village ordinance, written policy adopted by the Village, a comprehensive
plan or other written design plan that applies to other occupiers of the
rights-of-way, including on a historic landmark or in a historic district.
      7.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocation small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant.
   If the applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the
applicant shall provide written certification describing the property rights,
technical limits or material cost reasons the alternate location does not
satisfy the criteria in this paragraph.
      8.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated.
   New or replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which
small wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
         (a)   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility
pole, other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in
place on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located
within three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or
wireless support structure and that is in the same right-of-way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
         (b)   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
      9.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height
for a new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on
which the small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant
shall apply for a special use permit, variance or administrative waiver as the
case may be in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in
title 11, chapter 2, part 2 of this Code.
      10.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground- mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
      11.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall
comply with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way
if the requirements include a waiver, zoning or other process that addresses
wireless provider requests for exception or variance and do not prohibit
granting of such exceptions or variances.
      12.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval if the requirements include a
waiver, zoning or other process that addresses requests to install such new
utility poles or modify such existing utility poles and do not prohibit the
replacement of utility poles.
      13.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Municipal utility
pole or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant.
   (D)   Application Fees: Application fees are imposed as follows:
      1.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
      2.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
      3.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local
ordinance, applications pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by the
required application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable.
      4.   The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or
require any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider
authorized to occupy the rights- of-way, for:
         (a)   Routine maintenance;
         (b)   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities
that are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless
provider notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned
replacement and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of
equipment consistent with subsection (B)1, "Application Requirements", of this
section; or
         (c)   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or
replacement of micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung
between existing utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes.
      5.   Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work
within rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require
lane closures.
   (E)   Exceptions To Applicability: Nothing in this chapter authorizes a
person to collocate small wireless facilities on:
      1.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner;
      2.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
      3.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201
of the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
   For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given
to that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this
chapter shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: a) to
obtain a franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or
video service or b) to obtain any required permission to install, place,
maintain, or operate communications facilities, other than small wireless
facilities subject to this chapter.
   (F)   Pre-Existing Agreements: Existing agreements between the Village and
wireless providers that relate to the collocation of small wireless facilities
in the right-of-way, including the collocation of small wireless facilities on
Village utility poles, that are in effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for
all small wireless facilities collocated on the Village's utility poles
pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before June 1, 2018, subject
to applicable termination provisions contained therein. Agreements entered into
after June 1, 2018, shall comply with this chapter.
   A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the Village on the
effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms that the Village
makes available under this chapter for the collocation of small wireless
facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the collocation of
small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application submitted two
(2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by notifying the Village
that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The existing agreement
remains in effect, subject to applicable termination provisions, for the small
wireless facilities the wireless provider has collocated on the Village's
utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to the Village before the
wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its option under this
paragraph.
   (G)   Annual Recurring Rate: A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an
annual recurring rate to collocate a small wireless facility on a Village
utility pole located in a right-of-way that equals: 1) two hundred dollars
($200.00) per year or 2) the actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the
wireless provider's use of space on the Village utility pole.
   If the Village has not billed the wireless provider actual and direct costs,
the fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00) payable on the first day after
the first annual anniversary of the issuance of the permit or notice of intent
to collocate, and on each annual anniversary date thereafter.
   (H)   Abandonment: A small wireless facility that is not operated for a
continuous period of twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The
owner of the facility shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety
(90) days after receipt of written notice from the Village notifying the
wireless provider of the abandonment.
   The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return receipt
requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Municipal
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery.
   A wireless provider shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells
or transfers small wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village.
Such notice shall include the name and contact information of the new wireless
provider. (Ord. 1997, 7-25-2018)
9-14-4: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Cook County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act.
Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation of small
wireless facilities on Municipal utility poles within the right-of-way, the
Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at annual
rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Municipal
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 1997, 7-25-2018)
9-14-5: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right- of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 1997, 7-25-2018)
9-14-6: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   (A)   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   (B)   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   (C)   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage.
The wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility.
A wireless provider may self-insure all or a portion of the insurance coverage
and limit requirement required by the Village. A wireless provider that self-
insures is not required, to the extent of the self-insurance, to comply with
the requirement for the name of additional insureds under this section. A
wireless provider that elects to self-insure shall provide to the Village
evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability to self- insure the
insurance coverage limits required by the Village. (Ord. 1997, 7-25-2018)
TITLE 10
TRAFFIC
Traffic Codes Adopted   1
Traffic Enforcement (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   2
Through And One-Way Streets (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   3
Operation Of Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   4
Pedestrians (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   5
Miscellaneous Driving Rules (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   6
Stopping; Standing; Parking (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   7
Parking Meter Regulations (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   8
Vehicle Equipment (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   9
Accidents; Arrests (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   10
Licensing Vehicles   11
Bicycles (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   12
Vehicle; Dealer Registration; Offense (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   13
Drivers Licenses And Renting Of Vehicles (Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)   14
Parking, Traffic, Miscellaneous Traffic Regulations   15
Snowmobile Registration And Safety Act   16
Administrative Adjudication Of Vehicular Standing, Parking And Condition Of
Vehicle Regulation Violations   17
Park Zones   18
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC CODES ADOPTED
SECTION:
10-1-1: Illinois Vehicle Code Adopted
10-1-2: Motor Vehicle Theft Reporting Act Adopted
10-1-3: Child Passenger Protection Act Adopted
10-1-4: Penalties
10-1-1: ILLINOIS VEHICLE CODE ADOPTED:
The "Illinois Vehicle Code", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-100 and
following and any subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted by
reference. For purposes of writing citations under the Village Code based on
the adoption of the Illinois Vehicle Code under this chapter, a reference to
this chapter (example: 10-1-1) followed by a slash and the section number from
the Illinois Vehicle Code shall be used. For illustration purposes, 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-101 shall be cited as 10-1-1/2-101. (Ord. 1989,
6-13-2018)
10-1-2: MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT REPORTING ACT ADOPTED:
The "Motor Vehicle Theft Reporting Act", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 10/
1 and following and any subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted by
reference. (Ord. 1395, 7-24-1996)
10-1-3: CHILD PASSENGER PROTECTION ACT ADOPTED:
The "Child Passenger Protection Act", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 25/1 and
following and any subsequent amendments thereto are hereby adopted by
reference. (Ord. 1395, 7-24-1996)
10-1-4: PENALTIES:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this Code or the maximum allowed by State Statutes for each
offense except that any person violating section 10-1-1 of this chapter
pertaining to driving on a suspended license shall be fined not less than five
hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense and not less than seven hundred
fifty dollars ($750.00) for a second offense. (Ord. 1989, 6-13-2018)
CHAPTER 2
TRAFFIC ENFORCEMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 3
THROUGH AND ONE-WAY STREETS
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 4
OPERATION OF VEHICLES
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 5
PEDESTRIANS
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 6
MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 7
STOPPING; STANDING; PARKING
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 8
PARKING METER REGULATIONS
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 9
VEHICLE EQUIPMENT
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 10
ACCIDENTS; ARRESTS
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 11
LICENSING VEHICLES
(Rep. by Ord. 2166, 4-9-2025)
CHAPTER 12
BICYCLES
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 13
VEHICLE; DEALER REGISTRATION; OFFENSE
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 14
DRIVERS LICENSES AND RENTING OF VEHICLES
(Rep. by Ord. 1394, 7-24-1996)
CHAPTER 15
PARKING, TRAFFIC, MISCELLANEOUS TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
10-15-1: Speed Restrictions
10-15-2: Obstructing Traffic
10-15-3: Parking On Roadway
10-15-4: Parking Vehicles For Sale
10-15-5: All Night Parking
10-15-6: Parking In Alleys
10-15-7: Unauthorized Parking In Cab Stands; Bus Stands
10-15-8: Parking Signs Required
10-15-9: Parking On Parkways
10-15-10: Coasters, Roller Skates And Similar Devices
10-15-11: Parking Of Trucks And Buses Restricted
10-15-12: Limited Winter Parking
10-15-13: Weight Regulations
10-15-14: Permit Fee Schedule
10-15-15: Presumptions
10-15-16: Notice On Illegally Parked Vehicle
10-15-17: Blocking Of Streets By Railroad Trains
10-15-18: Repair Or Maintenance Of Vehicles On Streets
10-15-19: Parking On Private Or Public Property
10-15-20: Authority Of Police And Fire Departments
10-15-21: Invalidity Of Any Section Or Provision; Separability
10-15-22: Commuter Parking Facility
10-15-23: Permit Parking Only
10-15-24: Parking In Front Yards
10-15-25: Penalties
10-15-26: Go-Carts, Minibikes, Motorized Recreational Off Road Vehicles
10-15-27: Administrative Charges For Vehicles Towed
10-15-28: Amnesty Program
10-15-29: Electronic Communication Devices
10-15-1: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to drive any motor vehicle on any street or alley not
under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois or county of Cook in a
residential district within the village at a speed in excess of twenty (20)
miles per hour. The superintendent of streets shall post the appropriate signs
showing such speed limits. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-2: OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC:
No vehicle shall be operated or allowed to remain upon any street in such a
manner as to form an unreasonable obstruction to the traffic thereon. (Ord.
1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-3: PARKING ON ROADWAY:
It shall be unlawful to park, stand or stop any vehicle at any place where the
standing of a vehicle will reduce usable width of the roadway for moving
traffic to less than eighteen feet (18'), unless so directed by a police
officer. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-4: PARKING VEHICLES FOR SALE:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle anywhere in the village with a "For
Sale" or similar sign displayed on it unless the vehicle is parked on lots
where businesses have been licensed to sell new or used cars. The use of the
word "vehicle" includes, but is not limited to, automobiles, trucks, campers,
vans, boats, motorcycles, motor scooters, snowmobiles and other similar
vehicles. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-5: ALL NIGHT PARKING:
No person shall park any vehicle on any street for a period of time longer than
thirty (30) minutes between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except physicians on emergency calls. (Ord.
1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-6: PARKING IN ALLEYS:
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such
conditions as to leave available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop,
stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the
driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-7: UNAUTHORIZED PARKING IN CAB STANDS; BUS STANDS:
No vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated
as a cab stand; and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place
designated as a bus loading zone. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-8: PARKING SIGNS REQUIRED:
The chief of police or any other person authorized by the president and board
of trustees may cause signs to be posted in areas where parking is limited or
prohibited, indicating such limitations or prohibitions. (Ord. 1601, 7-14-2004)
10-15-9: PARKING ON PARKWAYS:
It shall be unlawful for any business to park or locate any vehicle or property
or signs, in whole or in part, on any parkway within the village. This includes
village, county and state roads. It is not a violation for a customer to park
on a parkway while patronizing the business location, unless there are
provisions in this code or state statutes that prohibit said parking (parking
near fire hydrants, crosswalks, etc.) or unless signs are posted preventing
said parking for any reason.
Any parkways used by patrons of businesses must be paved with asphalt or
concrete. Parking on parkways shall also be allowed for the benefit of
churches, schools, public buildings or multiple residential family use. (Ord.
1601, 7-14-2004)
10-15-10: COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND SIMILAR DEVICES:
No person upon roller skates, rollerblades, skateboards or riding in or by
means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device, shall go upon any roadway
except while crossing a street at a crosswalk and when so crossing such person
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to pedestrians. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-11: PARKING OF TRUCKS AND BUSES RESTRICTED:
   (A)   No person shall stand or park any truck, tractor, semitrailer, trailer
or bus on any residential street for a longer period than is necessary for the
reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle, except that a
driver of a bus may park such bus in a designated bus stand as is provided
otherwise in this chapter.
   (B)   No person shall stand or park any truck, tractor, semitrailer, trailer
or bus on any business street in the village for a longer time than is
necessary for the reasonably expeditious loading or unloading of such vehicle,
except that a driver of a bus may park such bus in a designated bus stand as is
provided elsewhere in this chapter.
   (C)   Any vehicle parked in violation of this section is hereby declared to
be a nuisance which may be abated by any police officer by citing the owner or
driver of the vehicle and/or by posting appropriate notice indicating that the
vehicle will be towed, and after the appropriate time by having such vehicle
towed by an authorized towing company. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-12: LIMITED WINTER PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on a village street at any time if the
snow on the street exceeds two inches (2") in depth. This ban on parking shall
remain in effect until snow removal operations are completed. If a car is
parked on a street when the snow starts falling, it shall be the owner's or
driver's responsibility to remove the car from the street by the time the snow
has reached a depth of two inches (2"). (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-13: WEIGHT REGULATIONS:
   (A)   Restrictions On Weight And Size Enforced: In order to prevent
destruction of hard surfaced streets and roadways in the village, it is
necessary that restrictions on the weight and size of all vehicular traffic
using such streets and roadways be limited and enforced.
   (B)   Exceeding Statute Limitations Without Permit Unlawful: It shall be
unlawful for any person to be in control of, to drive, to park, or move on,
upon or across, or for the owner to cause or knowingly permit to be parked,
driven, or moved upon or across, any street or highway under the jurisdiction
of the village, any vehicle or combination of vehicles exceeding the size and
weight limitations stated in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102 (width),
5/15-103 (height), 5/15-107 (length), and 5/15-111 (weight), as amended,
without a permit pursuant to this section.
   (C)   Exceptions: Size and weights limitations while operating on village
streets shall not apply to fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal
operations owned and operated by or for any governmental body, or to implements
of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance
of a farm or agricultural endeavor, public utility trucks performing
maintenance functions, and to any vehicle or combination of vehicles operated
under the terms of a valid oversize and/or dimension permit issued by the
village under the authority of subsection (F) of this section. In addition,
garbage or refuse equipment and vehicles making deliveries within the village
that meet the width, height, length, and weight requirements in subsection (B)
of this section are permitted.
   (D)   Restrictions Imposed By Ordinance: Where lower size and weight limits
or other restrictions are imposed by ordinance under authority of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, 15-316, and 15-317 and signs indicating such
limitations or restrictions are posted, it shall be unlawful to operate any
vehicle or combination of vehicles in excess of such size or weight limitations
or in violation of such restrictions except as allowed by ordinance.
   (E)   Weight Limits On Streets:
      1.   Except for fire apparatus or equipment for snow or ice removal
operations owned and operated by or for any governmental body, or to implements
of husbandry temporarily operated or towed in a combination in the furtherance
of a farm or agricultural endeavor, or garbage or refuse equipment, or vehicles
making deliveries within the village that meet the width, height, length, and
weight requirements in subsection (B) of this section, or public utility trucks
performing maintenance functions, the maximum gross weight limit for all
vehicular traffic using streets under the jurisdiction of the village shall be
six thousand (6,000) pounds except for designated truck routes and state or
county roads or unless otherwise required by state or federal law.
      2.   The superintendent of public works shall cause weight limit signs to
be posted at the entrances into the village and at all major entrances of major
subdivisions within the village. The maximum gross weight limit shall apply to
all types of vehicles traveling in, on, upon, and over the separate streets and
roadways controlled by the village.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle, whether passenger car or motor
truck or any other type of vehicle having a gross weight more than the maximum
gross weight limit, to come upon, traverse or travel over or upon streets and
roadways controlled by the village except for designated truck routes or as
authorized by the chief of police or the public works director.
      4.   Every separate entry upon any separate street and roadway by the
driver of a vehicle having a gross weight in excess of the maximum gross weight
limit permitted shall be deemed to be a separate offense by such driver.
      5.   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and load is unlawful shall require the driver to stop and submit to a
weighing of the same either by means of a portable or stationary scale. If such
scale is not available at the place where such vehicle is stopped, the police
officer shall require that such vehicle be driven to the nearest public scale.
      6.   Whenever a police officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load pursuant
to this section, determines that the weight is unlawful, such officer shall
require the driver to stop the vehicle in a suitable place and remain standing
until such portion of the load is removed as may be necessary to reduce the
gross weight of such vehicle to such limits as permitted under this section and
shall forthwith charge the driver for violating this section. All material so
unloaded shall be cared for by the owner or operator of such vehicle at the
risk of such owner or operator.
      7.   Any driver of a vehicle who fails or refuses to stop and submit the
vehicle and load to a weighing, or who fails or refuses when directed by a
police officer upon weighing of the vehicle to stop the vehicle or otherwise
comply with the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
      8.   When any vehicle is operated on the roads and streets under the
jurisdiction of the village at a weight greater than permitted herein or by the
terms of a permit issued under this section in violation of the provisions of
this section, the owner or driver, or both, of such vehicle shall be deemed
guilty of such violation, and the owner or driver, or both, of such vehicle may
be prosecuted pursuant to this code and may be subject to a fine up to seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00).
   (F)   Permits For Overweight And/Or Oversized Vehicles:
      1.   A permit shall be required for the movement of any vehicle or
combination of vehicles with a nondivisible load on roadways and bridges within
the jurisdiction of the village that exceeds the dimensions and weights
permitted for the particular roadways to be traversed whether they be
nondesignated or designated roadways.
      2.   The village, with respect to any street or highway under its
jurisdiction, may, upon application to the police department on forms provided
by the police department and good cause being shown therefor, issue a special
permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of
vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum weight
and/or size specified in this section. The applicant shall furnish the
following information on the special permit application:
         (a)   The name and address of the owner or lessee of the vehicle.
         (b)   Applicant's name.
         (c)   Type of yearly permit required whether it be for a single trip,
round trip or multiple routing.
         (d)   The registration of the power unit.
         (e)   Description of the object or vehicle to be moved.
         (f)   The number of axles of the vehicle or combination of vehicles.
         (g)   The maximum axle weights of all single, tandem, or series axles.
         (h)   The maximum gross weight of the vehicle.
         (i)   The maximum width, length and height of the vehicle and load.
         (j)   Requested routing over village streets to and from the specified
location.
      3.   For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply:
   ONE-WAY OR SINGLE TRIP MOVEMENT: One trip from the point of origin to the
point of destination. Any additional stops between the point of origin and the
point of destination are expressly prohibited. Single trip permits are
effective for seven (7) consecutive days from the date of issuance unless
otherwise directed by the police department.
   QUARTERLY PERMITS: Those trips that are known to be continuous in nature and
shall be for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of issuance.
   ROUND TRIP MOVEMENT: Two (2) trips over the same route in opposite
directions. Round trip permits are effective for fourteen (14) consecutive days
from the date of issuance. Any additional stops between points of origin and
the point of destination are expressly prohibited.
   YEARLY TRIPS: Those trips that are known to be continuous in nature
throughout a calendar year beginning on January 1 of a specific year and ending
on December 31 of the same year.
      4.   The owner or agent shall submit an application fee found in this
code for a single routing that will be valid for seven (7) calendar days, round
trip routing valid for fourteen (14) calendar days, quarterly permits valid for
a base period of ninety (90) days, and a yearly permit valid for three hundred
sixty five (365) days. Permits are valid only for the date periods specified on
the permit and for the specific vehicle, load, and routing as established by
the chief or designee. No substitution of vehicle, load, or routing is
permitted without the expressed written permission of the chief or designee,
and the permit must be carried in the vehicle to which the permit applies.
      5.   The chief or designee is authorized to approve the application upon
verification with the public works director or designee for approved routes.
Upon approval and payment of all required fees, the police department shall
issue a permit allowing passage of the oversize and/or overweight vehicles over
village streets. The permit shall be specific and contain:
         (a)   Permit number;
         (b)   The date(s) the permit is valid;
         (c)   Whether the yearly permit is for single trip, round trip,
quarterly or annual term;
         (d)   The description of object or vehicle to be moved;
         (e)   Authorized gross weight, axle weights, width, length and height;
         (f)   The authorized routing over village streets, including the
origin and termination points within the village;
         (g)   The applicable fee;
         (h)   The date and signature of the chief or designee; and
         (i)   Specify general conditions that the permittee must comply with
that are consistent and reasonable for the protection of the general public and
streets.
      6.   It is the duty of the permittee to read and be familiar with the
permit provisions. Undertaking of the permit trip is deemed prima facie
evidence of acceptance of the permit provisions and that:
         (a)   The permittee is in compliance with all operation requirements;
         (b)   No dimension and weight limitations specified in the permit will
be exceeded;
         (c)   All operation, registration, and license requirements have been
complied with;
         (d)   All financial responsibilities, obligations, and other legal
requirements have been met; and
         (e)   The permittee assumes all responsibility for injury and damage
to persons or to public or private property, including his or her own, or to
the object being transported, caused directly or indirectly by the
transportation or movement of vehicles and objects authorized under the permit.
The permittee agrees to hold the village harmless from all suits, claims,
damages, or proceedings of any kind and to indemnify the village for any claim
it may be required to pay arising from the movement.
      7.   The permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which the permit
applies at all times while operating on streets within the village and shall be
exhibited upon demand to any law enforcement officer, police officer, or
authorized village official. Electronic copies of the permit are acceptable
provided the police officer is able to inspect the permit on the device used by
the driver. If there are any discrepancies between the written items upon the
applicant's copy and the village's copy of the permit, the village's copy shall
be considered correct. The permit is void if any of the printed widths,
lengths, heights, or weight limits have been changed or altered.
      8.   Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the provisions of a
village permit, whether by size, weight, or general provisions, and either or
both the owner and driver of such vehicle, shall be deemed guilty and either or
both the owner and driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation.
   (G)   Construction Vehicles: For purposes of this section, a construction
vehicle is any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons or property
in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for hire or not
for hire, but not including a commuter van, a vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement when being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not
being used commercially. It shall be unlawful to operate any construction
vehicle on any street in the village when signs are posted on that street
prohibiting construction vehicles. Where the chief, with the approval of the
village board, establishes a truck route, construction vehicles will utilize
only those established routes to service those areas of the village under
construction.
   (H)   Penalty: Any person, firm, or corporation who or which violates,
disobeys, neglects, fails to comply with, or resists enforcement of the
provisions of this section shall be fined pursuant to this code up to an amount
of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each calendar day a violation occurs.
In addition to seeking a fine, the village attorney may institute any proper
action in the name of the village to enjoin the violation of any provision of
this section. (Ord. 1917, 3-23-2016)
10-15-14: PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE:
The following permit fee schedule shall be applicable for overweight permits:
PERMIT FEE SCHEDULE
 Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Trip Yearly Trip
                              Single Trip Round Trip Quarterly Trip Yearly Trip
Weight with load:                                                 
Up to 100,000 pounds          $ 50.00     $ 75.00    $150.00        $500.00
100,001 to 120,000 pounds     75.00       100.00     200.00         800.00
120,001 to 150,000 pounds     100.00      150.00     Prohibited     Prohibited
Over 150,000 pounds           150.00      200.00     Prohibited     Prohibited
Width with load:                                                  
Up to 12 feet                 25.00       50.00      $ 75.00        $300.00
12 feet 1 inch to 14 feet     50.00       75.00      100.00         500.00
Over 14 feet                  75.00       100.00     Prohibited     Prohibited
Height with load:                                                 
13 feet 6 inches to 14 feet 6 25.00       50.00      $75.00         $300.00
inches
Over 14 feet 6 inches         50.00       75.00      Prohibited     Prohibited
Length with load:                                                 
Up to 110 feet                25.00       50.00      $75.00         $300.00
Over 110 feet                 50.00       75.00      Prohibited     Prohibited
 
In addition to these permit fees, the village may charge necessary and
appropriate administrative, engineering and road damage fees. (Ord. 1917, 3-23-
2016)
10-15-15: PRESUMPTIONS:
Whenever any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of any of the
provisions of any regulations prohibiting or restricting parking, the person in
whose name such vehicle is registered shall be prima facie responsible for such
violation and subject to the penalty therefor. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-16: NOTICE ON ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE:
   (A)   Whenever any vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of any
regulations prohibiting or restricting parking, and there is no person in
attendance upon such parked vehicle to be arrested or served immediately with a
traffic violation notice to appear in court to answer the charge of violation,
any police officer observing such violation may attach to the vehicle used in
such violation a traffic violation notice so that the person in whose name such
vehicle is registered may appear in court on a day certain to be named in such
notice and answer to the charge of such violation.
When any vehicle is parked in a private parking lot in violation of any
regulation or in a public parking lot in violation of any regulation and there
is no person in attendance upon such parked vehicle to be arrested or served
immediately with a traffic violation notice to appear in court to answer the
charge of such violation, any police officer upon a written complaint signed by
the owner or proprietor of the lot, or by his authorized agent, that the
vehicle is not entitled to the privileges of the parking lot may attach to the
vehicle a traffic violation notice as provided herein.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the driver or owner of
the vehicle to which said notice is attached, to remove same from said vehicle.
(Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-17: BLOCKING OF STREETS BY RAILROAD TRAINS:
It shall be unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad
train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to
prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time
longer than ten (10) minutes; except that, this provision shall not apply to
trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. (Ord. 1396, 7-
24-1996)
10-15-18: REPAIR OR MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES ON STREETS:
No person shall perform maintenance work or repairs on a vehicle on any street
except for repairs necessitated by an emergency. Any such emergency repairs
shall be made as close to the right hand edge of the roadway as possible with
the vehicle facing in the direction of traffic flow. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-19: PARKING ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person not so authorized to park a
vehicle on private property.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person not so authorized to park a
vehicle on public property. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-20: AUTHORITY OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS:
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the officer of the police department or such
other authorized officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce all
street traffic and parking regulations of the village and the state of
Illinois.
   (B)   Officers of the police department or such other authorized officers or
crossing guards as are assigned or authorized by the chief of police are hereby
authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformance with
traffic laws or regulations; provided, that, in the event of a fire or other
emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the
police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding
the provisions of the traffic laws or regulations.
   (C)   Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may
direct or assist the police in directing traffic at or in the immediate
vicinity. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-21: INVALIDITY OF ANY SECTION OR PROVISION; SEPARABILITY:
It is the intention of the village board that this chapter, and every provision
thereof, shall be considered separable; and the invalidity of any section,
clause, provision or part or portion of any section, clause or provision of
this chapter shall not affect the validity of any other portion of this
chapter. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-22: COMMUTER PARKING FACILITY:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this chapter:
   DISABLED PERSON: A person who displays a license plate on his or her motor
vehicle which has been issued to him or her by the motor vehicle division of
the secretary of state's office and which, on its face indicates that the owner
and driver of such vehicle is a disabled person and is thus entitled to display
such special license plate on his or her motor vehicle.
   PARKING SPACE: A space in the commuter parking facility for the parking of
motor vehicles; which space is identified by plainly marked stripes painted on
the surface of the paving and by being numbered.
   RESTRICTED DISABLED PARKING AREA: An area in the commuter parking facility
for the parking of motor vehicles, which area is marked by signs clearly
indicating that it may be used by disabled persons only.
   (B)   Manner Of Parking; Parking In Areas Reserved For Disabled Persons:
      1.   No person shall park a motor vehicle in any designated parking space
in such a manner that such motor vehicle protrudes over and into any other
parking space immediately contiguous to it so as to prevent the use of the
latter space by another motor vehicle.
      2.   No person shall park a motor vehicle in a parking space which is
designated and marked for the use of disabled persons only, unless such vehicle
is operated by a disabled person.
   (C)   No Parking Areas: Parking is prohibited within the parking facility in
any location except in a designated parking space.
   (D)   Commercial Vehicles: No commercial parking facility.
   (E)   Enforcement By Police Department:
      1.   The police department shall enforce this chapter through the
issuance of citations and the towing and impounding of vehicles that are in
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Vehicles parked so as to
block traffic may be towed immediately and the owner or driver shall be
ticketed and shall be responsible for cost of towing and storage. Vehicles
parked over twelve (12) hours without paying a fee may be towed and the owner
or driver shall be ticketed and shall be responsible for the cost of towing and
storage.
      2.   It shall be presumed that the registered owner of any vehicle is in
violation of this section and if any other person admits to parking the vehicle
said person may be substituted as a defendant and be responsible for any
violations.
   (F)   Fees:
      1.   Every person who uses the commuter parking facility shall be
permitted to park his or her vehicle thereon for one 24-hour period and shall
pay as a fee therefor an amount as determined by the village board for each day
the facility is so used. No person shall use the facility without paying the
fee therefor.
      2.   Such fee shall be paid daily and collected pursuant to such
regulations as are, from time to time, adopted by the village board.
   (G)   Penalty: Any person who violates this chapter may be fined in
accordance with chapter 17 of this title. (Ord. 1538, 5-22-2002)
10-15-23: PERMIT PARKING ONLY:
   (A)   Intent And Purpose: The village board of trustees finds and declares
that the provisions of this section are enacted for the following reasons:
      1.   To reduce hazardous traffic conditions resulting from the use of
streets within residential districts for vehicles parked by persons not
residing within the residential districts;
      2.   To protect those residential districts from polluted air, excessive
noise, and refuse caused by the entry of such vehicles;
      3.   To protect the residents of these residential districts from
unreasonable burdens in gaining access to their residences, and to assure the
constant availability of on street parking throughout the permit zone parking
area for the benefit of permit zone residents;
      4.   To preserve the character of these districts as residential
districts;
      5.   To promote efficiency in the maintenance of streets in these
residential districts in a clean and safe condition;
      6.   To promote traffic safety and safety of children and other
pedestrians in these residential districts;
      7.   To forestall dangers arising from the blocking of fire lanes,
hydrants and other facilities required by emergency vehicles, both in reaching
victims and in transporting them to hospitals; and
      8.   To promote the peace, comfort, convenience and welfare of all
residents within the residential permit parking zone.
   (B)   Violations Of Section: It shall be a violation of this section:
      1.   To park or leave standing any vehicle in the permit parking zone
between the hours on the days stated in Paragraph (C) of this section except
those vehicles displaying either a valid residential decal permit in the lower
corner of their rear windshield on the driver’s side, or a valid guest permit
hanging from the rearview mirror (written side of the permit facing front
windshield).
      2.   For any vehicle displaying a valid residential decal or guest permit
to be parked elsewhere than at the curbside parking space of the resident
listed on the application for which the decal permit was issued, during the
prohibitive hours of this section.
      3.   For any person to represent in any fashion that a vehicle is
entitled to a parking permit authorized by this section when it is not so
entitled. The display of a parking permit on a vehicle not entitled to such a
parking permit shall constitute such a representation.
      4.   For any person to duplicate or attempting to duplicate, by any
means, a parking permit authorized by this section.
   (C)   Definitions: As used in this section:
BLUE ZONE:  That residential area generally located within six (6) square blocks of the Metra
            Commuter Rail Station in the Village of Midlothian.
CURBSIDE    That part of the public highway, street or road curb that runs adjacent the length
PARKING     and/or width of a residential property line and is otherwise permitted under this
SPACE:      code for on street parking.
RED ZONE:   That Residential area generally bounded by 147th Street on the south, 145th Street
            on the north, Kilpatrick Avenue on the west and Knox Avenue on the east.
            A contiguous or nearly contiguous area containing public highways, streets, roads
RESIDENTIAL or parts thereof primarily abutted by residential property or residential and
DISTRICT:   nonresidential (schools, parks, churches and nursing homes, or residential and
            business) property.
            A residential district where curbside parking on public highways, streets or roads
            is prohibited without a resident permit between the hours on the designated days
            as follows:
            Red zone - Ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. and Six o’clock (6:00) A.M. seven (7) days a
RESIDENTIAL week
PARKING     Blue zone - Seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. and Five o’clock (5:00) P.M. Monday thru
PERMIT      Friday, excluding state holidays.
ZONE:       unless the vehicle properly displays a parking permit authorized by this section.
            The Chief of Police may at his/her sole discretion, allow guest non-resident
            parking without a windshield hanger permit upon prior request for specific guest
            vehicles, for a period not to exceed eight (8) hours in any Red zone permitted
            area.
 
   (D)   Designation Of Residential Parking Permit Zone:
      1.   In order for the village board of trustees to determine whether a
residential district, or portion thereof, shall be designated or shall continue
to be designated as a residential parking permit zone, the mayor, or his
designee, shall conduct, upon his own initiative or upon a petition signed by a
majority of the residents in the district or portion thereof, a public hearing
prior to such designation and prior to the withdrawal of such designation. Such
public hearing shall be held only after due notice has been published two (2)
times in a newspaper of general circulation in the village. The notice shall
clearly state the purpose, time and location of the public hearing, the exact
location and boundaries of the proposed, or existing, residential parking
permit zone and the proposed parking permit fees to be charged. During such
public hearing any interested person shall be entitled to appear, to be heard
and to submit a written statement for the record. The mayor, or his designee,
may impose a reasonable limitation upon the length of time that any interested
person may be heard. The village clerk, or his designee, shall maintain a
record of all oral and written statements by interested persons.
      2.   To enable the village board of trustees to determine whether a
residential district, or portion thereof, shall be designated, or shall
continue to be designated, as a residential parking permit zone, the mayor, or
his designee, shall have had conducted a block by block survey of the proposed
or existing residential parking permit zone. No residential district, or
portion thereof, shall be designated as a residential parking permit zone
unless the survey of it reveals seventy five percent (75%) of those residents
are in favor of the parking permit zone.
      3.   Within thirty (30) days following the close of the public hearing,
the mayor, or his designee, shall recommend by written report to the village
board of trustees, based on the record of public hearing and the results of the
survey, whether to designate the residential district or portion thereof under
consideration as a residential parking permit zone or whether to withdraw the
designation of an existing residential parking permit zone. The report shall
also demonstrate that the mayor, or his designee, in making the recommendation,
has taken into account the following:
         (a)   The effect on the safety of the residents of the proposed, or
existing, residential parking permit zone from intensive vehicle parking by
nonresidents.
         (b)   The difficulty or inability of residents of the proposed, or
existing, residential parking permit zone to obtain adequate curbside parking
adjacent to or near their residences because of widespread use of available
curbside parking spaces by nonresident motorists.
         (c)   The likelihood of alleviating, by use of the residential parking
permit system established by this section, any problem of nonavailability of
residential parking spaces.
         (d)   The desire of the residents in the proposed, or existing,
residential parking permit area for the institution of a residential parking
permit system.
         (e)   The need for some parking spaces to be available in the
proposed, or existing, residential parking permit zone for use by the general
public.
      4.   Within thirty (30) days following its receipt of the report, the
village board of trustees shall vote, as applicable:
         (a)   Whether to designate the residential district or portion thereof
under consideration as a residential parking permit zone; or
         (b)   Whether to withdraw the designation of an existing residential
parking permit zone.
   (E)   Posting Of Residential Parking Permit Signs:
      1.   Following the village board of trustees’ affirmative vote to
designate a residential parking permit zone, parking signs shall be erected (2
to a block) in the designated zone.
      2.   The signs shall be of such character as to inform readily an
ordinarily observant person that curbside parking on public highways, streets,
roads or parts thereof in the designated zone is prohibited between the days
and hours stated in paragraph (C) of this section, unless the vehicle properly
displays a parking permit authorized by this section.
   (F)   Notice To Residents Of Designation Of Residential Parking Permit Zone:
Following the village board of trustees’ affirmative vote to designate a
residential parking permit zone, the mayor or his designee shall mail to every
residence within the designated residential parking permit zone the following
documents:
      1.   A notice of designation which shall inform the residents in the
designated zone of:
         (a)   The existence and exact location of the residential parking
permit zone;
         (b)   The parking restrictions applicable to all vehicles in curbside
parking spaces along public highways in the designated zone which do not
properly display a parking permit authorized by this section; and
         (c)   The procedures to obtain a residential and guest parking permit.
      2.   An application for a residential parking permit on which the
applicant is to provide the following information for each vehicle to receive a
residential parking permit:
         (a)   The name and residential address of the owner of the vehicle;
         (b)   The current year village vehicle sticker number;
         (c)   The make, model and license plate number of the vehicle; and
         (d)   The signature of the applicant for the residential parking
permit.
   (G)   Issuance Of Residential Parking Permits:
      1.   Upon the applicant’s submission of a completed and validated
residential parking permit application and his fulfillment of all applicable
provisions of this section controlling issuance, renewal or transfer of
residential parking permits, the applicant shall receive one residential
parking permit decal for each vehicle described in the application. Such
residential parking permit decal shall be securely affixed to the inside lower
corner of the rear windshield of the vehicle on the driver’s side.
      2.   No residential parking permit shall be issued to a vehicle whose
owner and principal operator do not reside within the designated residential
parking permit zone.
      3.   The applicant for, and holder of, the residential parking permit
shall be the owner or principal operator of the vehicle receiving the parking
permit.
      4.   A vehicle shall be issued a residential parking permit only if it
has a current village sticker and displays valid state license plates, unless
the vehicle is not required to have them.
      5.   Each household will receive two (2) guest permits. Proper display of
a guest permit in use will be to hang it from the rearview mirror (written side
facing the front windshield).
      6.   Both the residential parking permit and the guest permit allow
curbside parking only in front of the residence listed on the application
during the prohibitive hours of this section.
   (H)   Replacement Of Residential Parking Guest Permits Lost Or Destroyed:
Upon the holder’s payment of a one dollar ($1.00) residential guest parking
replacement permit fee, his submission of a completed and validated residential
parking permit application, his fulfillment of all applicable provisions of
this section controlling issuance and replacement of residential parking guest
permits, the holder shall receive one new residential parking guest permit.
Only one such permit will be issued to a resident in any calendar year.
   (I)   Transfer Of Residential Parking Permits: Upon the holder’s payment of
a one dollar ($1.00) residential parking permit transfer fee, his submission of
a completed and validated residential parking permit application, his
fulfillment of all applicable provisions of this section controlling issuance,
renewal or transfer of residential parking permits, and his surrender of his
existing residential parking permit, the holder shall receive a new residential
parking permit to be transferred to another qualifying vehicle.
   (J)   Withdrawal Of Designation Of Residential Parking Permit Zone:
      1.   Following the village board of trustees’ affirmative vote to
withdraw the designation of an existing residential parking permit zone, the
mayor, or his designee, shall mail to every residence within the existing
residential parking permit zone, a notice of the board’s withdrawal of the
designation. Said notice shall specify the effective date of the withdrawal of
the designation.
      2.   The effective date of the withdrawal of the designation of an
existing residential parking permit zone shall be thirty (30) days following
the date of the village board of trustees’ affirmative vote to withdraw the
designation.
   (K)   Penalty: Any person who violates this chapter may be fined in
accordance with chapter 17 of this title. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996; amd. Ord.
2085, 11-3-2021)
10-15-24: PARKING IN FRONT YARDS:
It shall be unlawful to park, stop or stand any vehicle on any lawn, grass or
front yard area within the village unless said area has been permitted by the
village for parking. This section does not prevent parking on standard, paved
driveway areas. (Ord. 1396, 7-24-1996)
10-15-25: PENALTIES:
   (A)   In all cases where the same offense is made punishable or is created
by different clauses or sections of this title, the prosecuting officer may
elect under which to proceed; but not more than one recovery shall be had
against the same person for the same offense; provided, that the revocation of
a license or permit shall not be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar
any other penalty being enforced.
   (B)   Whenever in this title a minimum but not maximum fine of penalty is
imposed, the court may in its discretion fine the offender any sum exceeding
the minimum fine or penalty so imposed but not exceeding the penalty as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state
statutes.
   (C)   Whenever in this title the doing of any act or the omission to do any
act constitutes a breach of any section or provision of this title, and there
shall be no fine or penalty declared for such breach, any person who shall be
convicted of any such breach shall be fined not less than forty dollars
($40.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense.
   (D)   All references to court in this title also applies to the
administrative adjudication procedure as set out in chapter 17 of this title.
(Ord. 1699, 7-22-2009)
10-15-26: GO-CARTS, MINIBIKES, MOTORIZED RECREATIONAL OFF ROAD VEHICLES:
   (A)   Operation On Public Property Prohibited:
      1.   Vehicles Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to operate
or drive, nor shall any owner permit to be operated or driven, any motorized
go-cart, minibike, recreational off road vehicle, motorcycle, moped, self-
powered motorized scooter, electric personal assistive mobility device, or any
other unlicensable vehicle driven by an internal combustion or battery powered
motor upon any highway, street, alley, sidewalk or public property within the
village.
      2.   Motorized Wheelchairs: Every person operating a motorized wheelchair
upon a sidewalk or roadway shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject
to all the duties applicable to a pedestrian.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, "go-carts", "minibikes",
"motorcycles", "mopeds", "self-powered motorized scooters", "electric personal
assistive mobility device" or "motorized recreational off road vehicle" refer
to a motor driven vehicle propelled by an internal combustion or battery
powered motor which by its construction cannot be licensed by the Illinois
secretary of state to be lawfully driven on a highway or public street.
   (C)   Liability; Vehicles Held As Evidence:
      1.   The parent or legal guardian of any person under the age of sixteen
(16) years who operates any vehicle in violation of village ordinances shall be
liable for any and all damages resulting from that individual's operation of
said vehicle. Additionally, the parent or legal guardian of any person under
the age of sixteen (16) years who operates any vehicle in violation of village
ordinances shall be liable for any and all fines for violation of this section.
      2.   Any vehicle operated by any persons in violation of village
ordinances shall be seized by the arresting officer and held as evidence in the
trial or adjudication of a person charged with violating this section and shall
not be released to the owner, parent or legal guardian until the completion of
the trial or hearing of the cause arising out of the violation of this section.
   (D)   Penalty: Any person violating any provision of this section may be
charged with a violation of this code and be fined not less than twenty five
dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this
code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each offense. (Ord. 1596, 5-
26-2004)
10-15-27: ADMINISTRATIVE CHARGES FOR VEHICLES TOWED:
(A)   Whenever any vehicle is authorized to be towed by the village police
department, the owner, lessor or entity entitled to lawful possession of said
vehicle shall pay an administrative charge to the village in the amount of one
hundred dollars ($100.00) per tow except for tows involving an arrest or
violation as provided in paragraph B of this section.
(B)   The owner, lessor or entity entitled to lawful possession of the vehicle
shall pay an administrative charge to the village in the amount of seven
hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per tow and or impoundment for the following
violations:
   1.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to section 36-1 of the criminal code of 2012; or
   2.   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs, an
intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation of
section 11-501 of the Illinois vehicle code ("vehicle code"); or
   3.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, a felony or in violation of the cannabis control act; or
   4.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois controlled
substances act; or
   5.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense involving firearms in violation of section 24-1,
24-1.5, or 24-3.1 of the criminal code of 1961 or the criminal code of 2012; or
   6.   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to operate a
motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to section 6-303 of the Illinois
vehicle code; except that vehicles shall not be subjected to seizure or
impoundment if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or
due to failure to comply with emission testing; or
   7.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting, possessing, or
attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled substance, as defined
by the cannabis control act or the Illinois controlled substances act; or
   8.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver's license,
in violation of section 6-101 of the vehicle code, if the period of expiration
is greater than one (1) year; or
   9.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a
driver's license or permit, in violation of section 6-101 of the vehicle code,
or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's license
or permit due to a person's age; or
   10.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a warrant
has been issued by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer charges
that the driver violated section 6-101, 6-303, or 11-501 of the vehicle code;
or
   11.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in the
attempt to commit, an offense involving theft in violation of article 16 or 16A
of the criminal code of 1961 or the criminal code of 2012; or
   12.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of aggravated
speeding, reckless driving or in the attempt to commit, any other misdemeanor
or felony offense in violation of the criminal code of 1961 or the criminal
code of 2012 or
   13.   Operation or use of a motor vehicle recklessly in violation of section
11-503 of the vehicle code:
      (a)   While the vehicle is part of a funeral procession; or
      (b)   In a manner that interferes with a funeral procession.
(C)   The following shall apply to any fees imposed for administrative and
processing costs pursuant to paragraphs (A) and (B) of this section:
   1.   All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be imposed
on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that owner.
      (a)   No administrative fees shall be imposed on the registered owner or
the agents of that owner if the motor vehicle was stolen or hijacked at the
time the vehicle was impounded. To demonstrate that the motor vehicle was
hijacked or stolen at the time the vehicle was impounded, the owner or the
agents of the owner must submit proof that a report concerning the motor
vehicle was filed with a law enforcement agency in a timely manner.
   2.   The village administrative fee shall be in addition to any other
penalties that may be assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations;
and any towing or storage fees, or both, charged by the towing company.
   3.   The fees shall be uniform for all similarly situated vehicles.
   4.   The fees shall be collected by and paid to the village.
   5.   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid to
the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
   6.   Any commercial vehicle relocator that tows a vehicle pursuant to
authorization from the village police department shall verify that the
aforesaid village administrative charge has been paid before releasing the
vehicle to the owner, lessee, or other entity entitled to lawful possession
thereof.
      (a)   By the first day of each month, any commercial vehicle relocator
operating within the village shall file a report containing the following
information:
      (1)   Name of commercial vehicle relocator.
      (2)   Address.
      (3)   List of vehicles towed pursuant to village authorization.
      (4)   Dates that the vehicles were towed.
      (5)   Such other information as may be required by the village chief of
police.
The aforesaid report shall include information with respect to all vehicles
towed and or impounded during the second month previous to the month in which
the report must be filed.
(D)   Right To Administrative Hearing. Any owner of record, lessee, or a
lienholder of record of impounded vehicles under paragraph (B) of this section
shall have an opportunity for a hearing, as provided in subdivision (b)(4) of
section 11-208.3 of the vehicle code, and for the release of the vehicle to the
owner of record, lessee, or a lienholder of record upon payment of all
administrative fees and towing and storage fees.
(E)   Notice Of Impoundment. Whenever a police officer has cause to believe
that a motor vehicle is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for
the towing of the vehicle to a facility authorized by the village. At the time
the vehicle is towed, the village shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to
notify the owner, lessee, or person identifying himself or herself as the owner
or lessee of the vehicle, or any person who is found to be in control of the
vehicle at the time of the alleged offense, of the fact of the seizure, and of
the vehicle owner's or lessee's right to an administrative hearing. The village
shall also provide notice that the motor vehicle will remain impounded pending
the completion of an administrative hearing, unless the owner or lessee of the
vehicle or a lienholder posts with the village a bond equal to the
administrative fee as provided by ordinance and pays for all towing and storage
charges.
(F)   Notice Of Hearing. The hearing notice pursuant to paragraph (D) of this
section shall:
   1.   be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record either
by personal service or by first class mail to the interested party's address as
registered with the secretary of state;
   2.   be served upon interested parties within ten (10) days after a vehicle
is impounded by the municipality; and
   3.   contain the date, time, and location of the administrative hearing. An
initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than forty-five (45)
days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing.
(G)   Administrative Hearing. The hearing provided pursuant to paragraph (D) of
this section shall include the following requirements concerning administrative
hearings:
   1.   Administrative hearings shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is
an attorney licensed to practice law in this State for a minimum of 3 years;
and
   2.   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing officer
shall consider the defense provided in paragraph (C)(1)(a) of this section and
issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the vehicle
impoundment;
   3.   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the village;
   4.   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall be
subject to review under the provisions of the administrative review law;
   5.   Unless the administrative hearing officer overturns the basis for the
vehicle impoundment, no vehicle shall be released to the owner, lessee, or
lienholder of record until all administrative fees and towing and storage
charges are paid;
   6.   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage facility
within thirty-five (35) days after the administrative hearing officer issues a
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of article II of chapter 4 of the vehicle code.
   7.   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, if the
administrative hearing officer finds that the village impounded a motor vehicle
that was stolen or hijacked at the time the vehicle was impounded, the village
shall refund any administrative fee already paid by the registered owner or
lessee of the vehicle.
   8.   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine, penalty,
or administrative fee imposed under this section which remains unpaid in whole
or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial review
under the administrative review law may be enforced in the same manner as a
judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 1612, 4-27-2005;
amd. Ord. 2171, 6-25-2025)
10-15-28: AMNESTY PROGRAM:
From time to time, the village board may implement an amnesty program for fines
and penalties assessed under this chapter. In order to do so, the village board
shall adopt an ordinance or resolution setting forth the time period within
which the amnesty program will be conducted, the percentage or amounts of fines
and penalties that will be required to be paid and other necessary terms as
determined by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1685, 4-22-2009)
10-15-29: ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICES:
   (A)   Definitions: As used in this section:
   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device, including, but not
limited to, a wireless telephone, personal digital assistant, or a portable or
mobile computer while being used for the purpose of communicating using verbal
statements or listening to verbal statements (telephone call), composing,
reading, or sending an electronic message, but does not include a global
positioning system or navigation system or a device that is physically or
electronically integrated into the motor vehicle.
   ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: A self-contained piece of digital communication that is
designed or intended to be transmitted between physical devices. Electronic
message includes, but is not limited to, electronic mail, a text message, an
instant message, or a command or request to access an internet site.
   (B)   Use Prohibited: Except as otherwise provided in subsection (C) of this
section, no person shall drive a motor vehicle while using an electronic
communication device.
      1.   "Using an electronic communication device" shall include, but not be
limited to, the following activities:
         (a)   Talking or listening to another person on the telephone;
         (b)   Text messaging;
         (c)   Sending, reading or listening to an electronic message; or
         (d)   Browsing the internet via the mobile, cellular, analog wireless
or digital telephone.
      2.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person who
violates the requirements of this section shall be subject to a fine of one
hundred dollars ($100.00).
      3.   If a violation of this section occurs at the time of a traffic
accident, the driver may be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred
dollars ($500.00) which shall be assessed in addition to the fine set forth in
subsection (B)2 of this section.
      4.   A violation of this section shall not be a moving traffic violation
and is deemed to be a compliance violation.
   (C)   Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   A law enforcement officer, operator of an emergency vehicle, a
village employee, village official or village agent while performing his or her
official duties;
      2.   A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of reporting an emergency situation and continued communication with
emergency personnel during the emergency situation;
      3.   A driver using an electronic communication device in hands free or
voice activated mode; or
      4.   A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed
on a permanently installed communication device designed for a commercial motor
vehicle with a screen that does not exceed ten inches (10") tall by ten inches
(10") wide in size;
      5.   A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on
the shoulder of a roadway; or
      6.   A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle
is stopped due to normal traffic being obstructed and the driver has the motor
vehicle transmission in neutral or park.
   (D)   Speed Zones: Pursuant to section 11-610.1 of the Illinois vehicle
code, a person may not use an electronic communication device at any time while
operating a motor vehicle on a roadway in a school speed zone established under
section 11-605, or on a highway in a construction or maintenance speed zone
established under section 11-605.1. This subsection does not apply to: 1) a
person engaged in a highway construction or maintenance project for which a
construction or maintenance speed zone has been established under section 11-
605.1, 2) a person using a wireless telephone for emergency purposes,
including, but not limited to, law enforcement agency, healthcare provider,
fire department, or other emergency services agency or entity, 3) a law
enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle when performing the
officer's or operator's official duties, or 4) to a person using a wireless
telephone in voice activated mode. Such violations shall be prosecuted pursuant
to subsection (E) of this section.
   (E)   Violation: If any violation of this section is subject to the
reporting requirements of section 6-204 of the Illinois vehicle code, as
amended, such violation shall be deemed not to be a compliance violation within
the meaning of this section and the appropriate proceedings shall be instituted
in a court of competent jurisdiction to prosecute such violation. (Ord. 1719,
4-14-2010)
CHAPTER 16
SNOWMOBILE REGISTRATION AND SAFETY ACT
SECTION:
10-16-1: Registration And Safety Act Adopted
10-16-2: Registration
10-16-3: Operating On Streets
10-16-4: Noise Abatement
10-16-5: Penalty
10-16-1: REGISTRATION AND SAFETY ACT ADOPTED:
The "snowmobile registration and safety act", 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
40/1-1 and following, is hereby adopted by reference. (Ord. 1145, 12-9-1987)
10-16-2: REGISTRATION:
   (A)   Operation Of Unnumbered Snowmobiles: Except as otherwise provided in
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes, no person shall, after the effective date of
this act, operate any snowmobile within the corporate limits unless such
snowmobile has been registered and numbered in accordance with the provisions
of the Illinois snowmobile registration and safety act.
   (B)   Municipal Registration: No local registration is necessary. (Ord.
1145, 12-9-1987)
10-16-3: OPERATING ON STREETS:
In addition to the control provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 40/5-
1 and 40/5-2, a driver or operator may not operate a snowmobile on the village
streets, sidewalks, parkways and alleys. (Ord. 1145, 12-9-1987)
10-16-4: NOISE ABATEMENT:
A driver or operator may not operate a snowmobile anyplace in the village after
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. A driver or operator may not operate a snowmobile at
any time on private property without written permission of the owner. (Ord.
1145, 12-9-1987)
10-16-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of the state laws or the village ordinances
may be charged with a violation of this code and state statute and be fined not
less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) nor more than the penalty as provided in
section 1-4-1 of this code or the maximum allowed by state statutes for each
offense. (Ord. 1145, 12-9-1987; amd. Ord. 1362, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 17
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VEHICULAR STANDING, PARKING AND CONDITION OF
VEHICLE REGULATION VIOLATIONS
SECTION:
10-17-1: Purpose
10-17-2: Administrative Composition
10-17-3: Procedure
10-17-4: Administrative Hearings
10-17-5: Additional Notices
10-17-6: Final Determination Of Liability
10-17-7: Administrative Review
10-17-8: Nonresident Procedures
10-17-9: Schedule Of Fines/Penalties
10-17-10: Certified Report And Contesting Certified Report
10-17-11: Immobilization/Towing And Impoundment
10-17-12: Judicial Review
10-17-13: Debt To Municipality
10-17-14: Judgment
10-17-15: Severability
10-17-16: Effective Date/Publication
10-17-17: Repealer
10-17-18: Amnesty Program
10-17-1: PURPOSE:
The stated purpose of this chapter is to provide a fair and efficient
enforcement of municipal vehicular standing, parking and condition of vehicle
regulation violation(s) and other municipal regulation violation(s) as may be
allowed by law, through an administrative adjudication of violation(s) of
municipal ordinances regulating the standing, parking and condition of vehicles
within the geographic boundaries of this municipality and a schedule of uniform
fines and penalties and authority and procedures for collection of unpaid fines
and penalties.
For purposes of this chapter "compliance violation" means a violation of a
municipal regulation governing the condition or use of equipment on a vehicle
or governing the display of a municipal wheel tax license. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-
1993)
10-17-2: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPOSITION:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking, and
compliance, regulation violation(s) shall provide for a traffic compliance
administrator, hearing officer, computer operator/system coordinator and
hearing room personnel (deputy), with the power, authority and limitations as
are hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   Traffic Compliance Administrator: Shall be empowered and is hereby
authorized and directed to:
      1.   Operate and manage the system of administrative adjudication of
vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation(s).
      2.   Adopt, distribute and process standing, parking and compliance
violation notices and other notices as may be required under this chapter or as
may be reasonably required to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
      3.   Collect monies paid as fines and/or penalties assessed after a final
determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation
(s) liability.
      4.   Conduct hearings, as a hearing officer with the same power and
authority as is hereinafter set forth, during the absence of the appointed
hearing officer.
      5.   Certify copies of final determination(s) of standing, parking and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and factual report(s) verifying
that the final determination of standing, parking and compliance regulation
violation(s) liability was issued in accordance with this chapter and 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3.
      6.   Certify reports to the secretary of state concerning initiation of
suspension of driving privileges in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth, and those of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
6-306.5.
      7.   Review final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notices of impending
impoundment or validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension, in
an administrative review capacity in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, hereinafter set forth.
      8.   Promulgate rules and regulations reasonably required to operate and
maintain the administrative adjudication system hereby created.
      9.   Collect unpaid fines and penalties by filing complaints in the
circuit court or selecting or appointing an individual or agency to act on
behalf of this municipality in filing complaints seeking judgments for unpaid
fines or penalties and pursuit of all postjudgment remedies available by
current law.
      10.   Select or appoint an individual, agency or firm to tow and impound
vehicles in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, hereinafter set
forth. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
   (B)   Hearing Officer: Shall be empowered and is hereby authorized and
directed to:
      1.   Preside over the administrative hearings, established herein, as the
adjudicator.
      2.   Administer oaths.
      3.   Issue subpoenas to secure the attendance of witnesses and production
of relevant papers or documentation.
      4.   Assess fines and penalties for the violation of vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s) as are established in section 10-
17-9 of this chapter.
      5.   Assess an administrative fee in the amount of ten dollars ($10.00)
in lieu of a finding of liability. Such administrative fee shall not be added
to fines or other penalties assessed pursuant to section 10-17-9 of this
chapter after a finding of liability.
      6.   Make final determination of:
         (a)   Vehicular standing, parking and compliance regulation violation
(s) liability.
         (b)   Validity of notice of impending impoundment.
         (c)   Validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, hereinafter set forth.
      7.   Provide for the accurate recordation of the administrative
adjudication hearing(s). (Ord. 1819, 1-9-2013)
   (C)   System Coordinator/Computer Operator: Are hereby authorized and
directed to operate and maintain the computer program(s) for the administrative
adjudication system hereby created, on a day to day basis, including, but not
limited to:
      1.   Input of violation notice information.
      2.   Hearing date(s) and notice dates.
      3.   Fine and penalty assessments and payment(s).
      4.   Issue payment receipts.
      5.   Issue succeeding notices of hearing dates, final determination of
liability, notice of impending impoundment, and notice of impending driver's
license suspension, as directed by the traffic compliance administrator in
accordance with the provisions hereinafter set forth.
      6.   Keep accurate records of appearances and nonappearances at
administrative hearings, pleas entered, fines and penalties assessed and paid.
   (D)   Hearing Room Personnel: Are hereby authorized and directed to:
      1.   Maintain hearing room decorum.
      2.   Have and execute authority as is granted to courtroom deputies of
the circuit court.
      3.   Perform such other duties or acts as may reasonably be required and
as directed by the hearing officer or traffic compliance administrator.
      4.   This position is limited to off duty, full time, part time or
auxiliary police officers.
   (E)   Appointments: The village president is hereby authorized to appoint
persons to hold the positions above set forth. One person may hold and fulfill
the requirements of one or more of the above stated positions.
   (F)   Compensation: To be paid for each of the above stated positions shall
be as determined by the village president and approved by the board of
trustees. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-3: PROCEDURE:
The system of administrative adjudication of vehicular standing, parking and
compliance regulation violation(s) shall be in accordance with the following
procedures, and final determination(s) of vehicular standing, parking and
compliance regulation violation(s) liability, validity of notice of impending
impoundment, validity of notice of impending driver's license suspension,
impoundment of vehicle and collections shall be made only in accordance with
the provisions set forth below:
   (A)   Violation Notice: Vehicular standing, parking and compliance
regulation violation(s) notice(s) ("violation notice(s)") shall be issued by
the person(s) authorized herein and shall contain information and shall be
served, certified and have evidentiary admissibility as is hereinafter set
forth.
   (B)   Authorization: All full time, part time and auxiliary police officers
as well as other specifically appointed individuals shall have the authority to
issue violation(s) notices.
   (C)   Detection Of Violations: Any individual authorized hereby to issue
violation(s) notices and who detects a violation of any section of any
applicable municipal ordinance, shall issue a notice of violation thereof and
shall make service thereof as is hereinafter set forth.
   (D)   Contents Of Violation Notice: The vehicular standing, parking and
compliance regulation "violation notice" shall contain, but shall not be
limited to, the following information:
      1.   The date, time and place of the violation (date of issuance).
      2.   The particular vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violated.
      3.   Vehicle make and state registration number.
      4.   The fine and any penalty which may be assessed for late payment.
      5.   The signature and identification number of the person issuing the
notice.
      6.   A section entitled "request for hearing" which shall clearly set
forth that the registered owner or lessee may appear at the initial
administrative hearing to contest the validity of the violation notice on the
date and at the time and place as specified in the violation notice by:
         (a)   Checking or placing a mark in a space provided and clearly
identified, "request for hearing".
         (b)   Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided.
         (c)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         (d)   Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing"
portion fully completed, with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked
by the twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between
the first through the fifteenth day of the month; or postmarked by the tenth of
the month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end
of the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
traffic compliance administrator.
      7.   The date, time and place of an administrative hearing at which the
violation may be contested on its merits.
      8.   That payment of the indicated fine and any late payment penalty
shall operate as a final disposition of the violation.
      9.   A section entitled, "nonresident request for hearing -
nonappearance", which clearly sets forth that a nonresident registered owner or
lessee may appear at the initial administrative hearing to contest the validity
of the violation notice without personally appearing by:
         (a)   Checking or placing a mark in space provided and clearly
identified, "nonresident request for hearing - nonappearance".
         (b)   Placing his/her name and current address in the place provided.
         (c)   Signing his/her name in the appropriate indicated place.
         (d)   Filing the violation notice with the "nonresident request for
hearing" portion fully completed, with the traffic compliance administrator
postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued
between the first and fifteenth day of the month; or postmarked by the tenth of
the month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end
of the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the
traffic compliance administrator.
         (e)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic
compliance administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth of the
month; or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request shall
be deemed filed, if postmarked by the due dates herein specified.
         (f)   A clearly marked statement that execution of the nonresident
request for hearing is a waiver of the nonresident's right to a personal
appearance and that the adjudication will be made based upon the notarized
statement of facts submitted by the nonresident and the facts contained in the
violation(s) notice(s).
   (E)   Service Of Notice: Service of violation(s) notice(s) shall be made by
the person issuing such notice by:
      1.   Affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
standing or parked vehicle; or
      2.   Handing the notice to the registered owner, operator or lessee of
the vehicle, if present.
   (F)   Correctness Of Facts: The correctness of facts contained in the
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s)
shall be certified by the person issuing said notice by:
      1.   Signing his/her name to the notice(s) at the time of service; or
      2.   In the case of a notice produced by a computer device, by signing a
single certificate, to be kept by the traffic compliance administrator,
attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the device while under
his/her control.
   (G)   Record Of Notice: The original or a facsimile of the violation(s)
notice(s) shall be retained by the traffic compliance administrator and kept as
a record in the ordinary course of business.
   (H)   Prima Facie Evidence Of Correctness: Any violation(s) notice(s)
issued, signed and served in accordance herewith, or a copy of the notice,
shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facia evidence of the
correctness of the facts shown on the notice.
   (I)   Admissibility: The violation(s) notice(s) or a copy(s) shall be
admissible in any subsequent administrative or legal proceeding. (Ord. 1313,
12-8-1993)
10-17-4: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS:
An administrative hearing to adjudicate the alleged standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) on its merits:
   (A)   Owner Or Operator: Such administrative hearings shall be granted to
the registered owner or operator of the "cited vehicle", pursuant to 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 or the lessee of the "cited vehicle",
pursuant to 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306, incorporated herein by
reference.
   (B)   Hearing Dates: Hearing dates shall be at the date, time and place as
is set forth in the violation notice issued and served, or such additional
notices issued in accordance with this chapter. Violators shall be given no
more than three (3) opportunities to appear and failure to appear by the third
scheduled hearing date will result in a "final determination of liability" as
hereinafter set forth.
   (C)   Hearings To Be Recorded: Administrative hearings shall be tape
recorded.
   (D)   Liability Or Nonliability Determination: Such administrative hearing
shall culminate in a determination of liability or nonliability made by the
hearing officer, who shall consider testimony and other evidence without the
application of the formal or technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer
shall, upon a determination of liability, assess fines and penalties in
accordance with section 10-17-9 of this chapter.
   (E)   Representation By Attorney: Persons appearing to contest the alleged
standing, parking or compliance violation on its merits may be represented by
counsel at their own expense.
   (F)   Review: The final determination of any matter which may be decided by
the hearing officer may be reviewed as is hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 1313,
12-8-1993)
10-17-5: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
Upon failure of the registered owner, operator or lessee of the "cited vehicle"
to appear at the administrative hearing indicated in the vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), or upon final
determination of violation liability, the traffic compliance administrator
shall send or cause to be sent additional notices which:
   (A)   Shall be sent to the registered owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle"
at the address as is recorded with the secretary of state.
   (B)   Shall be sent to the lessee of the "cited vehicle" at the address last
known to the lessor of the "cited vehicle" at the time of the lease.
   (C)   Shall be sent by first class mail, postage prepaid.
   (D)   Service of additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be
complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail.
   (E)   The additional notices sent in accordance herewith shall be in the
following sequence and contain, but not be limited to, the following
information:
      1.   Upon the failure of the registered owner or lessee of the "cited
vehicle" to appear at the hearing set forth in the vehicular standing, parking
or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), additional notice(s) shall be
sent, as above set forth, and shall contain, but not be limited to, the
following information:
         (a)   Date and location of violation cited in the vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s).
         (b)   Particular standing, parking or compliance regulation violated.
         (c)   Vehicle make and state registration.
         (d)   Fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment.
         (e)   Notice to the registered owner or lessee of their current
status, other than paid in full.
         (f)   Date, time and place of the administrative hearing at which the
alleged violation may be contested on its merits.
         (g)   Statement that failure to either pay fine and any applicable
penalty or failure to appear at the hearing on its merits on the date and at
the time and place specified will result in a final determination of vehicular
standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) liability for the
"cited" violation in the amount of the fine and penalty indicated.
         (h)   Statement that upon the occurrence of a final determination of
vehicular standing, parking or compliance violation(s) liability for the
failure, and the exhaustion of, or the failure to exhaust, available
administrative or judicial procedures for review, any unpaid fine or penalty
will constitute a debt due and owing the municipality.
      2.   A notice of final determination of vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall be sent following an
appearance by the violator and a determination of liability, or the failure to
appear by the violator by the third and final hearing date upon conclusion of
any administrative and/or judicial review, as is hereinafter set forth, and the
notice shall contain, but not be limited to, the following information and
warnings:
         (a)   A statement that the unpaid fine and any penalty assessed is a
debt due and owing the municipality.
         (b)   A warning that failure to pay the fine and any penalty due and
owing the municipality within the time specified may result in the
municipality's filing a complaint in the circuit court to have the unpaid fine
or penalty rendered a judgment in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-208.3(f), incorporated herein by reference.
         (c)   A warning that the person's driver's license may be suspended
for failure to pay fines or penalties for ten (10) or more vehicular standing
or parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5,
incorporated herein by reference.
         (d)   A warning that the vehicle owned by the person and located
within the municipality may be impounded for failure to pay fines or penalties
for ten (10) or more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violations.
      3.   A notice of impending suspension of a person's driver's license
shall be sent to any person determined to be liable for the payment of any fine
or penalty that remains due and owing on ten (10) or more vehicular standing or
parking regulation violation(s):
         (a)   The notice shall state that the failure to pay the fine or
penalty owing within forty five (45) days of the date of the notice will result
in the municipality's notifying the secretary of state that the person is
eligible for initiation of suspension proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-306.5, incorporated herein by reference.
         (b)   The notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be
sent by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the
secretary of state. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-6: FINAL DETERMINATION OF LIABILITY:
A final determination of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violation(s) liability shall:
   (A)   Occur following the failure to pay the total assessed fine or penalty
after the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability and the exhaustion of or the
failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures hereinafter set forth,
or
   (B)   Where a person fails to appear at a prior hearing or by the third and
final administrative hearing provided to contest the alleged violation(s) on
the date and at the time and place specified in a prior served or mailed
notice, the hearing officer's determination of vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability shall become final:
      1.   Upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
      2.   Upon the expiration of the period for filing petition without a
filing having been made. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-7: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW:
A petition to set aside a determination of vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) liability may be filed by a person owing an
unpaid fine or penalty in the manner and subject to the restrictions and
grounds hereinafter set forth:
   (A)   A written petition to set aside a determination of liability must be
filed in the office of the traffic compliance administrator within, but not
later than, fourteen (14) days from the date the determination of liability is
made.
   (B)   The traffic compliance administrator shall act upon the petition(s)
timely filed and render a decision thereon within fourteen (14) days of the
date filed.
   (C)   The grounds for setting aside a determination of liability shall be
limited to the following:
      1.   The person against whom the determination of liability is made was
not the owner or lessee of the "cited vehicle" on the date the vehicular
standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s) was issued.
      2.   The person's having paid the fine or penalty prior to the
determination of liability for the violation(s) in question.
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   (D)   Should the determination of liability be set aside, the traffic
compliance administrator shall:
      1.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, that the
determination of liability has been set aside.
      2.   Notify the registered owner, or lessee, as the case may be, of a
date, time and place for a hearing on the merits of the violation for which
determination of liability has been set aside.
      3.   Notice of setting aside of the determination of liability and the
notice of the hearing date shall be by first class mail, postage prepaid, to
the address set forth on the petition to set aside the determination of
liability.
      4.   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice(s) is
deposited in the United States mail. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-8: NONRESIDENT PROCEDURES:
Nonresidents of this municipality who have been served vehicular standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s) notice(s), in accordance with
this chapter, may contest the alleged violation on its merits, as could a
resident, or may contest the validity without personally appearing at an
administrative hearing by:
   (A)   Completing, in full, the "nonresident request for hearing" section of
the violation notice, served upon him/her pursuant to this chapter.
   (B)   Signing the nonresident request for hearing in the space specified in
the violation notice, and acknowledging that his/her personal appearance is
waived and submitting to an adjudication based upon the notarized statement
filed by him/her and the facts contained in the violation notice.
   (C)   Filing the violation notice with the "request for hearing" section
fully completed with the traffic compliance administrator postmarked by the
twenty fifth of the month, if the violation notice was issued between the first
through the fifteenth day of the month; or postmarked by the tenth of the
month, if the violation notice was issued between the sixteenth and the end of
the prior month. The request shall be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic
compliance administrator.
   (D)   Filing a notarized statement of facts specifying the grounds for
challenging the violation notice which must be filed with the traffic
compliance administrator postmarked by the twenty fifth of the month, if the
violation notice was issued between the first through the fifteenth day of the
month; or postmarked by the tenth of the month, if the violation notice was
issued between the sixteenth and the end of the prior month. The request shall
be deemed filed upon receipt by the traffic compliance administrator. The
acceptance of a "nonresident request for hearing" after the due date or with
cause, at the discretion of the traffic compliance administrator, shall be
accepted for hearing consideration and decision.
   (E)   The hearing officer shall make an adjudication based upon the facts
set forth in the notarized statement of facts filed by the nonresident as is
contained in the violation notice.
   (F)   Notice of the determination of the hearing officer shall be served
upon the nonresident by first class mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
nonresident at the address set forth in the statement of facts submitted.
   (G)   Service of the notice shall be complete on the date the notice is
placed in the United States mail.
   (H)   All other provisions of this chapter shall apply equally to
nonresidents of this municipality. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-9: SCHEDULE OF FINES/PENALTIES:
   (A)   The fines and penalties which shall be imposed for the violation of
all vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) shall be
as follows:
   FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
 
       Fine Schedule      General Fine Disabled Parking Traffic Compliance
                          Amount       Fine Amount
       Upon service of a
       "hang-on violation
       notice", the fine
Step 1 amount owed prior  $ 60.00      $350.00          $ 60.00
       to or on the first
       hearing date shall
       be:
       Upon failure to
       pay the fine
       amount specified
Step 2 in step 1 prior to 150.00       450.00           150.00
       or on the first
       hearing date, the
       fine amount shall
       be:
       Upon failure to
       pay the fine
       amount specified
Step 3 in step 2 prior to 225.00       500.00           225.00
       the second hearing
       date, the fine
       amount shall be:
       Upon failure to
       pay the fine
       amount specified
Step 4 in step 3 prior to 375.00       600.00           375.00
       the third hearing
       date, the fine
       amount shall be:
 
   (B)   The fines and penalties herein set forth shall be uniformly applied
for each violation of any applicable municipal ordinance.
   (C)   The municipality adopts by reference all current and future local
standing, parking or condition of vehicle ordinances, and those provisions of
the Illinois Compiled Statutes governing the standing, parking or condition of
vehicles, for its enforcement and adjudication within the geographical
boundaries of the municipality and in those areas subject to off street parking
agreements. (Ord. 1811, 11-14-2012)
10-17-10: CERTIFIED REPORT AND CONTESTING CERTIFIED REPORT:
   (A)   Upon a failure to pay fines and penalties deemed due and owing the
village after the exhaustion of administrative procedures set forth herein for
ten (10) or more vehicular parking regulation violations, the traffic
compliance administrator shall make a certified report to the secretary of
state stating that the owner of a registered vehicle has failed to pay any fine
or penalty due and owing the village as a result of ten (10) or more violations
of municipal vehicular standing or parking regulations and thereby cause the
suspension of that person's driver's license.
   (B)   The traffic compliance administrator shall take no further action
unless and until the fines and penalties due and owing the village are paid or
upon determination that the inclusion of the person's name on the certified
report was in error. At such time, the traffic compliance administrator shall
submit to the secretary of state a notification which shall result in the
halting of a driver's license suspension proceedings. The person named therein
shall receive a certified copy of such notification upon request and at no
charge.
   (C)   Persons may challenge the accuracy of the certified report by
completing a form provided by the office of the traffic compliance
administrator. The form shall specify the grounds on which such challenge is
based. Grounds for challenge shall be limited to the following:
      1.   The person was neither the owner nor the lessee of the vehicle so
receiving ten (10) or more violation notices on the date or dates such notices
were issued; or
      2.   The person has paid the fine and/or penalty for the ten (10) or more
violations indicated on the certified report.
   (D)   The traffic compliance administrator shall render a determination
within fourteen (14) business days of receipt of the objection form and shall
notify the objector of the determination. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-11: IMMOBILIZATION/TOWING AND IMPOUNDMENT:
   (A)   Conditions For Immobilization And/Or Towing And Impoundment: A vehicle
may be eligible for immobilization and/or towing and impoundment when:
      1.   The vehicle is parked or left in violation of any provision of the
traffic code of the village of Midlothian for which the vehicle is subject to
an immediate tow, or in any place where it constitutes an obstruction or
hazard, or where it impedes the work of any village employee and/or contractor
during such operations as snow removal, the vehicle may be towed to a vehicle
pound or relocated to a legal parking place and there restrained.
      2.   When the registered owner of any vehicle has accumulated three (3)
or more vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations for
which the fines and/or penalties remain unsatisfied in their entirety as
determined by the traffic compliance administrator and said owner has failed
to: a) remit full payment or b) file a request for a hearing within twenty one
(21) days of the date of the notice described below. If at the conclusion of
the preimmobilization and/or pretowing hearing described in subsection (E) of
this section, the traffic compliance administrator determines that the notice
is valid, the vehicle(s) shall become immediately eligible for immobilization
and/or towing.
   (B)   Pretowing And/Or Preimmobilization Notice: When the traffic compliance
administrator has determined that a registered owner has accumulated three (3)
or more violations as defined in this section, and prior to the vehicle being
towed and/or immobilized, he shall:
      1.   Cause a written notice of impending vehicle immobilization and/or
towing to the registered owner of the vehicle as listed with the Illinois
secretary of state by first class mail. The notice shall substantially contain
the following information:
         (a)   That a final determination has been made on three (3) or more
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violations, the fines and
penalties for which remain unsatisfied;
         (b)   A listing of the violations for which the person has been
determined to be liable, which shall include for each violation: 1) the
vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation violation notice number,
2) the date of issuance, and 3) the total amount of fine(s) and/or penalties
assessed;
         (c)   That a failure by the motor vehicle owner to pay the fines and
penalties in their entirety within twenty one (21) days from the date that the
notice was mailed will result in the inclusion of the state registration number
of the vehicle or vehicles of the owner to an immobilization and/or towing list
which will make it eligible to be immobilized and/or towed by the village of
Midlothian and/or its agents; and
         (d)   That the registered owner may contest the validity of the notice
by completing and signing a request for hearing form of a notice and filing the
request with the traffic compliance administrator within twenty one (21) days
from the date that the notice was mailed. The request for hearing shall be
considered filed upon receipt at village hall.
   (C)   Preimmobilization And/Or Pretowing Notice Procedures:
      1.   Upon the receipt of a request for a hearing to contest the validity
of the notice of impending immobilization, towing or impoundment, the traffic
compliance administrator shall schedule an administrative hearing to contest
the validity of the notice at either the next regular hearing date but no later
than ninety (90) days from receipt of the request for hearing.
      2.   The hearing notice shall be served by first class mail, postage
prepaid, to the address set forth on the request for hearing. Service of such
notice shall be considered completed on the date of mailing.
   (D)   Postimmobilization And/Or Posttowing Procedures:
      1.   Upon immobilization or towing and impoundment of an eligible
vehicle, a postimmobilization and towing notice shall be sent to the owner, or
if the vehicle is immobilized in place, shall be affixed to the vehicle in a
conspicuous place.
      2.   Any notice affixed to a vehicle shall provide the following: a) a
notice that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage, b) a notice
that the unauthorized removal of or damage to the immobilizing restrain is a
violation of Illinois law, c) information regarding how the release of the
immobilizing restraint may be had, and d) notification that the owner may
request a postimmobilization hearing. If the restraint has not been released by
the village within twenty four (24) hours of its placement, the restraint shall
be released and the vehicle towed and impounded.
      3.   A posttowing notice shall be mailed to the registered owner of a
vehicle which was towed and/or impounded within ten (10) calendar days of the
towing and impoundment. The notice shall provide the following: a) the date and
time that the vehicle was towed, b) the location and/or address from which it
was towed, c) the case number, d) a reference to the reason and/or cause for
the tow and impoundment, e) a statement that the vehicle is subject to towing
and storage fees, f) the name, address, telephone number and hours of operation
of the storage facility where the vehicle may be claimed upon payment of
towing, storage fees, fines and penalties owed, g) the right to request a
postimmobilization and/or postimpoundment hearing within fourteen (14) days
after impoundment or fourteen (14) days after the notice was sent, whichever is
later, and h) that if a hearing is not requested and the towing, storage fees,
fines and penalties remain unsatisfied after thirty (30) days from the date
that the notice was sent, the vehicle will be considered abandoned and may be
sold or otherwise disposed of in accordance with Illinois law.
      4.   The notice described in subsection (D)3 of this section shall be
sent by first class mail to the address of the registered owner of the vehicle
as maintained by the Illinois secretary of state.
      5.   The owner of an immobilized and/or an impounded vehicle or his
authorized representative may secure release of the vehicle by paying the
immobilization, towing and storage fees provided below and all fines and
penalties remaining due on each final determination of violation issued.
   (E)   Hearing Procedures:
      1.   The general rules and procedures for administrative hearings under
this code shall apply unless specifically contradicted herein.
      2.   No person shall be permitted to collaterally challenge or attack the
original determination of liability during the hearing on eligibility for
immobilization, towing and/or impoundment. This shall not preclude said person,
however, from challenging service of the original infraction.
      3.   Documentary evidence which would conclusively disprove liability
shall be based solely on the following grounds: a) that all fines and penalties
for the violations listed in the notice have been paid in full or b) that the
registered owner of the vehicle has not accumulated three (3) or more final
determinations of vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulation
violations which were unpaid at the time of the notice of impending
immobilization or towing was issued.
      4.   The hearing officer shall issue an order at the conclusion of the
hearing in which he determines whether or not the vehicle is eligible for
immobilization, towing and/or impoundment and/or whether the immobilization
and/or impoundment was warranted under this code. This order shall be
considered a final order for purposes of section 3-101 of the Illinois code of
civil procedure 1 .
   (F)   Fees: The fee for immobilization shall be one hundred dollars
($100.00) and/or a fee for towing subsequent to the immobilization and storage
fee for every twenty four (24) hour period the vehicle is retained shall be
assessed. No fee shall be assessed and all funds paid shall be refunded for any
immobilization or tow which has been determined to be erroneous. Such refund
shall be provided within thirty (30) days of such determination.
   (G)   Immobilization, Towing And Impoundment:
      1.   The village board shall appoint or retain the services of an
individual agency or company to tow and impound vehicles in accordance
herewith, provided:
         (a)   The individual, agency or company is licensed according to local
and state law to perform the services required;
         (b)   The individual, agency or company is insured in an amount deemed
adequate to the village board;
         (c)   The individual, agency or company has available a secured
impound area within which to retain vehicles impounded hereunder. For the
purpose of this section, a "secured area" shall mean an area bounded by a
fence, chainlink or otherwise, of a sufficient height and with locking gates so
as to minimize or prevent unauthorized entry into the impounded vehicles; and
         (d)   The individual, agency or company is not otherwise precluded by
law from providing service to the village.
   (H)   Unlawful Tampering With An Immobilization Device: It shall be unlawful
to relocate or tow any vehicle restrained by an immobilization device without
the approval of the traffic compliance administrator or his designee. Any
person who relocates an immobilized vehicle in violation of this section shall
be subject to a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation.
(Ord. 1843, 8-14-2013)
 
Notes
1 1. 735 ILCS 5/3-101.
10-17-12: JUDICIAL REVIEW:
Judicial review of final determinations of vehicular standing, parking or
compliance regulation violation(s) and final administrative decisions issued
after hearing(s) regarding vehicle immobilization or towing and impoundment
made under this section shall be subject to the provisions of the
administrative review law as is set forth in 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
301 et seq., incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-13: DEBT TO MUNICIPALITY:
Any fine, penalty or part of any fine or any penalty assessed in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after the exhaustion
of, or the failure to exhaust, administrative remedies created under this
chapter and the conclusion of any judicial review procedures, shall be a debt
due and owing the municipality and, as such, may be collected in accordance
with the applicable law. Payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from
a standing, parking or compliance violation shall constitute a final
disposition of that violation. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-14: JUDGMENT:
   (A)   The traffic compliance administrator shall, following the expiration
of the period within which administrative or judicial review may be sought for
a final determination of violation, take all necessary action(s), execute all
required documents and appoint or retain any individual or agency deemed
appropriate to obtain a judgment against and collect monies from the person(s)
who have been assessed fines or penalties which remain unpaid and have become a
debt due and owing the municipality in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3 by:
      1.   Filing a complaint in the circuit court praying for the entry of a
judgment against the person for whom a final determination of standing, parking
or compliance regulation violation(s) liability has been made.
      2.   The complaint filed by the traffic compliance administrator or
individual or agency on behalf of the municipality seeking entry of a judgment
against an individual for unpaid fines and/or penalties pursuant to a final
determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) shall
have appended:
         (a)   A certified copy of the final determination of the standing,
parking or compliance regulation violation(s).
         (b)   A certification that recites facts sufficient to show that the
final determination of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s)
was issued in accordance with this chapter and 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-208.3.
      3.   Nothing shall prevent the municipality from consolidating multiple
final determinations of standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s)
liability in an action in the circuit court against an individual.
      4.   Pursuing all available remedies, allowed by law, to collect money
judgments.
   (B)   Service of summons and a copy of the complaint may be served upon the
person against whom a judgment is sought under the provisions of this chapter
by any method provided under 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203,
incorporated by reference, or by certified mail, return receipt requested,
provided the total amount of fines and penalties for final determination of
standing, parking or compliance regulation violation(s) does not exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-15: SEVERABILITY:
Should a court of competent jurisdiction determine that one or more sections or
subsections of this chapter is or are invalid, the remaining sections and
subsections hereof shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-
1993)
10-17-16: EFFECTIVE DATE/PUBLICATION:
The ordinance codified herein shall become effective ten (10) days after
publication in pamphlet form as required by law. (Ord. 1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-17: REPEALER:
Any and all ordinances, sections or subsections of ordinances in conflict
herewith are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflicts upon this chapter
becoming effective. This includes, but is not limited to, the penalty
provisions of other ordinances which are in conflict with this chapter. (Ord.
1313, 12-8-1993)
10-17-18: AMNESTY PROGRAM:
From time to time, the village board may implement an amnesty program for fines
and penalties assessed under this chapter. In order to do so, the village board
shall adopt an ordinance or resolution setting forth the time period within
which the amnesty program will be conducted, the percentage or amounts of fines
and penalties that will be required to be paid and other necessary terms as
determined by the board of trustees. (Ord. 1685, 4-22-2009)
CHAPTER 18
PARK ZONES
SECTION:
10-18-1: Definitions
10-18-2: Speed Limit
10-18-3: Complete Stop Required
10-18-4: Fine For First Offense
10-18-5: Fine For Second Or Subsequent Offense
10-18-6: Additional Fine; Allocation
10-18-7: Park Zone Streets
10-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
PARK IMPROVEMENTS: Cost associated with: maintenance, repair and upgrade of
public amenities within the park zones, including bathroom facilities,
playground equipment, lighting, street signs, pedestrian and bicycle
facilities, and fences.
PARK ZONE: Any recreation facility and area on any land owned or operated by
the Midlothian park district ("park district") that is used for recreation
purposes, including, but not limited to: parks, playgrounds, swimming pools,
hiking trails, bicycle paths, picnic areas, roads and streets, and parking
lots.
PARK ZONE STREET: Any portion of any street or intersection adjacent to or
within a park zone that has been established as a park zone street in section
10-18-7 of this chapter where signs have been posted by the village of
Midlothian identifying a street or portion of a street as a "park zone street"
and stating the maximum speed limit is twenty (20) miles per hour.
SAFETY PURPOSES: Costs associated with: park zone safety education and targeted
traffic enforcement activities; the purchase, installation, and maintenance of
signs and caution lights mounted on park zone signs; pavement markings;
pedestrian and bicycle safety infrastructure; and any other expense associated
with park zones and park zone streets. (Ord. 1763, 9-14-2011)
10-18-2: SPEED LIMIT:
On any day when children are present and within fifty feet (50') of motorized
traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess of twenty
(20) miles per hour, while traveling on a park zone street. (Ord. 1763, 9-14-
2011)
10-18-3: COMPLETE STOP REQUIRED:
On any day when children are present and within fifty feet (50') of motorized
traffic, no person shall fail to come to a complete stop at a stop sign or red
light, or fail to stop and yield right of way to a pedestrian in a crosswalk
while traveling on a park zone street or at any intersection before turning
right onto a park zone street. (Ord. 1763, 9-14-2011)
10-18-4: FINE FOR FIRST OFFENSE:
A first violation of this chapter is a petty offense with a minimum fine of one
hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). (Ord. 1763, 9-14-2011)
10-18-5: FINE FOR SECOND OR SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE:
A second or subsequent offense is a petty offense with a minimum fine of three
hundred dollars ($300.00). (Ord. 1763, 9-14-2011)
10-18-6: ADDITIONAL FINE; ALLOCATION:
In addition, when a fine is imposed, the person who has violated this chapter
will be charged an additional fifty dollars ($50.00). Of this additional fine,
twenty five dollars ($25.00) shall be allocated to the park district and twenty
five dollars ($25.00) shall be allocated to the village of Midlothian. Both
agencies shall use these funds for "park improvements" and "safety purposes" as
defined under section 10-18-1 of this chapter. (Ord. 1763, 9-14-2011)
10-18-7: PARK ZONE STREETS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following streets are designated park zone
streets:
Street Or Park Name From (N. Or W. Cross Street) To (S. Or E. Cross Street)
Street Or Park Name From (N. Or W. Cross Street) To (S. Or E. Cross Street)
Central Park Avenue 149th Street                 151st Street
Homan Avenue        Abbottsford Road             145th Street
Kedzie Avenue       I-294                        145th Street
Kenneth Avenue      14340 Kenneth Avenue         End of street
Kilbourn Avenue     144th Street                 14533 Kilbourn Avenue
Kilbourn Avenue     150th Street                 151st Street
Kostner Avenue      145th Street                 14530 Kostner Avenue
Kostner Avenue      150th Street                 151st Street
Lawndale Avenue     145th Street                 Waverly Avenue
Scout Park          148th Street                 Kenton Avenue
Waverly Avenue      145th Street                 Lawndale Avenue
Waverly Avenue      147th Street                 147th Place
144th Street        Kilbourn Avenue              Kenneth Avenue
145th Street        Homan Avenue                 Kedzie Avenue
145th Street        Lawndale Avenue              Waverly Avenue
145th Street        Pulaski Road                 Springfield Avenue
146th Street        Pulaski Road                 Springfield Avenue
147th Place         3910 147th Place             Waverly Avenue
148th Place         149th Street                 3845 148th Place
149th Street        148th Place                  3846 149th Street
149th Street        Central Park Avenue          Turner Avenue
150th Street        4550 150th Street            4510 150th Street
150th Street        Kilbourn Avenue              Kostner Avenue
151st Street        Kilbourn Avenue              Kostner Avenue
 
(Ord. 1763, 9-14-2011)
MI110   T11 ()
TITLE 11
ZONING
Title, Purpose And Intent   1
Administration   2
Nonconformities   3
Zoning Districts   4
Residential Districts   5
Business Districts   6
Office/Limited Industrial District   7
Open Space And Recreation District   8
Use Standards   9
Sexually Oriented Businesses   10
General Development Standards   11
Off Street Parking And Loading   12
Landscaping And Screening   13
Signs   14
Planned Unit Development   15
Definitions   16
CHAPTER 1
TITLE, PURPOSE AND INTENT
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Purpose And Intent
11-1-3: Applicability
11-1-4: Transition Rules
11-1-5: Penalty For Violation
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known, cited and referred to as the VILLAGE OF MIDLOTHIAN
ZONING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-1-2: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This title is adopted for the following purposes:
   (A)   To promote and to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare.
   (B)   To zone all properties in such a manner as to reflect their best use,
and to conserve and enhance their value.
   (C)   To check existing congestion, and to prevent future congestion, by
limiting the development of land to a degree consistent with the capacity of
the village to furnish adequate public services.
   (D)   To prevent overcrowding of land with buildings and thereby ensure
maximum quality of living and working conditions, and prevent blight and slums.
   (E)   To protect residential, commercial and industrial areas alike from
harmful encroachment by incompatible uses and to ensure that land allocated to
a class of uses shall not be usurped by other inappropriate uses.
   (F)   To fix reasonable standards to which buildings or structures shall
conform.
   (G)   To prevent such additions to, and alterations or remodeling of,
existing buildings or structures that would not comply with the restrictions
and limitations imposed hereafter.
   (H)   To ensure high standards of light, air and open space in areas where
people live and work.
   (I)   To relieve street congestion through adequate requirements for off
street parking and loading facilities.
   (J)   To foster a more rational pattern of relationships between
residential, commercial and industrial uses for the mutual benefit of all.
   (K)   To provide protection against fire, explosion, noxious fumes and other
hazards, in the interest of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare.
   (L)   To define the powers and duties of administrative officers and bodies,
as provided hereinafter.
   (M)   To prescribe penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
title or any amendments thereto. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-1-3: APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Territorial Application: This title shall apply to all land, uses,
buildings and structures within the village, including that owned by other
municipal corporations and government bodies. Midlothian's planning
jurisdiction includes property within its corporate limits and unincorporated
areas located within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the village limits.
   (B)   General Application: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this title shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion and protection of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare, and shall be construed to achieve the purposes for which this
title was adopted.
   (C)   General Prohibition: Except as otherwise provided by this title, no
building, structure or land shall be used or occupied, and no building or
structure, or part thereof, shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed,
moved, enlarged or structurally altered, unless it conforms with the provisions
of this title governing the zoning district in which it is located.
   (D)   Private Agreements: This title is not intended to nullify any private
agreement, provided that where there is a conflict between such private
agreement and this title and, where this title is more restrictive, this title
shall control.
   (E)   Other Laws And Regulations: Unless otherwise specifically provided,
this title shall control over less restrictive statutes, ordinances or
regulations, and more restrictive statutes, ordinances or regulations will
control over the provisions of this title. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-
2007)
11-1-4: TRANSITION RULES:
In determining the applicability of this title, with respect to the previously
applicable zoning regulations, the following rules shall apply:
   (A)   Existing Unlawful Uses And Structures: A structure or use of a lot,
building or accessory building or structure not lawfully existing at the time
of the adoption of this title is hereby deemed lawful as of the effective date
hereof, provided that it conforms with all of the requirements of this title.
However, if such structure or use does not conform to all of the requirements
of this title, such structure or use remains unlawful hereunder.
   (B)   Existing Permitted Uses: When a lot is used for a purpose that was
classified as a permitted use prior to the effective date hereof, and such use
is classified as a special use by this title, such use is hereby deemed a
lawful special use for the purpose of this title. Any addition, enlargement or
expansion of such use shall conform to the requirements for special uses within
this title.
   (C)   Principal Uses Rendered Nonconforming: When a lot is used for a
purpose that was a lawful use before the effective date hereof, and this title,
or any amendment thereto, no longer classifies such use as either a permitted
or special use in the zoning district in which it is located, such use is
hereby deemed a legal nonconforming use and shall be controlled by the
provisions of chapter 3, "Nonconformities", of this title.
   (D)   Principal Buildings, Structures And Lots Rendered Nonconforming: Where
any lawful building, structure or lot existing on the effective date hereof
does not meet all standards set forth in this title, or any amendment thereto,
such building, structure or lot is hereby deemed nonconforming and shall be
controlled by the provisions of chapter 3, "Nonconformities", of this title.
   (E)   Accessory Uses, Structures And Buildings Rendered Nonconforming: When
any lawful accessory building, structure or use existing on the effective date
hereof does not meet all standards set forth in this title, or any amendment
therefor, such building, structure or use is hereby deemed nonconforming and
shall be controlled by the provisions of chapter 3, "Nonconformities", of this
title, except for signs, which shall be governed by chapter 14, "Signs", of
this title.
   (F)   Previously Issued Building Permits: When a building permit for a
building or structure has been lawfully issued prior to the effective date
hereof, and when construction has begun within six (6) months of the issuance
of such permit and is being diligently pursued to completion, the building or
structure may be completed in accordance with the plans on the basis of which
the building permit was issued and may, upon completion, be occupied under a
certificate of occupancy for the use originally intended, subject to the
provisions of chapter 12, "Off Street Parking And Loading", of this title,
governing off street parking and loading.
   (G)   Previously Granted Special Uses, Variations And Planned Unit
Developments: All special uses, variations and planned unit developments
granted prior to the effective date hereof, shall remain in full force and
effect. The recipient of the special use, variation or planned unit development
may proceed to develop the property in accordance with the approved plans and
any conditions attached thereto. However, if the recipient has failed to act on
the special use, variation or planned unit development before approval expires,
the provisions of this title shall govern.
   (H)   Pending Applications: Where an application for a special use,
variation or planned unit development is pending on the effective date hereof,
the provisions of this title shall govern such application. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-1-5: PENALTY FOR VIOLATION:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this title shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 2
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
Part 1. Administrative Bodies And Officials
11-2-1: Village Board Of Trustees
11-2-2: Plan Commission
11-2-3: Zoning Board Of Appeals
11-2-4: Site Plan Review Committee
11-2-5: Superintendent Of Buildings
11-2-6: Village Clerk
Part 2. Administrative Procedures
11-2-7: Applications
11-2-8: Public Hearings
11-2-9: Public Notices
11-2-10: Building Permits
11-2-11: Certificate Of Occupancy
11-2-12: Zoning Certificates
11-2-13: Sign Permits
11-2-14: Site Plan Review
11-2-15: Zoning Text And Map Amendments
11-2-16: Special Uses
11-2-17: Variations
11-2-18: Administrative Appeals
11-2-19: Zoning Interpretations
11-2-20: Annexations
11-2-21: Enforcement And Penalties
11-2-22: Zoning Procedures And Administration; Table 2-1
PART 1. ADMINISTRATIVE BODIES AND OFFICIALS
11-2-1: VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the village
board of trustees.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: In addition to those powers and duties set forth in
this code, the village board shall have the following powers and duties as
established by the Illinois municipal code relative to building and zoning:
      1.   To make final decisions on applications for text and map amendments
(section 11-2-15 of this chapter).
      2.   To make final decisions on applications for planned unit
developments (chapter 15 of this title).
      3.   To make final decisions on special use applications (section 11-2-16
of this chapter).
      4.   To make final decisions on applications for variations (section 11-
2-17 of this chapter).
      5.   To make final decisions on applications for subdivisions, subject to
the subdivision regulations of this code.
      6.   To make final decisions on applications for annexations (section 11-
2-20 of this chapter).
      7.   All other powers and duties set forth in the Illinois municipal code
relative to building and zoning. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-2: PLAN COMMISSION:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the plan
commission.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: In addition to those powers and duties set forth in
this code, the plan commission shall have the following powers and duties
relative to building and zoning:
      1.   To assist in the development and review of, and amendment to, the
comprehensive plan, as requested by the village board.
      2.   To make recommendations to the zoning board of appeals and village
board on preapplications for planned unit developments (chapter 15 of this
title).
      3.   To make recommendations to the village board on applications for
subdivisions, subject to the subdivision regulations of this code. (Ord. 1650,
10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-3: ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the zoning board
of appeals 1 .
   (B)   Powers And Duties: In addition to those powers and duties set forth in
this code, the zoning board of appeals shall have the following powers and
duties relative to building and zoning:
      1.   To hear and make recommendations to the village board on
applications for text or map amendments (section 11-2-15 of this chapter).
      2.   To hear and make recommendations to the village board on
applications for planned unit developments (chapter 15 of this title).
      3.   To hear and make recommendations to the village board on special use
applications (section 11-2-16 of this chapter).
      4.   To hear and make recommendations to the village board on
applications for variations (section 11-2-17 of this chapter).
      5.   To hear and make final decisions on appeals of administrative
decisions (section 11-2-18 of this chapter) made by the superintendent of
buildings or the site plan review committee.
      6.   To render zoning interpretations (section 11-2-19 of this chapter).
      7.   To hear and make recommendations to the village board on
applications for annexations (section 11-2-20 of this chapter).
      8.   Any other powers and duties the village board gives it from time to
time. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 2, chapter 6 of this code.
11-2-4: SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE:
   (A)   Establishment: The village hereby establishes the site plan review
committee. The site plan review committee shall be comprised of the
superintendent of public works, the superintendent of buildings, the village
engineer, if applicable, the fire chief, if applicable, the police chief, if
applicable, and the health officer, if applicable. The village attorney shall
be advised of all matters pending before the site plan review committee and
shall be provided copies of all relevant documents. The village attorney shall
provide legal advice to the site plan review committee, but shall not have any
authority or power to make decisions.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: The site plan review committee shall review and
make final decisions on site plan review (section 11-2-14 of this chapter).
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-5: SUPERINTENDENT OF BUILDINGS:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the position of
superintendent of buildings.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: In addition to those powers and duties set forth in
this code, the superintendent of buildings, or his/her designee, shall have the
following powers and duties relative to building and zoning:
      1.   To review requests for, and issue, building permits (section 11-2-10
of this chapter), sign permits (section 11-2-13 of this chapter) and
certificates of occupancy (section 11-2-11 of this chapter), and maintain
records thereof.
      2.   To review and make final decisions for requests for zoning
certificates (section 11-2-12 of this chapter).
      3.   To conduct inspections of buildings and structures to determine
compliance with the terms of this title and other applicable ordinances.
      4.   To enforce the provisions of this title and to issue notices of
violations.
      5.   To perform such other duties as may be requested by the village
board including, but not limited to, providing assistance and advice as may be
required to various boards, commissions, committees and agencies of the
village.
      6.   To serve on the site plan review committee.
      7.   All other powers and duties set forth in this code and/or given by
the village president. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-6: VILLAGE CLERK:
   (A)   Establishment: The village pursuant to the Illinois municipal code has
previously established the position of village clerk.
   (B)   Powers And Duties: In addition to those powers and duties set forth in
this code, the village clerk, or his/her designee, or other official to whom
such duties and powers are delegated by the village board, shall have the
following powers and duties relative to zoning:
      1.   To maintain permanent and current records of this title including,
but not limited to, all maps, amendments, special uses, variations, appeals,
interpretations and applications thereof.
      2.   To receive, file and forward to the superintendent of buildings, the
site plan review committee, the plan commission and/or zoning board of appeals
applications for special uses, amendments, variations, planned unit
developments, appeals, annexations and subdivision applications.
      3.   To receive recommendations from the plan commission on planned unit
developments and transmit the same to the zoning board of appeals and village
board.
      4.   To receive recommendations from the plan commission on subdivision
applications and transmit same to the village board.
      5.   To receive recommendations from the zoning board of appeals on
applications for special uses, amendments, variations, annexations and planned
unit developments, and transmit the same to the village board.
      6.   All other powers and duties prescribed in the Illinois municipal
code. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
PART 2. ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
11-2-7: APPLICATIONS:
   (A)   Authorization: An application for a special use, variation, site plan
review, appeal, or planned unit development may be filed only by the owner or
lessee of the property, or by an agent or contract purchaser specifically
authorized by the owner to file such application. An application for
annexation, a map or text amendment, or request for a zoning interpretation may
be filed by an owner, lessee, agent or contract purchaser of property located
in the village or may be initiated by the village.
   (B)   Filing: An application for a special use, variation, appeal,
interpretation, text or map amendment, annexation and planned unit development
shall be filed with the village clerk. An application for a building or sign
permit, certificate of occupancy, zoning certificate, or site plan review shall
be filed with the superintendent of buildings. The application shall be on
forms provided by the village and shall be filed in such number as the
instructions provide. All plans shall be at a scale sufficient to permit a
clear and precise understanding of the proposal. The application shall include
information, plans and data specified as submission requirements sufficient to
determine whether the application will conform to the requirements set forth in
this title.
   (C)   Completeness: The superintendent of buildings or village clerk shall
determine whether the application is complete. If the application is not
complete, the superintendent or village clerk shall notify the applicant of any
deficiencies and shall take no steps to process the application until the
deficiencies are remedied in writing within fourteen (14) days. All
applications shall be granted, denied or scheduled for public hearing within
thirty (30) days. Any application that has not been granted, denied or
scheduled for public hearing within thirty (30) days shall be considered
denied. Once the superintendent or village clerk has determined that the
application is complete, the application shall be scheduled for consideration
at a public hearing, where applicable.
   (D)   Fees: Every application shall be accompanied by the required filing
fee as established and modified, from time to time, by the village board. The
failure to pay such fee when due shall be grounds for refusing to process the
application, and for denying or revoking any permit or approval for the subject
property. No fees shall be waived, and no fees shall be refunded, except those
authorized by the village board in its sole discretion. Fees shall be
established by the village board by resolution. A current fee schedule shall be
kept on file in the office of the village clerk and shall be available to the
general public during normal business hours.
   (E)   Withdrawal Of Application: An applicant shall have the right to
withdraw an application at any time prior to the decision on the application by
a village official, commission or board. Such withdrawal shall be in writing.
There will be no refund of fees.
   (F)   Successive Applications: Once an application is denied, the applicant
shall not be allowed to file a substantially similar application until one year
after the date of denial of the original application unless there is
substantial new evidence available or if a significant mistake of law or of
fact affected the prior denial. Such subsequent applicant shall include a
detailed statement of the grounds justifying its consideration. The
superintendent of buildings shall make a determination as to whether the
subsequent application is making substantially the same request. If the
superintendent finds that there are no grounds for consideration of the
subsequent application, he/she shall summarily, and without hearing, deny the
request. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-8: PUBLIC HEARINGS:
   (A)   Conduct Of Public Hearings:
      1.   Public hearings will be conducted at meetings of the zoning board of
appeals, plan commission or village board, or at other such times as decided by
the chairperson, with the approval of a majority of the body conducting the
hearing.
      2.   Minutes of each public hearing will be distributed with the agenda
for the next regular meeting of the body conducting the hearing, or as soon as
a copy is available.
      3.   The procedure for public hearings shall be as follows:
         (a)   Call to order and roll call.
         (b)   The chairperson opens the public hearing for the application(s).
         (c)   The chairperson presents a brief explanation of the public
hearing procedure and swears in those wishing to give testimony.
         (d)   The secretary of the body conducting the hearing or his/her
designee presents the application before the body conducting the hearing:
            (1)   The secretary or his/her designee enters the application into
the record by describing each accompanying exhibit with its title and number.
            (2)   The secretary or his/her designee reads any part of the
application or exhibits as deemed necessary, or as requested by a member of the
body conducting the hearing or member of the public in attendance at the
hearing.
         (e)   Applicant presents testimony regarding the petition and
associated applications. The initial oral presentation by the applicant shall
be limited to ten (10) minutes for simple applications and thirty (30) minutes
for complex applications. The chairperson of the body conducting the hearing
may permit an extension of time if he or she determines that the allotted time
does not provide sufficient opportunity to fairly present the application.
         (f)   Questions are directed to the applicant by the body conducting
the hearing and public hearing attendees.
         (g)   Presentation of testimony from others regarding the petition and
associated applications.
         (h)   Rebuttals testimony.
         (i)   Follow up questions from the body conducting the hearing.
         (j)   Discussion of evidence gathered relative to the findings of fact
by the body conducting the hearing.
         (k)   Hearing closed or continued by the approval of a motion of the
body conducting the hearing. If the hearing is closed, the body conducting the
hearing shall not accept any comment regarding the petition from anyone outside
the body conducting the hearing, except:
            (1)   The hearing may be reopened on written motion within fourteen
(14) days after the close of the hearing, but only for the following reasons:
               A.   A report based on evidence presented at the public hearing.
               B.   Any person presenting information in response to a specific
question from the body conducting the hearing.
               C.   Any person presenting testimony that directly rebuts sworn
testimony presented at the hearing.
   (B)   Continuances: The chairperson, with approval of the body conducting
the hearing, may change or continue the regular public hearing date and time.
In order to reopen the hearing, no new notice shall be required if a hearing is
continued to a date specified, provided that a public announcement of the
future date, time and place of the continued hearing is made at the hearing and
placed in the minutes. If the hearing is adjourned, rather than continued to a
date specified, in order to reopen the hearing, all notices must be given that
would have been required for the initial public hearing.
   (C)   Evidence And Testimony:
      1.   All interested parties may appear for themselves or be represented
by a person of their choosing. Written statements will be accepted prior to the
hearing to be entered into the public hearing record.
      2.   All testimony and evidence shall be given under oath, or by
affirmation, to the body conducting the hearing. Any person may appear at a
hearing and submit evidence, upon receiving recognition from the chairperson of
the body conducting the hearing. Each person who submits evidence shall
identify themselves and their address. Any person may ask relevant questions of
other witnesses, but only through the chairperson and at the discretion of the
chairperson.
      3.   The chairperson, with consent of two-thirds (2/3) of the body
conducting the hearing, may limit testimony to a specific amount of time to
provide a reasonable opportunity for all interested persons to testify.
      4.   The body conducting the hearing is not bound by strict rules of
evidence, but the chairperson may exclude irrelevant, immaterial, incompetent
or unduly repetitious testimony or evidence.
   (D)   Minutes Of Public Hearings: Minutes of all public hearings shall be
kept on file in the office of the village clerk. Copies shall be available,
upon request, to any person for a fee specified in the fee schedule, which
shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-9: PUBLIC NOTICES:
   (A)   Published Notices: For all applications that require a public hearing,
the village shall cause a notice to be published in a newspaper of general
circulation within the village. The notice shall include the date, time, place
and purpose of such hearing, the name of the applicant, and the address of the
subject property. Such notice shall be published not less than fifteen (15)
days, nor more than thirty (30) days, in advance of the scheduled hearing date.
   (B)   Posted Sign Notices: In addition to the required published notice, the
applicant shall be required to post a sign on the subject property for all
applications for special uses, zoning map amendments, planned unit
developments, and variations, in accordance with the following provisions:
      1.   Location And Time Period For Posting Signs: The required posting
period shall be seven (7) consecutive days, immediately prior to the hearing
date (excluding the day of the hearing from the 7 day period). The sign shall
be posted at a prominent location on the property, near the sidewalk or public
right of way so that it is visible to passing pedestrians and motorists.
Properties with more than one street frontage shall be required to post one
sign visible from each street frontage.
      2.   Applicant's Responsibility For Posting Signs: Any applicant required
to post a sign under this provision shall acknowledge receipt of a copy of
these requirements at the time the application is accepted by the village. It
is the applicant's responsibility to obtain a sign from the village and to
verify the correct hearing date, time and place with the village. Further, it
is the applicant's responsibility to erect the sign on the property and
maintain it during the required seven (7) day period. The applicant shall
verify to the zoning board of appeals at the time of the hearing that the sign
posting requirement has been complied with and the zoning board of appeals may,
by motion, waive defects in said compliance.
      3.   Content Of Posted Signs: The sign to be conspicuously posted on the
subject property shall be provided by the village and shall notify the public
of the scheduled hearing time, date and location in, substantially, the
following form:
         NOTICE - PUBLIC HEARING
         A PENDING APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT OF THIS PROPERTY IS TO BE
REVIEWED AT A PUBLIC HEARING THAT IS SCHEDULED ON (DATE) AT (TIME) AT THE
MIDLOTHIAN VILLAGE HALL LOCATED AT 14801 S. PULASKI ROAD. A COPY OF THIS
APPLICATION CAN BE REVIEWED OR PURCHASED AT THE VILLAGE CLERK'S OFFICE.
      4.   Sign Deposits: At the time the sign is issued by the village, the
applicant shall provide a sign deposit in an amount specified by the village to
cover the cost of the sign. This fee shall be established by the village board.
A current copy of the fee schedule shall be made available at the office of the
village clerk. This deposit shall be returned to the applicant at the time the
sign is returned to the village and shall be forfeited if the sign is not
returned within three (3) days of the public hearing or is returned in a
damaged condition.
      5.   Failure To Post: Failure to post for the required time will require
the continuance of the public hearing until all notice requirements are met, or
denial of the application.
   (C)   Notice To Other Property Owners: Notice shall be as set out in section
11-13-7 of the Illinois municipal code 1  and shall include:
      1.   An applicant for special use shall, not more than thirty (30) days
before filing an application for special use with the zoning board of appeals,
serve written notice, either in person or by registered mail, return receipt
requested, on the owners, as recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds or
the registrar of titles of the county in which the property is located and as
appears from the authentic tax records of such county, of all property within
two hundred fifty feet (250') in each direction of the location for which the
special use is requested; provided the number of feet occupied by all public
roads, streets, alleys and other public ways shall be excluded in computing the
two hundred fifty foot (250') requirement. The notice herein required shall
contain the address of the location for which the special use is requested, a
brief statement of the nature of the requested special use, the name and
address of the real and beneficial owner of the property for which the special
use is requested, a statement that the applicant intends to file an application
for special use and the approximate date on which the application will be
filed. In addition to serving the notice herein required, at the time of filing
application for special use, the applicant shall furnish to the zoning board of
appeals a complete list containing the names, last known addresses and tax
numbers (PIN numbers) of the owners of the property required to be served, the
method of service and the names and last known addresses of the owners of the
service and the names and addresses and tax numbers (PIN numbers) of the
persons so served. The applicant shall also furnish a written statement
certifying that he or she has complied with the requirements of this
subsection. The zoning board of appeals shall hear no application for special
use unless the applicant for special use furnishes the list and certificate
herein required. The zoning board of appeals shall, not more than thirty (30)
days nor less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing at which the
application for special use is to be considered, send written notice to the
persons appearing on the list furnished by the applicant, which notice shall
contain the time and place of the hearing, the address of the location for
which the special use is requested and the name and address of the applicant
for special use and a brief statement of the nature of the special use
requested.
      2.   The zoning board of appeals shall cause a notice of time, place and
purpose of such hearing to be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the village not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15)
days in advance of such hearing.
   (D)   Public Examination And Copying Of Applications And Other Documents:
      1.   During normal business hours, any person may examine the application
and material submitted in support of, or in opposition to, the application,
subject to the exceptions set forth in the freedom of information act.
      2.   Upon reasonable request, any person shall be entitled to copies of
the application and related documents. The superintendent of buildings or
village clerk shall make copies for a fee specified in the fee schedule, which
shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-13-7.
11-2-10: BUILDING PERMITS:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the process for
obtaining a building permit as set forth in title 4, chapter 3 of this code.
   (B)   Applicability: No building or site improvement, including patios,
driveways, sidewalks and/or other paved areas, shall be initiated until the
village has issued a building permit. A building permit shall not be issued
until the following permits, certificates and/or approvals are obtained:
      1.   Zoning certificate, if applicable.
      2.   Site plan approval, if applicable.
      3.   Special use approval, if applicable.
      4.   Planned unit development approval, if applicable.
      5.   Approval of a variation, if applicable.
      6.   Approval of a zoning map amendment, if applicable.
      7.   Approval of an annexation, if applicable.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The superintendent of buildings, or his/her
designee, shall be responsible for determining compliance with this title and
all other applicable ordinances, prior to issuance of a building permit. In
accordance with section 4-3-7 of this code, the superintendent of buildings
will accept or reject the application for a building permit within fifteen (15)
days.
   (D)   Records Of Building Permits: A record of all building permits shall be
kept on file in the office of the superintendent of buildings and copies shall
be available, upon request, to any person for a fee specified in the fee
schedule, which shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk for
the time period required under state statutes.
   (E)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board via resolution or
ordinance. A current copy of the fee schedule shall be available, upon request,
in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-11: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the process for
obtaining a certificate of occupancy.
   (B)   Applicability: No building or site shall be used or occupied, in whole
or in part, for any purpose, until the village has issued a certificate of
occupancy. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until pertinent
requirements are fulfilled or complied with, and the building department
conducts the final inspection.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The superintendent of buildings, or his/her
designee, shall be responsible for determining compliance with this title and
all other applicable ordinances, prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy. If approved, the certificate of occupancy shall be issued within
five (5) business days after the erection or alteration of such building has
been completed, written notification of completion is submitted and the village
has received request for a certificate of occupancy. If denied, written notice
to the applicant specifying the reasons why the request is denied, will be
issued no later than five (5) business days after the village has been notified
in writing that the building or structure is ready for occupancy. Issuance of a
certificate of occupancy shall also comply with the requirements of section 4-
3-15 of this code.
   (D)   Continuance Of Present Occupancy Of Existing Building: Nothing in this
section shall prevent the continuance of the present occupancy or use of any
existing building, except as may be necessary for safety of life and property.
   (E)   Temporary And Conditional Certificate Of Occupancy: The superintendent
of buildings, or his/her designee, may issue a temporary or conditional
certificate of occupancy to allow the premises to be occupied for the proposed
use. Such certificate shall become final only upon full compliance with this
title and this code, and approval by the superintendent of buildings.
   (F)   Posting: The certificate of occupancy shall be dated and signed by the
superintendent of buildings, or his/her designee, and shall identify the
approved use or occupancy of the building, site or structure. The certificate
shall state that the use or occupancy complies with the terms of this title and
this code. Every certificate of occupancy for a nonresidential use shall be
permanently posted in a prominent place on the premises at all times.
   (G)   Fees: The fee for obtaining a certificate of occupancy shall be
assessed at the time when the building permit fees are assessed. Fees shall be
established by the village board. A current copy of the fee schedule shall be
available, upon request, in the office of the village clerk.
   (H)   Records Of Certificates Of Occupancy: A record of all certificates of
occupancy shall be kept on file in the office of the superintendent of
buildings for five (5) years and copies shall be available on request, to any
person for a fee specified in the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in
the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-12: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village hereby establishes the process
for obtaining a zoning certificate. The purpose of a zoning certificate is to
promote compliance by establishing a procedure for the village to certify that
the application complies with all standards of this title prior to issuance or
renewal of a building permit, certificate of occupancy, business license, and/
or establishment of a home occupation. The zoning certificate shall be in the
form of a "checkbox" on the above listed applications that, when marked,
indicates compliance with this title.
   (B)   Applicability: No building or site shall be used or occupied, in whole
or in part, for any purpose, until a zoning certificate has been issued stating
that the use, building, and site improvements comply with the provisions of
this title. A zoning certificate shall be issued prior to issuance of a
building permit, certificate of occupancy, business license, and/or
establishment of a home occupation.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The superintendent of buildings, or his/her
designee, shall be responsible for issuing zoning certificates.
   (D)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board. A current copy
of the fee schedule shall be made available, upon request, in the office of the
village clerk.
   (E)   Records Of Zoning Certificates: A record of all zoning certificates
shall be kept on file in the office of the superintendent of buildings and
copies shall be available, upon request, to any person for a fee specified in
the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in the office of the village
clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-13: SIGN PERMITS:
   (A)   Establishment: The village has previously established the process for
issuance of a sign permit.
   (B)   Applicability: No sign, except those identified as exempt in chapter
14, "Signs", of this title, shall hereafter be erected, constructed, altered or
relocated without first obtaining a sign permit.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The superintendent of buildings shall be
responsible for determining compliance with this title prior to issuance of a
sign permit. Application for a sign permit in which electrical wiring and/or
connections are to be used shall also be reviewed by the electrical inspector.
   (D)   Permit Application: Application for a permit to erect, relocate or
structurally alter a sign shall be made on forms provided by the superintendent
of buildings, or his/her designee, and shall contain and have attached the
following information:
      1.   Name, address and phone number of the applicant.
      2.   Location of the building, structure or lot to which or upon which
the sign or other advertising structure is to be attached or erected and the
location on the lot where the sign will be erected.
      3.   The position of the sign or other advertising structure in relation
to nearby buildings or structures.
      4.   The dimensions of the lot on which the sign is to be erected. In
cases involving wall signs, the dimensions of the wall to which the sign will
be attached, or painted on, are required.
      5.   A blueprint, an ink drawing or a computer generated drawing of the
plans and specifications and methods of construction and attachment to the
building or in the ground. The blueprint or drawing must show the dimensions of
the sign, surface area (in square feet) of the sign, and height of the sign
from the ground to the bottom of the sign.
      6.   In cases of freestanding signs over ten feet (10') in height, all
projecting signs, all marquees and all canopies, a written statement from a
structural engineer or a manufacturer which indicates the structure's ability
to withstand local wind pressures and to meet all other ordinances of the
village is required.
      7.   The name of the person erecting the structure.
      8.   Any required electrical permit.
      9.   Written consent of the owner of the building, structure or land to
which the structure is being erected or attached.
      10.   An insurance policy as required by subsection (H) of this section.
      11.   Such other information as the superintendent of buildings, or his/
her designee, shall require to show full compliance with this title and all
other laws and ordinances in the village.
      12.   The appropriate sign permit fee as established.
   (E)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board. A current copy
of the fee schedule shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk.
   (F)   Permit Issuance: Upon the filing of an application for a permit for
erection, alteration or relocation of a sign, the superintendent of buildings,
or his/her designee, shall:
      1.   Examine the plans and specifications and the premises upon which the
proposed structure shall be erected.
      2.   An application for sign permit shall be approved or denied within
thirty (30) days of submittal of an application. If additional information is
needed, the applicant will be notified within three (3) business days. The
applicant shall have seven (7) calendar days after said notification to provide
such additional information. If the applicant fails to provide said information
within seven (7) calendar days, the review of the application will be made and
decision made based on the documentation and information originally submitted
by the applicant. If the application is not approved or denied within the
thirty (30) day period, the sign permit is deemed denied. The application can
be denied only if it violates a specific provision or provisions of this code
and the superintendent of building (or his or her designee) shall specify the
provision or provisions of this code which the application violates. Said
denial shall be issued in writing.
      3.   Issue a permit if the structure complies with the requirements of
this title and all other ordinances of the village within thirty (30) days. If
the work authorized under an erection permit is not completed within six (6)
months after the date of issuance, the permit becomes null and void.
   (G)   Approval Of Electrified Signs: The application for a permit for the
erection of a sign or other advertising structure in which electrical wiring
and connections are to be used shall be submitted to the superintendent of
buildings, or his/her designee, and shall include a wiring diagram with
specifications on all wiring and connections. The electrical inspector shall
examine the plans and specifications regarding all wiring and connections to
determine if they comply with the electrical code of the village and shall
approve the permit if the plans and specifications comply with the code. A
decision by an electrical inspector determining compliance with the village
electrical code shall be made in compliance with title 4 of this code.
   (H)   Certificate Of Insurance: Before a permit shall be issued for any sign
to be erected on a location which is adjacent to a public sidewalk or
thoroughfare, and is closer to the lot line of the lot on which it is erected
than a distance less than the height of the sign, plus ten percent (10%), the
applicant shall submit to the village a certificate of insurance showing the
village as an additional insured with bodily injury insurance of at least one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each person, and one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) each occurrence and property damage coverage of five hundred
thousand dollars ($500,000.00) each occurrence. The policies of insurance shall
be with companies approved by the village board. In the event said insurance
expires or is cancelled, the sign shall be immediately removed or be considered
an unlawful sign.
   (I)   Records Of Sign Permits: A record of all sign permits shall be kept on
file in the office of the superintendent of buildings and copies shall be
available on request, to any person for a fee specified in the fee schedule,
which shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-
10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-14: SITE PLAN REVIEW:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The site plan review process is hereby
established to promote orderly development and redevelopment in the village and
to ensure such development or redevelopment occurs in a manner that is
harmonious with surrounding properties, is consistent with the comprehensive
plan, and promotes the general welfare of the village. This section provides
standards by which to determine and control the physical layout and design to
achieve the following purposes:
      1.   Compatibility of land uses, buildings and structures.
      2.   Protection and enhancement of community property values.
      3.   Efficient use of land.
      4.   Minimization of traffic, safety hazards and overcrowding problems.
      5.   Minimization of environmental problems.
   (B)   Applicability:
      1.   Site plan review shall be required for all permitted uses that are
subject to discretionary review and for every application for a building
permit, including those for new construction, additions and site improvements.
This requirement shall not apply to those building permits for construction
that is limited to interior remodeling or exterior building modifications that
do not enlarge the building. This section shall not apply to any request for
building permits for detached single-family dwellings or accessory structures
to detached single-family dwellings.
      2.   No building permit shall be issued unless, and until, site plan
approval has been granted. A zoning certificate shall also be required as part
of the site plan review process. This requirement shall be waived when proposed
development is subject to special use, variation, annexation or planned unit
development review.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: Applications for building permits shall be
submitted for review to the site plan review committee. The site plan review
committee shall approve, approve with conditions, recommend modifications or
deny the site plan applications within thirty (30) days of receipt of a
complete application.
   (D)   Standards For Site Plan Review: The scope of site plan review includes
the location of principal and accessory structures, infrastructure, open space,
landscaping, exterior lighting, traffic movement and flow, number of parking
spaces, design of parking lots, and location of landscaping and screening. In
reviewing site plans, the site plan review committee shall evaluate the
relationship of the site plan to adopted land use policies, and the goals and
objectives of the comprehensive plan. In addition, the site plan review
committee shall evaluate the following characteristics:
      1.   The arrangement of the structures and buildings on the site to:
         (a)   Allow for the effective use of the proposed development.
         (b)   Allow for the efficient use of the land.
         (c)   Ensure compatibility with development on adjacent property.
         (d)   Respond to off site utilities and service conditions, and
minimize potential impacts on existing or planned municipal services, utilities
and infrastructure.
         (e)   Protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
         (f)   Conform to the requirements of this title and other applicable
regulations.
      2.   The arrangement of open space or natural features on the site to:
         (a)   Create a desirable and functional environment for patrons,
pedestrians and occupants.
         (b)   Preserve unique natural resources, where possible.
         (c)   Provide adequate measures to preserve existing healthy, mature
trees, wherever practicably feasible.
         (d)   Respect desirable natural resources on adjacent sites.
         (e)   Design drainage facilities to promote the use and preservation
of natural watercourses and patterns of drainage.
         (f)   Avoid unnecessary or unreasonable alterations to existing
topography.
      3.   The organization of circulation systems to:
         (a)   Provide adequate and safe access to the site.
         (b)   Minimize potentially dangerous traffic movements.
         (c)   Separate pedestrian and auto circulation, and provide for
bicycle parking or storage, insofar as practical.
         (d)   Minimize curb cuts.
      4.   The design of off street parking lots or garages to:
         (a)   Minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
         (b)   Promote logical and safe parking and internal circulation.
      5.   The design of landscape improvements and related features to:
         (a)   Create a logical transition to adjoining lots and developments.
         (b)   Screen incompatible uses.
         (c)   Minimize the visual impact of the development on adjacent sites
and roadways.
         (d)   Utilize plant materials suitable to withstand the climatic
conditions of the village and microclimate of the site.
         (e)   Promote and enhance the appearance and image of the village.
      6.   Site illumination that is designed, located and installed in a
manner that will minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties.
      7.   Conformance of the proposed development with the goals and policies
of the comprehensive plan, and all village codes and regulations.
   (E)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board by resolution or
ordinance. A current copy of the fee schedule shall be available, upon request,
in the office of the village clerk.
   (F)   Records Of Site Plan Reviews: The superintendent of buildings shall
keep a record of all site plan review requests on file for the time period
required by state statute. Copies shall be available, upon request, to any
person for a fee specified in the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in
the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-15: ZONING TEXT AND MAP AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village has previously established the
process for amending the zoning ordinance text or map. This process is intended
to permit modifications in response to changed conditions or changes in village
policy. Amendments are not intended to relieve particular hardships or confer
special privileges or rights upon any person or party.
   (B)   Initiation Of Amendments: The village, or any person having a right of
ownership of any property in the village, may propose map or text amendments.
All applications for map or text amendments shall be filed with the village
clerk in accordance with the requirements in section 11-2-7, "Applications", of
this chapter. Any amendments initiated by the village shall require an
application but shall be exempt from fees.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The village board, after receiving a
recommendation by the zoning board of appeals, shall take formal action on
requests for map or text amendments.
   (D)   Procedure:
      1.   Acceptance Of Application By Village Clerk: Upon receipt of an
application, the village clerk shall review the application for completeness.
The village clerk shall refer the application to the site plan review committee
for their review and schedule the application for an upcoming zoning board of
appeals agenda for consideration.
      2.   Site Plan Review: The site plan review committee shall review the
application, related documentation and plans in accordance with section 11-2-14
of this chapter. Their findings shall be submitted along with the completed
application to the zoning board of appeals.
      3.   Recommendation By Zoning Board Of Appeals:
         (a)   The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with section 11-2-8, "Public Hearings", of this chapter, that will
be held within thirty (30) days of the filing of the completed application,
unless the zoning board of appeals is unable to meet for any reason, in which
case the application will be heard at the next meeting. Notice for the public
hearing shall be in accordance with section 11-2-9, "Public Notices", of this
chapter.
         (b)   Within thirty (30) days of the close of the public hearing, the
zoning board of appeals shall forward its findings of fact and recommendation
of either approval, approval with conditions, or denial on applications for
zoning text amendments to the village board. The zoning board of appeals may
recommend either approval or denial on applications for zoning map amendments.
      4.   Action By Village Board: The village board shall consider the
application within thirty (30) days of receiving the findings of fact and
recommendation from the zoning board of appeals but may postpone final decision
for an additional thirty (30) days for any reason. The village board may take
action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial on
applications for zoning text amendments. The village board may take action in
the form of approval or denial on applications for zoning map amendments. The
village board may also refer the matter back to the zoning board of appeals for
further consideration.
   (E)   Standards For Zoning Text And Map Amendments: The zoning board of
appeals recommendation and village board decision on any zoning amendment,
whether text or map amendment, is a matter of legislative discretion that is
not controlled by any one standard. However, in making their recommendation and
decision, the zoning board of appeals and village board shall consider the
following factors:
      1.   For both zoning text and map amendments:
         (a)   The extent to which the proposed amendment is consistent with
the goals, objectives, and policies of the village comprehensive plan.
         (b)   The extent to which the proposed amendment creates
nonconformities.
      2.   Additional standards for zoning text amendments: The extent to which
the proposed amendment is consistent with the purposes of this title.
      3.   Additional standards for zoning map amendments:
         (a)   The suitability of the subject property for uses permitted or
permissible under its present zoning classification.
         (b)   The existing uses and zoning classifications of properties in
the vicinity of the subject property.
         (c)   Whether sites exist for the proposed use in existing districts
permitting such use.
         (d)   The length of time that the property has been vacant as compared
to development activities occurring in the vicinity.
         (e)   The adequacy of public facilities and services to serve the
subject property including, but not limited to, streets, utilities, parks, and
police and fire services.
         (f)   The extent, if any, to which a reasonable economic benefit can
be realized from uses permitted by the existing zoning and the extent, if any,
to which the value of the subject property is diminished by the existing zoning
classification applicable to it.
         (g)   The extent, if any, to which such diminution in value is offset
by the need to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and
general welfare.
         (h)   The extent, if any, to which use and enjoyment of adjacent
properties would be affected by the proposed rezoning and the extent, if any,
to which the value of adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed
rezoning.
         (i)   The trend of development in the vicinity of the subject
property, including changes, if any, in such trend since the subject property
was placed in its current zoning classification.
         (j)   The extent, if any, to which the future orderly development of
adjacent properties would be affected by the proposed amendment and the
potential effect of the proposed amendment on the character of future
development if applied generally to other uses in the zoning district or within
the village as a whole.
   (F)   Written Protest: In the case of a written protest against any proposed
amendment of the regulations or districts, signed and acknowledged either by
the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to be altered, or
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage immediately adjacent to or across an alley
therefrom, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage abutting or
directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered, the amendment shall not
be passed except by a favorable vote of majority of the members of the village
board then holding office. In such cases, a copy of the written protest shall
be served, by the protestor, to both the applicant for the proposed amendment
and the applicant's attorney, if any, by certified mail at the address of such
applicant and attorney shown in the application for the proposed amendment.
   (G)   Fees: Fees are established by the village board as may be amended from
time to time. A current copy of the fee schedule shall be made available, upon
request, in the office of the village clerk.
   (H)   Records Of Zoning Map And Text Amendments: A record of all zoning map
and text amendments shall be kept on file by the village clerk and copies shall
be available on request, to any person for a fee specified in the fee schedule,
which shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-
10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-16: SPECIAL USES:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village has previously established the
process for considering applications for special uses. This title is based upon
the division of the village into districts, within which the use of land and
buildings and the bulk and location of buildings or structures are essentially
uniform. However, there are special uses, which, because of their unique
character, cannot be properly classified in a particular district(s) without
consideration, in each case, of the impact of those uses upon neighboring lands
and upon the public need for the particular use at the particular location. The
special use process addresses these unique circumstances and regulates such
uses to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. Such special uses fall into two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses operated by a public agency or publicly related utilities, or
uses traditionally maintained for the public interest.
      2.   Uses entirely private in character, but of such nature that the
operation may give rise to unique problems with respect to their impact upon
neighboring property or public facilities.
   (B)   Initiation Of Special Uses: Any person having a right of ownership or
right of possession in any property in the village may request a special use.
All applications for special uses shall be filed with the village clerk in
accordance with the requirements in section 11-2-7, "Applications", of this
chapter.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The village board, after receiving a
recommendation by the zoning board of appeals, shall take formal action on
special use requests.
   (D)   Procedure:
      1.   Acceptance Of Application By Village Clerk: Upon receipt of an
application, the village clerk shall review the application for completeness.
The village clerk shall send the application to the site plan review committee
for review and schedule the application for an upcoming zoning board of appeals
agenda for consideration.
      2.   Site Plan Review: The site plan review committee shall review the
application, related documentation and plans in accordance with section 11-2-14
of this chapter. Their findings shall be submitted along with the completed
application to the zoning board of appeals.
      3.   Recommendation By Zoning Board Of Appeals:
         (a)   The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with section 11-2-8, "Public Hearings", of this chapter, that will
be held within forty five (45) days of the filing of the completed application,
unless the zoning board of appeals is unable to meet for any reason, in which
case the application will be heard at the next meeting. Notice for the public
hearing shall be in accordance with section 11-2-9, "Public Notices", of this
chapter.
         (b)   Within thirty (30) days of the close of the public hearing, the
zoning board of appeals shall forward its findings of fact and recommendation
of either approval, approval with conditions, or denial on applications for
special uses to the village board.
      4.   Action By Village Board: The village board shall consider the
application within thirty (30) days of receiving the findings of fact and
recommendation from the zoning board of appeals but may postpone final decision
for an additional thirty (30) days for any reason. The village board may take
action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial of
applications for special uses. The village board may also refer the matter back
to the zoning board of appeals for further consideration.
   (E)   Standards For Special Uses: Zoning board of appeals recommendation and
village board decision on any special use is a matter of legislative discretion
that is not controlled by any one standard. An application for a special use
shall not be approved unless the application is determined to be in substantial
conformance with each of the following standards, in addition to any specific
use standards included in chapter 9, "Use Standards", of this title:
      1.   The proposed special use is, in fact, a special use authorized in
the zoning district in which the property is located.
      2.   The proposed special use is deemed necessary for the public
convenience at that location.
      3.   The proposed special use does not create excessive additional
impacts at public expense for public facilities and services, and will be
beneficial to the economic welfare of the community.
      4.   The proposed use is in conformance with the goals and policies of
the comprehensive plan, and all village codes and regulations.
      5.   The proposed special use will be designed, located, operated and
maintained so as to be harmonious and compatible in use and appearance with the
existing or intended character of the general vicinity.
      6.   The proposed special use is a suitable use of the property to
generate income from an appropriate business and, without the special use, the
property will be substantially diminished in value.
      7.   The proposed special use will not significantly diminish the safety,
use, enjoyment and value of other property in the neighborhood in which it is
located.
      8.   The proposed special use is compatible with development on adjacent
property.
      9.   The proposed special use minimizes potentially dangerous traffic
movements, and provides adequate and safe ingress and egress to the site.
      10.   The proposed special use provides the required number of parking
spaces and maintains parking areas in accordance with the requirements of this
title.
      11.   The proposed special use is served by adequate utilities, drainage,
road access, public safety and other necessary facilities.
      12.   The proposed special use conforms with the requirements of this
title and other applicable regulations.
      13.   The applicant's experience, expertise and previous ownership and/or
management of similar businesses may be beneficial to the special use.
      14.   Otherwise complies with all state statutes and village ordinances.
   (F)   No Presumption Of Approval: The listing of a use as a special use
within a zoning district does not constitute an assurance or presumption that
such special use will be approved. Rather each proposed special use shall be
evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to the standards in this section,
the standards in chapter 9, "Use Standards", of this title, and the standards
for the district in which it is located. Such evaluation will determine whether
approval of the special use is appropriate at the particular location and in
the particular manner proposed.
   (G)   Conditions On Special Uses: The zoning board of appeals may recommend,
and the village board may impose, such conditions and restrictions upon the
construction, location and operation of a special use. Such conditions must be
deemed necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this section, to
promote the general objectives of this title, and to minimize or reduce the
injury to the value of property in the neighborhood. Such conditions shall be
expressly set forth in the ordinance granting the special use. Failure to
maintain such conditions or restrictions as may have been imposed shall
constitute grounds for revocation of such special use approval.
   (H)   Limitations On Special Uses:
      1.   Special use approval may become null and void unless a building
permit is issued and construction is completed within six (6) months, or a
certificate of occupancy is issued and the premises are occupied within ninety
(90) days, of the date of adoption of the ordinance granting special use
approval. After notice to the property owner and an opportunity for a hearing,
the village board may terminate the special use. However, the village board may
extend this period upon written request from the applicant showing good cause.
      2.   Special use approval is granted to a specific property and
authorizes the conduct of the special use only on the property represented on
the application and is not transferable to other properties or subsequent
owners or tenants.
      3.   The approval of a special use authorizes the use on the property in
the manner proposed, but does not in itself authorize the establishment of such
use without first obtaining any other required approvals, including a building
permit, sign permit, certificate of occupancy, zoning certificate and site plan
review.
      4.   Any modification or intensification of a special use that alters the
essential character or operation of the use in a way not approved at the time
the special use was granted, as evidenced by the record or by the text of this
title, shall require new special use approval in accordance with this section.
      5.   If a property or building which has been granted a special use is
vacated for sixty (60) consecutive days, the special use is deemed null and
void.
      6.   If the owner of the property and the owner/tenant of the business
are different, both parties must sign the special use application and special
use ordinance.
   (I)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board. A current copy
of the fee schedule shall be available, upon request, in the office of the
village clerk.
   (J)   Records Of Special Uses: The village clerk shall keep a record of all
special uses on file and copies shall be available on request, to any person
for a fee specified in the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in the
office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-17: VARIATIONS:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village has previously established the
process for review of variation requests. The process is to provide a narrowly
circumscribed means by which relief may be granted from unforeseen applications
of this title that create practical difficulties or particular hardships.
   (B)   Initiation Of Variations: Any person having a right of ownership or
right of possession in any property in the village may request a variation. All
applications for variations shall be filed with the village clerk in accordance
with the requirements in section 11-2-7, "Applications", of this chapter.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The village board, after receiving a
recommendation by the zoning board of appeals, shall take formal action on
variation requests.
   (D)   Procedure:
      1.   Acceptance Of Application By Village Clerk: Upon receipt of an
application, the village clerk shall review the application for completeness.
The village clerk shall send the application to the site plan review committee
for review and schedule the application for an upcoming zoning board of appeals
agenda for consideration.
      2.   Site Plan Review: The site plan review committee shall review the
application, related documentation and plans in accordance with section 11-2-
4 of this chapter. Their findings shall be submitted along with the completed
application to the zoning board of appeals.
      3.   Recommendation By Zoning Board Of Appeals:
         (a)   The zoning board of appeals shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with section 11-2-8, "Public Hearings", of this chapter, that will
be held within forty five (45) days of the filing of the completed application,
unless the zoning board of appeals is unable to meet for any reason, in which
case the application will be heard at the next meeting. Notice for the public
hearing shall be in accordance with section 11-2-9, "Public Notices", of this
chapter.
         (b)   Within thirty (30) days of the close of the public hearing, the
zoning board of appeals shall forward its findings of fact and recommendation
of either approval, approval with conditions, or denial on applications for
variations to the village board.
      4.   Action By Village Board: The village board shall consider the
application within thirty (30) days of receiving the findings of fact and
recommendation from the zoning board of appeals but may postpone a final
decision for an additional thirty (30) days for any reason. The village board
may take action in the form of approval, approval with conditions, or denial of
requests for variations. The village board may also refer the matter back to
the zoning board of appeals for further consideration. Any variation for which
the zoning board of appeals recommends denial may be approved by a favorable
majority vote of the village board.
   (E)   Findings Of Fact For Variations: A variation from the provisions of
this title shall not be granted unless the zoning board of appeals in its
recommendation, and village board in its decision, make specific findings of
fact directly based on the standards and conditions imposed by this section.
The standards for variations shall be as follows:
      1.   Hardship: No variation shall be granted unless the applicant shall
establish that carrying out the strict letter of the provisions of this title
would create a practical difficulty or particular hardship.
      2.   Unique Physical Conditions: The subject property is exceptional, as
compared to other properties subject to the same provisions, by means of a
unique physical condition, including irregular or substandard size, shape or
configuration, exceptional topographical features, or presence of an existing
use, structure or sign, whether conforming or nonconforming, or other
extraordinary physical conditions peculiar to, and inherent in, the subject
property that amount to more than a mere inconvenience to the property owner,
and that relate to, or arise out of, the characteristics of the property rather
than the personal situation or preference of the current property owner.
      3.   Not Self-Created: The aforesaid unique physical condition is not the
result of any action or inaction of the property owner, or his/her predecessors
in title, and that it existed at the time of enactment of the provisions from
which a variation is sought, was created by natural forces, or was the result
of governmental action, other than the adoption of this title.
      4.   Denied Substantial Rights: The carrying out of the strict letter of
provision from which a variation is sought would deprive the owner of the
subject property of substantial rights commonly enjoyed by owners of other
properties subject to the same provisions.
      5.   Not Merely Special Privilege: The alleged hardship or difficulty is
neither merely the inability of the owner or occupants to enjoy some special
privilege or additional right not available to owners or occupants of other
lots or properties subject to the same provisions, nor merely the inability of
the owner to gain a greater financial return from the use of the subject
property.
      6.   Conformance With Title And Plan Purposes: The variation would not
result in a use of development of the subject property that would not be in
harmony with the general and specific purposes of this title, including the
provision from which a variation is sought, or the general purpose and intent
of the comprehensive plan.
      7.   No Other Remedy: There is no means, other than granting the
requested variation, by which the alleged hardship or difficulty can be avoided
or remedied to a degree sufficient to permit a reasonable use of the subject
property.
      8.   Minimum Relief Required: The requested variation is the minimum
measure of relief necessary to alleviate the alleged hardship or difficulty
presented by the strict application of this title.
      9.   Additional Criteria For Sign Variations: Within thirty (30) days
after the denial of a sign permit by the superintendent of buildings, a request
for variance in height or size may be filed with the zoning board of appeals.
The zoning board of appeals may hold a hearing and make its recommendation to
the village board. The zoning board of appeals may recommend granting the
variation if it finds that the unusual shape or topography of the property in
question prevents signage allowable under the provisions of this title from
adequately identifying the business or other activity on such property. The
zoning board of appeals may recommend a variance only to allow the area or
height of a sign to be increased by up to twenty five percent (25%) of the
maximum allowable height or area. If the request for variance is based upon
building materials, the request must be made to the village board, in writing,
within thirty (30) days after the denial of the permit by the superintendent of
buildings. All appeals to the zoning board of appeals shall require payment of
appropriate fees and filing of applicable forms.
   (F)   Variation Less Than Requested: The zoning board of appeals may
recommend and the village board may grant variations less than or different
from that requested when the record supports the applicant's right to some
relief, but not to the entire relief requested.
   (G)   Conditions On Variations: The zoning board of appeals may recommend,
and the village board may impose, specific conditions and restrictions
concerning use, construction, character, location, landscaping, screening and
other matters that address the purposes and objectives of this title, upon any
property that is granted a variation. These conditions may be necessary or
appropriate to prevent or minimize adverse effects upon other property and
improvements in the vicinity of the subject property or upon public facilities
or services. Such conditions shall be expressly set forth in the ordinance or
order granting the variation. Failure to maintain such conditions or
restrictions as may have been imposed shall constitute grounds for revocation
of the variation.
   (H)   Limitations On Variations:
      1.   Variations may become null and void unless a building permit is
issued and construction is actually begun within six (6) months of granting the
variation and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. After notice to
the property owner and an opportunity for a hearing, the village board may
terminate the variation. However, the village board may extend this period,
upon written request from the applicant showing good cause.
      2.   A variation is granted to a specific property and authorizes the
conduct of the variation only on the property represented on the application
and is not transferable to other properties or other owners or tenants.
      3.   The approval of a variation only authorizes the particular
construction or development for which it was issued, but does not authorize the
establishment or extension of any use, nor development, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or moving of any building or structure without first
obtaining any other required permit, including a zoning certificate, building
permit and certificate of occupancy. The approved variation shall automatically
expire and cease to be of any force or effect if such construction or
development is beyond the scope so authorized.
   (I)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board. A current copy
of the fee schedule shall be available, upon request, in the office of the
village clerk.
   (J)   Records Of Variations: A record of all requests for variations,
including village action taken, shall be kept on file in the office of the
village clerk and copies shall be available, upon request, to any person for a
fee specified in the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in the office of
the village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-18: ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village hereby establishes the process
for review of appeals of decisions of the superintendent of buildings, or his/
her designee, or the site plan review committee with regard to sign permit,
zoning certificate, certificate of occupancy and building permit to provide
appropriate checks and balances on administrative authority.
   (B)   Initiation Of Appeals: Applications for appeals may be filed by the
owner, or any person having a right of ownership or possession in any property
in the village that is directly affected by an administrative decision made
under this title, by the superintendent of buildings or his/her designee or the
site plan review committee. All applications for appeals shall be filed with
the village clerk in accordance with the requirements in section 11-2-7,
"Applications", of this chapter.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The zoning board of appeals shall take formal
action on administrative appeals. The decision of the superintendent of
buildings, or his/her designee, or the site plan review committee on building
permits, certificates of occupancy, sign permits, zoning certificates or site
plan reviews can be appealed. Other duties, decisions and actions of the
superintendent, which are not established by this title, cannot be appealed
under this process.
   (D)   Procedure:
      1.   Acceptance Of Application By Village Clerk: Upon receipt of an
application, the village clerk shall review the application for completeness.
The village clerk shall schedule the application for an upcoming zoning board
of appeals agenda for consideration.
      2.   Decision By Zoning Board Of Appeals: The zoning board of appeals
shall hear an appeal within a reasonable time, and shall give due notice
thereof to the parties, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon
the hearing of the appeal, any party may appear in person, or by agent or
attorney. The board of appeals may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination.
   (E)   Limitations On Appeals: A decision of the superintendent or the site
plan review committee may only be appealed if an application is filed within
thirty (30) days of that decision.
   (F)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board. A current copy
of the fee schedule shall be available, upon request, in the office of the
village clerk.
   (G)   Records Of Appeals: A record of all requests for appeals, including
village action taken, shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk
and copies shall be available, upon request, to any person for a fee specified
in the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in the office of the village
clerk.
   (H)   Appeals To Village Board: An appeal of a decision to deny the issuance
of a sign permit, zoning certificate, certificate of occupancy or building
permit may be made in writing within ten (10) days of receipt of the decision
by filing a written request with the village clerk for the village board to
review the decision to deny issuance of the permit or certificate. The village
board shall consider the request within thirty (30) days of receiving same but
may postpone final decision for an additional thirty (30) days for any reason.
The village board may take action in the form of concurrence with the decision
to deny issuance of the permit/certificate or resolve to issue the permit or
certificate. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-19: ZONING INTERPRETATIONS:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village hereby establishes a process
for rendering zoning interpretations. The interpretation authority established
by this section is intended to recognize that the provisions of this title,
though detailed and extensive, cannot, as a practical matter, address every
specific situation to which they may have to be applied. Many such situations
can be readily addressed by an interpretation of the specific provisions of
this title in light of the general and specific provisions for which those
provisions have been enacted. The interpretation authority established herein
is not intended to add or change the essential content of the ordinance, but is
intended to only allow authoritative application of that content to specific
cases.
   (B)   Initiation Of Interpretations: Applications for zoning interpretations
may be filed by the owner of, or any person having a right of possession in,
any property in the village, that gives rise to the need for an interpretation.
In addition, the village board, superintendent of buildings, or other village
official may request that the village board render an interpretation. All
applications for interpretations shall be filed with the village clerk in
accordance with the requirements in section 11-2-7, "Applications", of this
chapter. If an applicant would like to make a formal presentation before the
village board, it shall be noticed in accordance with section 11-2-8, "Public
Notices", of this chapter.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The village board shall hear and make final
decisions on requests for interpretations.
   (D)   Procedure:
      1.   Acceptance Of Application By Village Clerk: Upon receipt of an
application, the village clerk shall review the application for completeness.
The village clerk shall schedule the application for an upcoming village board
meeting for consideration.
      2.   Decision By Village Board: The village board shall hear a request
for an interpretation within a reasonable time, and shall give due notice
thereof to the parties, and render the interpretation within a reasonable time.
The village board shall have the ability to request additional information
prior to rendering an interpretation.
   (E)   Fees: Fees shall be established by the village board. A current copy
of the fee schedule shall be available, upon request, in the office of the
village clerk.
   (F)   Records Of Zoning Interpretations: A record of all zoning
interpretations shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk and
copies shall be available on request, to any person for a fee specified in the
fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in the office of the village clerk.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-20: ANNEXATIONS:
   (A)   Establishment And Purpose: The village hereby establishes the process
for the annexation of property to the village. Property to be annexed must be
contiguous to the village as that term is defined in the Illinois municipal
code.
   (B)   Initiation Of Annexations: Any property owner desiring annexation to
the village may submit an annexation petition to the village clerk. Any
property owner desiring annexation to the village contingent to a zoning
classification other than R-1 single-family residential, or requiring a special
use permit, may submit an annexation petition to the village clerk conditioning
such annexation upon obtaining the stipulated zoning or special use permit. The
application for obtaining a particular zoning classification must follow the
procedures outlined in section 11-2-15, "Zoning Text And Map Amendments", of
this chapter, and be submitted at the time of the submission of the petition
for annexation. The application for obtaining a special use permit must follow
the procedures outlined in section 11-2-16, "Special Uses", of this chapter,
and also be submitted at the time of the submission of the petition for
annexation. The property owner shall pay an application fee at the time of the
application as provided in the fee schedule as established by the village board
and kept on file in the office of the village clerk. The application fee for
the zoning map amendment, and the application fee for a special use permit
shall also be paid at the time of submission. If the annexed property is to
remain in the R-1 single-family residential zoning classification, an
application for a zoning map amendment and the fee for that application will
not be required. If the proposed use of the property does not require a special
use permit, the application for a special use permit and the fee for that
application will not be required. All applications for annexation shall be
filed with the village clerk in accordance with the requirements of section 11-
2-7, "Applications", of this chapter. If the requested zoning change or special
use permit is refused by the zoning board of appeals and/or the village board,
the property owner may withdraw the petition to annex, but shall not receive a
refund of any fees paid to the village.
   (C)   Authority And Execution: The village board, after receiving a
recommendation by the zoning board of appeals, shall take formal action on
annexation petitions.
   (D)   Procedure:
      1.   Acceptance Of Application By Village Clerk: Upon receipt of a
complete application, the village clerk shall review the application for
completeness. The village clerk shall send the application to the site plan
review committee for review and schedule the application for an upcoming zoning
board of appeals agenda for consideration.
      2.   Site Plan Review: The site plan review committee shall review the
application, related documentation and plans in accordance with section 11-2-
4 of this chapter. Their findings shall be submitted along with the completed
application to the zoning board of appeals.
      3.   Recommendation By Zoning Board Of Appeals: The zoning board of
appeals shall hold a public hearing in accordance with section 11-2-8, "Public
Hearings", of this chapter, that will be held within thirty (30) days of the
filing of the completed application, unless the zoning board of appeals is
unable to meet for any reason, in which case the application will be heard at
the next available meeting date. Notices for the public hearing shall be in
accordance with section 11-2-9, "Public Notices", of this chapter. The zoning
board of appeals shall consider the findings of the site plan review committee
and any additional testimony presented at the public hearing before reporting
their findings of fact and recommendation.
      4.   Action Of Village Board:
         (a)   The village board shall consider the application within thirty
(30) days of receiving the findings of fact and recommendation from the zoning
board of appeals but may postpone consideration for an additional thirty (30)
days. If the corporate authorities wish to proceed with annexation, they may
then enter into an annexation agreement with the owner of the territory to be
annexed, which agreement is to state the purpose and terms of the annexation.
The annexation agreement shall be executed by the village president and
attested by the village clerk upon the adoption of a resolution or ordinance
directing said execution, which resolution or ordinance must be passed by a
vote of majority of the corporate authorities then holding office.
         (b)   The village board shall adopt an annexation ordinance in
conformity with the annexation agreement and the Illinois municipal code.
   (E)   Applicability Of Terms Of Annexation Agreement: The annexation
agreement shall be binding upon the successor owners of record of the land,
which is then subject of the agreement and upon successor municipal authorities
of the village.
   (F)   Annexation Fees: In order to cover the cost of site plan review,
preparation of annexation plats, examination of same, legal fees, engineering
fees, recording fees, and any other fees related to the annexation, anyone
annexing to the village may be charged a fee to cover the above costs. The fee
to be charged in any annexation may be set by the village board. This fee would
be in addition to any fee as set forth in subsection (B) of this section.
   (G)   Final Plats Of Annexation: Final plats of annexation, once the
annexation agreement is executed and the annexation ordinance is adopted, shall
be submitted to the village clerk and it shall be recorded by the village, and
the original plat, once recorded, shall be returned to the village clerk.
   (H)   Records Of Annexations: A record of all requests for annexation,
including village action taken, shall be kept on file in the office of the
village clerk and copies shall be available on request, to any person for a fee
specified in the fee schedule, which shall be kept on file in the office of the
village clerk. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-21: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   (A)   Enforcement: This title shall be enforced by the superintendent of
buildings, or his/her designee. The superintendent may secure the assistance of
the village attorney to seek an injunction, abatement, other appropriate
actions to enjoin, abate or stop any violation of this title and, at times, the
aid of the police department may be sought to enforce this title. The property
owner charged with the violation may be held responsible for any legal expenses
incurred by the village.
   (B)   Penalties: Any person, firm or corporation who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of
any of the provisions of this title, upon conviction, shall be fined for each
offense. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense for the purposes of the penalties and remedies available to the
village. The accumulation of penalties for violations, but not the obligation
for payment for violations already committed, shall cease upon correction of
the violation.
   (C)   Fines: Fines for violation of this title shall be in accordance with
subsection 1-4-1(A) of this code. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-2-22: ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION; TABLE 2-1:
TABLE 2-1:   ZONING PROCEDURES AND ADMINISTRATION
Steps
In      Zoning Procedures
Review
Process
        Sign
        Permit,
        Zoning               Zoning
        Certificate Building Map Or    Special Variations Annexations Interpretations Administrative
        And         Permit   Text      Use                                            Appeals
        Certificate          Amendment
        Of
        Occupancy
Steps In       Zoning Procedures
Review Process
               Sign Permit,
               Zoning
               Certificate    Building       Zoning Map Or Text Amendment                                              Special Use                                                               Variations                                                                Annexations                                                               Interpretations Administrative
               And            Permit                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Appeals
               Certificate Of
               Occupancy
Application    Superintendent Superintendent Village clerk                                                             Village clerk                                                             Village clerk                                                             Village clerk                                                             Village clerk   Village clerk
processing     of buildings   of buildings
Application    Superintendent Superintendent Village clerk                                                             Village clerk                                                             Village clerk                                                             Village clerk                                                             Village clerk   Village clerk
review 1       of buildings   of buildings
                              Superintendent
Site plan      Superintendent of buildings
review2        of buildings   or site plan   Site plan review committee                                                Site plan review committee                                                Site plan review committee                                                Site plan review committee                                                –             –
                              review
                              committee
Public notice3 –            –            15 – 30 day published newspaper notice; signposted on subject property; 15 – 30 day published newspaper notice; signposted on subject property; 15 – 30 day published newspaper notice; signposted on subject property; 15 – 30 day published newspaper notice; signposted on subject property; –             –
                                             notice mailed to other property owners                                    notice mailed to other property owners                                    notice mailed to other property owners                                    notice mailed to other property owners
Public         –            –            Zoning board of appeals                                                   Zoning board of appeals                                                   Zoning board of appeals                                                   Zoning board of appeals                                                   –             –
hearing4
Recommendation –            –            Zoning board of appeals                                                   Zoning board of appeals                                                   Zoning board of appeals                                                   Zoning board of appeals                                                   –             –
               Superintendent Site plan
Decision       of buildings   review         Village board                                                             Village board                                                             Village board                                                             Village board                                                             Village board   Village board
                              committee
Appeal         Village board  Village board  Circuit court                                                             Circuit court                                                             Circuit court                                                             Circuit court                                                             Circuit court   Circuit court
 
Notes:
   1.    Application in accordance with requirements of subsection 11-2-7(C) of
this chapter.
   2.    Site plan review in accordance with requirements of section 11-2-14(B)
of this chapter.
   3.    Notice in accordance with requirements of section 11-2-9 of this
chapter.
   4.    Public hearing in accordance with requirements of section 11-2-8 of
this chapter.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 3
NONCONFORMITIES
SECTION:
11-3-1: Purpose
11-3-2: General Standards Of Applicability
11-3-3: Nonconforming Uses Of Land, Buildings Or Structures
11-3-4: Nonconforming Buildings And Structures
11-3-5: Nonconforming Lots Of Record
11-3-6: Nonconforming Signs
11-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations and limitations on the
continued existence of uses, buildings, platted lots or structures established
prior to the effective date hereof that do not conform to the provisions of
this title. Many such nonconformities may continue, but the provisions of this
chapter are designed to curtail substantial investment in such nonconformities
and, where appropriate, to bring about their eventual elimination in order to
preserve the integrity of the zoning districts and regulations established by
this title. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-3-2: GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Authority To Continue: Any nonconforming buildings, structures,
platted lots, and uses that existed lawfully at the time of adoption of this
title, and which remain nonconforming, and any such building, structure,
platted lot or use that has become nonconforming upon adoption of this title,
or of any subsequent amendments thereto, may continue subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
   (B)   Illegal Uses, Buildings And Structures: Uses, buildings and structures
that were not lawfully established prior to adoption of this title, and remain
unlawful after the effective date hereof, shall not become legal by virtue of
its enactment.
   (C)   Burden On Property Owner To Establish Legality: The burden of
establishing the legality of a nonconformity that is existing under the
provisions of this title shall, in all cases, be upon the property owner of the
nonconforming use, building or structure, and not upon the village. Illegal
uses, buildings and structures shall be immediately brought into compliance
with all ordinances of the village.
   (D)   Safety Regulations: All police power regulations enacted to promote
the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare including,
but not limited to, all building, fire and health codes, shall apply to
nonconforming buildings and structures. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-
2007)
11-3-3: NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND, BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES:
This category of nonconformities consists of uses of land, buildings or
structures that are used for purposes on the effective date hereof, or any
amendment thereto, not permitted in the zoning district in which they are
located. Such uses may be continued as follows:
   (A)   Expansion Of Use Prohibited: A nonconforming use of land, buildings or
structures shall not be expanded, extended, enlarged or increased in intensity.
Such prohibited activity shall include, without limitation:
      1.   Any extension of the hours of operation of such use beyond the
normal hours of operation on the effective date hereof.
      2.   Expansion of any building or structure devoted entirely to a
nonconforming use.
      3.   An expansion or extension of a use, or its accessory uses, to any
structure, building, or land area, other than that occupied by such
nonconforming use, on the effective date hereof.
      4.   An expansion or extension of such use, including its accessory uses,
within a building or other structure, to any portion of the floor area that was
not occupied by such nonconforming use on the effective date hereof.
   (B)   Relocation Of Use: A nonconforming use of land, buildings or
structures shall not be relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location
on the same lot or parcel, or to any other lot or parcel, unless the use
thereof shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located after being so relocated.
   (C)   Change In Use: A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use
other than a use permitted within the zoning district in which the use is
located. When such a nonconforming use has been changed, in whole or in part,
to a permitted use, the whole or part which has been made to conform may not
thereafter be changed back to a use that is not permitted.
   (D)   Discontinuation Or Abandonment Of Use: Whenever a nonconforming use of
a building or premises has been discontinued for a period of six (6)
consecutive months, or thirty (30) consecutive days if a special use is
required, or changed to a higher classification or to a conforming use, such
nonconforming use shall not thereafter be changed back to a use that is not
permitted.
   (E)   Ordinary Repair And Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls,
nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on any
nonconforming building or structure. No repairs or reconstruction shall be made
that would create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of any previously
existing nonconformity, or increase the bulk of the building in any manner.
   (F)   Damage And Destruction:
      1.   In the event that any building or structure and/or property, that is
devoted, in whole or in part, to a nonconforming use is damaged or destroyed,
by any means not within the control of the property owner or tenant, to the
extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time,
then the building, structure and/or property shall not be restored or rebuilt
unless the building or structure thereafter conforms to all regulations of the
zoning district in which it is located.
      2.   The replacement value of the building, structure and/or property
shall be based on: a) a sale of that building, structure and/or property within
the previous year; b) an appraisal within the last two (2) years; or c) the
amount for which building, structure or property was insured prior to the date
of the damage or destruction. When such building, structure and/or property is
damaged or destroyed, by any means not within the control of the property owner
or tenant, to the extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of the replacement
value at that time, it may be repaired, reconstructed or restored, provided
that no new nonconformities are created and that the existing degree of
nonconformity is not increased. A building permit shall be obtained for such
rebuilding, restoration, repair or reconstruction within one year of the date
of damage or destruction, and the construction shall be substantially completed
within one year of issuance of the building permit.
      3.   In the event that the permit is not obtained within one year or that
repairs or restoration are not substantially completed within one year of the
issuance of the building permit, then the building, structure and/or use of
property shall not be restored unless the building, structure and/or property,
and the use thereof, conforms to all regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located. In the event that any building, structure and/or property
is damaged or destroyed by means within the control of the property owner or
tenant, the building, structure and/or property and use thereof, as restored or
repaired, shall comply with all requirements of this title. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-3-4: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES:
This category of nonconformities consists of buildings and structures that are
existing on the effective date hereof, or any amendment thereto, for which the
size or location does not conform with the yard, height, or other dimensional
or bulk provisions of this title, or any amendment thereto. Such buildings or
structures shall only be continued as follows:
   (A)   Additions And Enlargements: A building or structure which is
nonconforming with respect to its bulk, shall not be added to or enlarged.
   (B)   Structural Alterations: No structural alterations shall be performed
on any nonconforming building or structure, except in the following situations:
      1.   When the alteration is required by law or is necessary to restore
the building or structure to a safe condition upon the order of any official
charged with protecting the public safety.
      2.   When the alteration will result in eliminating the nonconformity.
      3.   When the alteration will not create any new nonconformity, increase
the degree of any existing nonconformity, or increase the bulk of the building
or structure in any manner.
      4.   The building or property is restored or replaced pursuant to
subsection 11-3-3(F) of this chapter.
   (C)   Relocation: A nonconforming building or structure shall not be
relocated, in whole or in part, to any other location on the same lot or
parcel, or to any other lot or parcel, unless the building or structure thereof
shall thereafter conform to all regulations of the zoning district in which it
is located after being so relocated.
   (D)   Ordinary Repair And Maintenance: Normal maintenance and incidental
repair or replacement, and installation or relocation of nonbearing walls,
nonbearing partitions, fixtures, wiring or plumbing may be performed on any
building or structure that is devoted, in whole or in part, to a nonconforming
use, provided it will not create any new nonconformity, increase the degree of
nonconformity, or increase the bulk of the building or structure in any manner.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-3-5: NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
This section regulates lots of record, existing on the effective date hereof,
which do not conform with the lot area or lot width requirements for the
district in which they are located. No nonconforming lot of record may be
improved except in compliance with this section.
   (A)   Individual Lots Of Record In Residential Districts: In the residential
districts, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions of this
title, a single-family dwelling and its accessory buildings may be erected on a
single nonconforming lot of record, provided that the lot is in separate
ownership and it meets all other zoning district bulk requirements.
   (B)   Lots Of Record Held In Common Ownership: If, on the effective date
hereof, in situations where there are two (2) or more lots of record with
continuous frontage in single ownership and one or more of the lots having
contiguous frontage does not meet the requirements for lot width or lot area as
established by this title, the land so involved shall be considered to be a
single undivided parcel for the purposes of this title. No portion of said
parcel shall be used, which does not meet the lot width and lot area
requirements established by this title. No division of the parcel shall be made
which leaves remaining lot(s) with lot width or lot area below the requirements
as stated in this title. No building permit shall be issued for the use of any
lot or portion of a lot transferred or conveyed in violation of this section.
   (C)   Additional Criteria For Nonconforming Lots Of Record: A variation from
this section may be obtained to permit the separation of two (2) adjoining lots
held in common ownership, provided that the village board finds that the
applicant complies with the standards for a variation in section 11-2-17,
"Variations", of this title. In addition, the applicant must comply with one of
the following standards:
      1.   Both lots meet the lot area and lot width requirements in effect at
the time the applicant purchased the lots.
      2.   Over half of the lots within five hundred feet (500') of the subject
lots have been developed as individual building sites and do not comply with
either the lot width or lot area requirement for the zoning district in which
they are located.
      3.   The owners of the abutting lots refuse to sell or convey, at a fair
market price, portions of their lots that could be added to the subject lots to
render them conforming without rendering said abutting lots or structures
located on such lots nonconforming. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-3-6: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
The provisions for nonconforming signs are contained within section 11-14-14,
"Nonconforming Signs", of this title. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Establishment Of Zoning Districts
11-4-2: Zoning Map
11-4-3: Annexed Land
11-4-4: Exemptions For Public Utilities
11-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONING DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purpose and intent of this title, the village is
hereby divided into the following zoning districts:
Residential Districts:
R-1 Single-family residential district
R-2 Single-family residential district
R-3 Single-family attached residential district
R-4 General residential district
R-5 Village center multi-family residential district
Business Districts:
B-1 Neighborhood business residential district
B-2 Village center district
B-3 Community commercial district
Office/Limited Industrial District:
O/I Office/limited industrial district
Open Space And Recreation District:
OS  Open space and recreation district
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-4-2: ZONING MAP:
   (A)   Location Of Districts:
      1.   The location and boundaries of the zoning districts established by
this title are set forth in the official zoning map, as periodically amended.
The official zoning map is hereby incorporated into, and made an integral part
of, this title.
      2.   It is the intent of this title that the entire area of the village,
including all land and water areas, be included in the zoning districts
established by this title. Any land lying within the village, but not shown on
the official zoning map as being included within a district, shall be deemed to
be classified as within the R-1 single-family residential district.
   (B)   Interpretation Of Boundary Lines:
      1.   Right Of Way Lines: Where zoning district boundary lines coincide
with streets, alleys, highways, easements, or right of way lines of railroads,
toll roads or expressways, the boundary line shall be construed to be the
centerline of said right of way.
      2.   Property Lines: Where zoning district boundary lines coincide with a
duly recorded property line, the property line shall be construed to be the
boundary line of the district.
      3.   Scaled Lines: Where the district boundary lines do not coincide with
a right of way line or duly recorded property line, the district boundary shall
be determined by measuring such boundary line(s) by using the map scale as
provided on the official zoning map.
      4.   Clarification Of Boundary Lines: The zoning board of appeals shall
review and make recommendations with regard to all interpretations of district
boundary lines, where the application of the aforesaid rules leaves a doubt as
to the boundary between two (2) zoning districts. Such recommendations shall be
submitted in writing to the village board for final interpretation. (Ord. 1650,
10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-4-3: ANNEXED LAND:
Any territory hereafter annexed into the village shall automatically, upon
annexation, be classified in the R-1 single- family residential district. Such
land shall be subject to the requirements of this R-1 single-family residential
district, unless otherwise provided for in the annexation agreement or until
such territory is rezoned. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-4-4: EXEMPTIONS FOR PUBLIC UTILITIES:
The following essential services are permitted to be erected, constructed,
altered or maintained in any zoning district:
   (A)   Traffic signals, fire hydrants, and similar equipment and accessories.
   (B)   Gas, electric, communication, water supply and transmission/
distribution systems.
   (C)   Elevated or underground water storage tanks.
   (D)   Storm and sanitary sewer collection and disposal systems.
   (E)   Utility poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits and cables
reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public
utilities, municipal or other governmental agencies for the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 5
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Residential District Purpose Statements
11-5-2: Permitted And Special Uses; Table 5-1
11-5-3: Yard And Bulk Regulations; Table 5-2
11-5-4: General Standards Of Applicability
11-5-1: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENTS:
   (A)   Purpose Of R-1 Single-Family Residential District: The purpose of the
R-1 single-family residential district is to provide for, and preserve, single-
family detached residential development on lots that are a minimum of twelve
thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet in area within the village. The R-
1 district also provides for limited public and institutional uses compatible
with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   Purpose Of R-2 Single-Family Residential District: The purpose of the
R-2 single-family residential district is to provide for, and preserve, single-
family detached residential development on lots that are a minimum of six
thousand one hundred twenty five (6,125) square feet in area within the
village. The R-2 district also provides for limited public and institutional
uses compatible with surrounding residential neighborhoods.
   (C)   Purpose Of R-3 Single-Family Attached Residential District: The
purpose of the R-3 single-family attached residential district is to provide
for, and preserve, single-family detached, and compatible single-family
attached, residential development consisting of either single-family, two-
family or townhouse dwellings, as defined by this title. The R-3 district also
provides for limited public and institutional uses compatible with surrounding
residential neighborhoods.
   (D)   Purpose Of R-4 General Residential District: The purpose of R-
4 general residential district is to provide for, and preserve, the quality of
higher density residential development that promotes efficient use of land and
infrastructure, and provides for a variety of housing types and styles, where
such development is compatible with adjacent uses. The R-4 district also
provides for limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with
surrounding residential neighborhoods.
   (E)   Purpose Of R-5 Village Center Multi-Family Residential District: The
purpose of the R-5 village center multi-family residential district is to
provide for higher density residential development within the village center
that promotes efficient use of land and infrastructure. The R-5 district also
provides for limited public and institutional uses that are compatible with
surrounding residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-5-2: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES; TABLE 5-1:
Table 5-1 lists permitted and special uses for the residential districts, as
follows:
TABLE 5-1:   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
 
S = Special use  P = Permitted use  Blank space = Prohibited use
Use Zoning District     Specific Use Standards
    R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
                                                    Zoning District Specific
Use                                                 R- R- R- R-     Use
                                                    1  2  3  4  R-5 Standards

Residential uses:                                               
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Community residence, large                  S  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(B)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Community residence, small                  S  S  S  S     11-9-2(B)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Daycare home, child                         P  P  P  P     11-9-2(E)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
    Dwelling, multi-family                            P  P    
    Dwelling, single-family                     P  P  P  P      
    Dwelling, townhouse                             P  P  P    
    Dwelling, two-family                            P  P  P    
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Home occupation                             P  P  P  P     11-9-2(J)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Manufactured home                                      11-9-2(K)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
Cultural, religious, recreational and entertainment             
uses:
    Club or lodge                                   S  S  S    
    Convent/monastery/seminary                  P  P  P  P  P    
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Cultural facility                           S  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(C)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Place of worship                            S  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(O)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
Governmental and educational uses:                              
    College/university                          S  S  S  S  S    
    Office, government                          P  P  P  P  P    
    Public service facility                     P  P  P  P  P    
    School, primary and secondary               P  P  P  P  P    
    Utility, local                              P  P  P  P  P    
Retail, service and transportation uses:                        
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Assisted living facility                    S  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(A)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Bed and breakfast establishment             S  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(F)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsections
    Daycare center, adult and child             S  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(A)
                                                                    and (D) of
                                                                    this title
    Hospital                                          S  S    
    Independent living facility                     S  S  S    
Other:                                                          
    Parking lot (customer/employees of adjacent S  S  S  S  S    
businesses)
                                                                    See chapter
    Planned unit development                    S  S  S  S  S   15 of this
                                                                    title
    Satellite dish antenna (over 18 inches in   S  S  S  S  S    
diameter)
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Wireless communication antenna              P  P  P  P  P   11-9-2(Q)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
                                                                    See
                                                                    subsection
    Wireless communications tower and/or facilitS  S  S  S  S   11-9-2(Q)
                                                                    of this
                                                                    title
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 2137, 2-28-2024)
11-5-3: YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS; TABLE 5-2:
Table 5-2 establishes yard and bulk regulations for the residential districts,
as follows:
TABLE 5-2:   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS
Yard And Bulk Regulations Zoning District
                          R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 R-5
Yard And     Zoning District
Bulk         R-1         R-2         R-3          R-4            R-5
Regulations
                                     9,000 sq.
                                     ft. plus     9,000 sq. ft.
                                     4,000 sq.    plus 4,000 sq.
Minimum lot  12,500 sq.  6,125 sq.   ft. for each ft. for each
area         ft.         ft.         dwelling     dwelling unit  25,000 sq. ft.
                                     unit in      in excess of 2
                                     excess of 2  dwelling units
                                     dwelling
                                     units
Minimum lot  100 ft.     49 ft.      60 ft.       80 ft.         200 ft.
width
Minimum      30 ft.      25 ft.      25 ft.       35 ft.         25 ft.
front yard
             Depth not   Depth not   Depth not    Depth not less
             less than   less than   less than    than 20% of
Minimum rear 20% of the  20% of the  20% of the   the lot depth,
yard         lot depth,  lot depth,  lot depth,   provided not   None1
             provided    provided    provided not less than 30
             not less    not less    less than 30 ft.
             than 30 ft. than 30 ft. ft.
             Width not   Width not
             less than   less than
Minimum      10% of the  10% of the
interior     lot width,  lot width,  10 ft.       10 ft.         10 ft.
side yard    provided    provided
             not less    not less
             than 10 ft. than 5 ft.
Minimum
distance
between
townhouse    n/a         n/a         10 ft.       10 ft.         10 ft.
and multi-
family
buildings
                         15 ft.; 20  15 ft. for   15 ft. for
                         ft. if a    house; 20    house; 20 ft.
Maximum                  garage is   ft. if a     if a garage is
corner side  20 ft.      located in  garage is    located in the 15 ft.
yard2                    the corner  located in   corner side
                         side yard   the corner   yard
                                     side yard
Maximum      32 ft. or   32 ft. or   36 ft. or 3  36 ft. or 3    82 ft. or 7
building     21/         21/         stories,     stories,       stories,
height,      2 stories,  2 stories,  whichever is whichever is   whichever is
principal    whichever   whichever   less         less           less
building     is less     is less
Maximum
building     14 ft. for  14 ft. for  14 ft. for   14 ft. for     14 ft. for
height,      detached    detached    detached     detached       detached
accessory    garage      garage      garage       garage         garage
building
Maximum                              8 dwelling   14 dwelling    60 dwelling
density      n/a         n/a         units per    units per      units per
                                     gross acre   gross acre     gross acre
                         1 story
                         above
                         grade:
                         1,400 sq.                Two-family:    Two-family:
                         ft.         2 story:     1,200 sq. ft.  1,250 sq. ft.
                                    1,800 sq.    per dwelling   per dwelling
             No building 1 story     ft. above    unit           unit
             shall have  raised      grade with                  
             less than   ranch, main 1,000 sq.    Townhouses:    Townhouses:
             1,600 sq.   floor:      ft. on first 1,250 sq. ft.  1,250 sq. ft.
             ft.         1,400 sq.   floor        per dwelling   per dwelling
                        ft. above               unit           unit
Minimum      Split       grade       Two-family:                 
floor area   level:                 1,250 sq.    Multi-family 1 Multi-family 1
             1,800 sq.   Split       ft. per      bedroom: 900   bedroom: 900
             ft.         level:      dwelling     sq. ft.        sq. ft.
                        1,400 sq.   unit                        
             2 story or  ft. above               Multi-family 2 Multi-family 2
             mid-level:  grade       Townhouses:  bedroom: 1,250 bedroom: 1,250
             2,000 sq.              1,250 sq.    sq. ft.        sq. ft.
             ft.         2 story:    ft. per                     
                         1,800 sq.   dwelling     Multi-family 3 Multi-family 3
                         ft. above   unit         bedroom: 1,750 bedroom: 1,750
                         grade with               sq. ft.        sq. ft.
                         1,000 sq.
                         ft. on
                         first floor
Maximum
building
coverage
(total of    35%         37%         50%          50%            80%
building and
garage,
attached or
detached
                                     No wider
                                     than the     Determined by  Determined by
                         40% of lot  width of     superintendent superintendent
Maximum      40% of lot  width or 20 garage       of buildings;  of buildings;
driveway     width       ft.,        opening;     approved by    approved by
width                    whichever   green space  site plan      site plan
                         is less     provided     review         review
                                     between      committee      committee
                                     units
             50% or 100% 50% or 100% 50% or 100%
Masonry      of first    of first    of first
construction floor or    floor or    floor or     100%           100%
requirement  ground      ground      ground level
             level       level
 
Notes:
   1.    Where a rear lot line abuts a residential district, a minimum rear
setback of 20 feet shall be provided, unless an alley separates the districts.
   2.    For corner lots, the front yard shall be defined as the yard with the
narrower width.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-5-4: GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses: See section 11-11-2,
"Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses", of this title, for standards
covering accessory buildings, structures and uses.
   (B)   Permitted Encroachments: See section 11-11-3, "Permitted
Encroachments; Table 11-1", of this title, for standards governing
encroachments.
   (C)   Off Street Parking And Loading: See chapter 12, "Off Street Parking
And Loading", of this title, for standards governing off street parking and
loading. Any and all open parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced with
bituminous, concrete, or a like material, with adequate drainage provided.
   (D)   Landscaping And Screening: See chapter 13, "Landscaping And
Screening", of this title, for standards governing landscaping and screening.
   (E)   Environmental Performance Standards: See section 11-11-4,
"Environmental Performance Standards", of this title, for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
   (F)   Temporary Uses: See section 11-9-3, "Temporary Uses", of this title,
for standards governing temporary uses.
   (G)   Signs: See chapter 14, "Signs", of this title, for standards governing
signs.
   (H)   Driveways: See subsection 11-11-2(I), "Driveways", of this title, for
standards governing driveways. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 6
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Business Districts Purpose Statements
11-6-2: Permitted And Special Uses; Table 6-1
11-6-3: Yard And Bulk Regulations; Table 6-2
11-6-4: General Standards Of Applicability
11-6-1: BUSINESS DISTRICTS PURPOSE STATEMENTS:
   (A)   Purpose Of B-1 Neighborhood Business Residential District: The purpose
of the B-1 neighborhood business residential district is to provide for areas
of small scale, low intensity business, office, mixed use and residential
opportunities in a manner that assures that the bulk, intensity and design of
development is compatible with adjacent residential neighborhoods.
   (B)   Purpose Of B-2 Village Center District: The purpose of the B-2 village
center district is to establish a zoning district that recognizes and protects
the unique scale and character of Midlothian's village center by permitting
compatible uses, including mixed uses, that enhance its physical character and
identity. The village center district is differentiated from other business
districts in that the pattern of development is oriented toward the pedestrian,
and the use, yard and bulk standards reflect Midlothian's desire to create a
village center that generates pedestrian activity.
   (C)   Purpose Of B-3 Community Commercial District: The purpose of the B-
3 community commercial district is to maintain and promote a broad mix of large
scale and small scale retail, service and office uses that provide goods and
services for the village as well as the surrounding region. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-6-2: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES; TABLE 6-1:
   (A)    Table 6-1 lists permitted and special uses for the business
districts, as follows:
TABLE 6-1:   BUSINESS DISTRICT PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
 
S = Special use  P = Permitted use  Blank space = Prohibited use
Use Zoning District Specific Use Standards
    B-1 B-2 B-3
                                                                              Zoning
                                                                              District Specific
Use                                                                           B- B- B- Use
                                                                              1  2  3  Standards

Residential uses:                                                                    
                                                                                       See
   Adult use cannabis craft grower but only as ancillary use to dispensary S  S  S  subsection
organization                                                                           5-4-41(A)
                                                                                       of title 5
                                                                                       See
    Adult use cannabis dispensary organization                            S  S  S  subsection
                                                                                       5-4-41(A)
                                                                                       of title 5
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Community residence, large                                            S    S  11-9-2(B)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Community residence, small                                            S    S  11-9-2(B)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Daycare home, child                                                   P    P  11-9-2(E)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Dwelling, above ground floor of office or commercial                  P  P     
    Dwelling, multi-family                                                P  S     
    Dwelling, townhouse                                                   P  S     
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Home occupation                                                       P  P    11-9-2(J)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
Cultural, religious, recreational and entertainment uses:                            
    Art gallery/studio                                                    P  P  P   
    Cemetery                                                              P  S  P   
    Club and lodge                                                        P  P  P   
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Cultural facility                                                     P  P  P  11-9-2(C)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
   Event venue                                                             S  S  S  subsection
                                                                                       5-4-43 of
                                                                                       this Code
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Indoor amusement                                                      P  P  P  11-9-2(C)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Indoor recreation                                                     P  P  P  11-9-2(C)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Live entertainment/dancing                                            S  S  S   
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Outdoor amusement                                                     S  S  S  11-9-2(C)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Outdoor recreation                                                    P  S  P  11-9-2(C)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Park/playground                                                       P  P  P   
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Place of worship                                                      S  S  S  11-9-2(O)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Theater                                                               S  S  P   
Governmental and educational uses:                                                   
    College/university                                                    P  P  P   
    Office, government                                                    P  P  P   
    Public service facility                                               P  P  P   
    School, primary and secondary                                         P  P  P   
    School, specialized instructional                                     P  P  P   
    Utility, local                                                        P  P  P   
Retail, service and transportation uses:                                             
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Assisted living facility                                              P  S  P  11-9-2(A)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Bed and breakfast establishment                                       S  S    11-9-2(F)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Currency exchange                                                     P  P  P   
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsections
    Daycare center, adult and child                                       S  S  S  11-9-2(A)
                                                                                       and (D) of
                                                                                       this title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Drive-through facility                                                P  S  P  11-9-2(G)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Financial institution                                                 P  P  P   
    Heavy retail and service                                                  P   
    Hospital                                                                  P   
    Hotel/motel                                                             S  P   
    Massage therapy clinic                                                P  P  P   
    Medical cannabis dispensing organization                                  S   
    Medical/dental clinic                                                 P  P  P   
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Motor vehicle sales and leasing                                       S  S  P  11-9-2(N)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Motor vehicle service and repair, minor                               S  S  P  11-9-2(M)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Motor vehicle service, convenience                                    P  S  P  11-9-2(L)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Motorcycle sales                                                      S  S  S  11-9-2(N)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Offices, professional                                                 P  P  P   
    Operations facility, ambulance/bus/taxicab                            P    P   
                                                                                       See
                                                                              P, P, P, subsection
    Outdoor cafe                                                          S  S  S  11-9-2(H)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
    Parking garage/structure                                              S  S  S   
    Parking lot, off street                                               P  S  P   
    Pawnshop                                                                  S   
    Personal services establishment                                       P  P  P   
    Restaurant                                                            P  P  P   
    Retail goods establishment                                            P  P  P   
    Tattoo parlor                                                             S   
    Tavern/bar                                                            S  S  S   
    Transportation station and terminal                                   P  S  P   
Industrial/storage uses:                                                             
    Miniwarehouse                                                             P   
    Research and development use                                            P  P   
Other:                                                                               
                                                                                       See chapter
    Planned unit development                                              S  S  S  15 of this
                                                                                       title
    Satellite dish antenna (over 18 inches in diameter)                   S  S  S   
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Wireless communications antenna                                       P  P  P  11-9-2(Q)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
                                                                                       See
                                                                                       subsection
    Wireless communications tower and/or facility                         S  S  S  11-9-2(Q)
                                                                                       of this
                                                                                       title
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 1870, 5-14-2014; Ord. 2047,
3-4-2020; Ord. 2071, 1-13-2021; Ord. 2112, 1-18-2023; Ord. 2137, 2-28-2024)
   (B)   Planned unit developments provisions applicable to the B-2 village
center district can be found in chapter 15, "Planned Unit Development", of this
title. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-6-3: YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS; TABLE 6-2:
Table 6-2 establishes yard and bulk regulations for the business districts, as
follows:
TABLE 6-2:   BUSINESS DISTRICT YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS
Yard And Bulk Regulations1 Zoning District
                           B-1 B-22 B-3
Yard And Bulk       Zoning District
Regulations1        B-1               B-22               B-3
Minimum lot area    None              None               None
Minimum lot width   None              None               None
Maximum front yard  None              10 feet3           None
Minimum front yard  0 feet            5 feet             0 feet
Minimum rear yard4  0 feet            0 feet             0 feet
Minimum interior    5 feet            0 feet             5 feet
side yard
Maximum corner side None              10 feet3           None
yard
Minimum corner side 0 feet            None               0 feet
yard
Maximum building    30 feet or 21/    52 feet or 4       30 feet or 21/
height5             2 stories,        stories, whichever 2 stories, whichever
                    whichever is less is less            is less
 
Notes:
   1.    In the B-1 district, residential units shall be required to meet the
bulk requirements of the R-2 district (for single-family dwellings) and the R-
4 district (for 2-unit townhouses, and multi-family dwellings). In the B-
2 district, residential units above the ground floor shall be required to meet
the bulk requirements of the R-4 district, except that the density may be
increased to 42 dwelling units per gross acre.
   2.    Planned unit development provisions applicable to the B-2 village
center district can be found in chapter 15, "Planned Unit Development", of this
title.
   3.    10 feet maximum only if the area in front of front, corner or side
building line is occupied by landscaping, a sidewalk, an outdoor cafe or a
monument sign. Under no circumstances shall the front or corner yard setback
area be utilized for vehicular circulation or parking.
   4.    Where a rear lot line abuts a residential district, a minimum rear
setback of 20 feet shall be provided, unless an alley separates the districts.
   5.    Chimneys, stacks, penthouses and elevated water towers may extend to a
height of 62 feet.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-6-4: GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses: See section 11-11-2,
"Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses", of this title, for standards
covering accessory buildings, structures and uses.
   (B)   Permitted Encroachments: See section 11-11-3, "Permitted
Encroachments; Table 11-1", of this title, for standards governing
encroachments.
   (C)   Off Street Parking And Loading: See chapter 12, "Off Street Parking
And Loading", of this title, for standards governing off street parking and
loading.
   (D)   Landscaping And Screening: See chapter 13, "Landscaping And
Screening", of this title, for standards governing landscaping and screening.
   (E)   Environmental Performance Standards: See section 11-11-4,
"Environmental Performance Standards", of this title, for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
   (F)   Temporary Uses: See section 11-9-3, "Temporary Uses", of this title,
for standards governing temporary uses.
   (G)   Signs: See chapter 14, "Signs", of this title, for standards governing
signs. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 7
OFFICE/LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-7-1: Office/Limited Industrial District Purpose Statement
11-7-2: Permitted And Special Uses; Table 7-1
11-7-3: Yard And Bulk Regulations; Table 7-2
11-7-4: General Standards Of Applicability !rH!
11-7-1: OFFICE/LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENT:
The purpose of the O/I office/limited industrial district is to provide and
preserve suitable locations for office, limited manufacturing, warehousing,
distribution, assembly and related heavy commercial activities that are of the
scale and type not to be injurious to any neighboring district or use. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-7-2: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES; TABLE 7-1:
Table 7-1 lists permitted and special uses for the office/limited industrial
district, as follows:
TABLE 7-1:   OFFICE/LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
 
S = Special use  P = Permitted use  Blank space = Prohibited use
Use O/I District Specific Use Standards
Use                                                   O/I District Specific Use
                                                                   Standards
Governmental and educational uses:                                 
                                                                   See
   Adult use cannabis craft grower                 S            subsection
                                                                   5-4-41(A) of
                                                                   title 5
                                                                   See
   Adult use cannabis cultivation center           S            subsection
                                                                   5-4-41(A) of
                                                                   title 5
                                                                   See
   Adult use cannabis dispensing organization      S            subsection
                                                                   5-4-41(A) of
                                                                   title 5
                                                                   See
   Adult use cannabis infuser organization or infusSr           subsection
                                                                   5-4-41(A) of
                                                                   title 5
                                                                   See
   Adult use cannabis processing organization or   S            subsection
processor                                                          5-4-41(A) of
                                                                   title 5
                                                                   See
   Adult use cannabis transporting organization or S            subsection
transporter                                                        5-4-41(A) of
                                                                   title 5
    Public service facility                       P             
    Utility, community/regional                   P             
    Utility, local                                P             
Retail, service and transportation uses:                           
    Heavy retail and service                      P             
    Miniwarehouse                                 P             
                                                                   See
    Motor vehicle service and repair, major       P            subsection
                                                                   11-9-2(L) of
                                                                   this title
                                                                   See
    Motor vehicle service and repair, minor       P            subsection
                                                                   11-9-2(L) of
                                                                   this title
    Offices, professional                         P             
    Operations facility, ambulance/bus/taxicab    S             
    Transportation station and terminal           P             
Industrial/storage uses:                                           
    Manufacturing, light/assembly                 P             
    Research and development use                  P             
    Warehouse/distribution                        P             
Other:                                                             
                                                                   See
   Event venue                                     S            subsection
                                                                   5-4-43 of
                                                                   this Code
                                                                   See chapter
    Planned unit development                      S            15 of this
                                                                   title
                                                                   See
    Wireless communications antenna               P            subsection
                                                                   11-9-2(Q) of
                                                                   this title
                                                                   See
    Wireless communications tower and facility    S            subsection
                                                                   11-9-2(Q) of
                                                                   this title
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007; Ord. 2071, 1-13-2021; Ord. 2112, 1-18-
2023)
11-7-3: YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS; TABLE 7-2:
Table 7-2 establishes yard and bulk regulations for the office/limited
industrial district.
TABLE 7-2:   OFFICE/LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS
Yard And Bulk Regulations O/I District
Yard And Bulk Regulations  O/I District
Minimum lot area           None
Minimum lot width          None
Minimum front yard         25 feet
Minimum rear yard          None, except where rear yard abuts residential
                           district, then 20 feet
Minimum interior side yard None
Minimum corner side yard   None
Maximum building height    40 feet or 3 stories1
 
Note:
   1.    Chimneys, stacks, penthouses and water tanks may extend to a height of
70 feet.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-7-4: GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses: See section 11-11-2,
"Accessory Uses", of this title, for standards covering accessory buildings,
structures and uses.
   (B)   Permitted Encroachments: See section 11-11-3, "Permitted
Encroachments; Table 11-1", of this title, for standards governing
encroachments.
   (C)   Off Street Parking And Loading: See chapter 12, "Off Street Parking
And Loading", of this title, for standards governing off street parking and
loading.
   (D)   Landscaping And Screening: See chapter 13, "Landscaping And
Screening", of this title, for standards governing landscaping and screening.
   (E)   Environmental Performance Standards: See section 11-11-4,
"Environmental Performance Standards", of this title, for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
   (F)   Temporary Uses: See section 11-9-3, "Temporary Uses", of this title,
for standards governing temporary uses.
   (G)   Signs: See chapter 14, "Signs", of this title, for standards governing
signs. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 8
OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION DISTRICT
SECTION:
11-8-1: Open Space And Recreation District Purpose Statement
11-8-2: Permitted And Special Uses; Table 8-1
11-8-3: Yard And Bulk Regulations; Table 8-2
11-8-4: General Standards Of Applicability
11-8-1: OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION DISTRICT PURPOSE STATEMENT:
The purpose of the OS open space and recreation district is to ensure the
continued existence, maintenance, conservation and protection of publicly and
privately owned open space, natural areas, and passive and active recreation
facilities that serve the village and surrounding region. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-8-2: PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES; TABLE 8-1:
Table 8-1 lists permitted and special uses for the open space and recreation
district, as follows:
TABLE 8-1:   OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION DISTRICT PERMITTED AND SPECIAL USES
 
S = Special use  P = Permitted use  Blank space = Prohibited use
Use OS District Specific Use Standards
Use                                          OS District Specific Use Standards
Governmental and educational uses:                       
    Golf course/country club/driving rangP            
    Indoor recreational                  P           See subsection 11-9-2
                                                         (C) of this title
    Nature preserve                      P            
    Outdoor recreation                   P            
    Park/playground                      P            
    Utility, community/regional          P            
    Utility, local                       P            
Other:                                                   
    Wireless communications antenna      P           See subsection 11-9-2
                                                         (Q) of this title
    Wireless communications tower and/or S           See subsection 11-9-2
facility                                                 (Q) of this title
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-8-3: YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS; TABLE 8-2:
Table 8-2 establishes yard and bulk regulations for the open space and
recreation district, as follows:
TABLE 8-2:   OPEN SPACE AND RECREATION DISTRICT YARD AND BULK REGULATIONS
Yard And Bulk Regulations OS District
Yard And Bulk Regulations                       OS District
Minimum lot area                                None
Minimum lot width                               None
Minimum front yard                              25 feet
Minimum rear yard                               30 feet
Minimum interior side yard                      10 feet
Minimum corner side yard                        15 feet
Maximum building height, principal or accessory 30 feet or 21/2 stories
building
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-8-4: GENERAL STANDARDS OF APPLICABILITY:
   (A)   Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses: See section 11-11-2,
"Accessory Uses", of this title, for standards covering accessory buildings,
structures and uses.
   (B)   Permitted Encroachments: See section 11-11-3, "Permitted
Encroachments; Table 11-1", of this title, for standards governing
encroachments.
   (C)   Off Street Parking And Loading: See chapter 12, "Off Street Parking
And Loading", of this title, for standards governing off street parking and
loading.
   (D)   Landscaping And Screening: See chapter 13, "Landscaping And
Screening", of this title, for standards governing landscaping and screening.
   (E)   Environmental Performance Standards: See section 11-11-4,
"Environmental Performance Standards", of this title, for standards governing
environmental performance standards.
   (F)   Temporary Uses: See section 11-9-3, "Temporary Uses", of this title,
for standards governing temporary uses.
   (G)   Signs: See chapter 14, "Signs", of this title, for standards governing
signs. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 9
USE STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-9-1: Use Of Land And Buildings
11-9-2: Standards For Specific Uses
11-9-3: Temporary Uses
11-9-4: Short Term Rental Units Prohibited
11-9-1: USE OF LAND AND BUILDINGS:
No building, structure or premises shall be used or occupied except in
conformity with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located.
No building or structure shall be erected, reconstructed, extended, enlarged,
altered or moved except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning
district in which it is located. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-9-2: STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES:
   (A)   Assisted Living Facility And Adult Daycare Centers: Assisted living
facilities and adult daycare centers shall meet all federal, state and local
requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety and
building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be
considered:
      1.   The provision of adequate on site drop off zones, sidewalks and
exterior lighting for the safety of residents and other pedestrians.
      2.   The safety of the neighborhood, and the amount of traffic or noise
to be generated.
      3.   The provision of adequate open space.
      4.   The extent to which the design of the building is compatible with
the surrounding neighborhood.
      5.   Each operator shall make available to the village fire department
and police department, upon request, a list indicating the names, addresses and
phone numbers of all adults being cared for in the assisted living facility or
adult daycare center.
   (B)   Community Residence, Small Or Large: Small or large community
residences shall meet all federal, state and local requirements including, but
not limited to, licensing, health, safety and building code requirements. In
addition, the following criteria shall be considered:
      1.   The cumulative effect of such uses will not alter the residential
character of the neighborhood.
      2.   The facility shall retain a residential, rather than institutional,
character.
      3.   The operation of the facility shall not adversely impact surrounding
properties.
      4.   Each operator shall make available to the village fire department
and police department, upon request, a list indicating the names, addresses and
phone numbers of all adults or children being cared for in the community
residence.
   (C)   Cultural Facilities, Indoor And Outdoor Recreation, And Indoor And
Outdoor Amusement: Cultural facilities, indoor and outdoor recreation, and
indoor and outdoor amusement uses shall be designed in such a manner that the
location of entrances, exits, exterior lighting, service areas, and parking and
loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, hazards to pedestrians,
and adverse impacts on adjoining properties.
   (D)   Child Daycare Center: Child daycare centers shall meet all federal,
state and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health,
safety and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria
shall be considered:
      1.   Each daycare center shall comply with all applicable building,
zoning, fire, and other health and safety regulations of the village.
      2.   No daycare center may operate unless the operator possesses a valid
daycare center license issued by the state of Illinois and a state fire marshal
approval permit, if applicable. The valid licenses and permit shall be
prominently displayed within the daycare facility at all times.
      3.   Each operator shall make available to the village fire department
and police department, upon request, a list indicating the names, addresses and
phone numbers of all children being cared for in the child daycare center.
      4.   All child daycare centers shall provide an on site, or immediately
adjacent, outdoor play area, of adequate size to meet state licensing
requirements. This outdoor play area shall either be located on the same site
as the daycare center or on an abutting park site, or other site maintained as
a permanent play area, determined to be acceptable by the village board. In no
case shall required parking spaces be converted, or used, to meet the outdoor
play area requirement.
      5.   All daycare centers shall provide parking and loading facilities
which will minimize traffic congestion, hazards to pedestrians, and adverse
impacts on adjoining properties.
   (E)   Child Daycare Homes: Child daycare homes shall meet all federal, state
and local requirements including, but not limited to, licensing, health, safety
and building code requirements. In addition, the following criteria shall be
considered:
      1.   Each daycare home shall comply with all applicable building, zoning,
fire, and other health and safety regulations of the village.
      2.   No daycare home may operate unless the operator possesses a valid
daycare home license issued by the state of Illinois and a state fire marshal
approval permit, if applicable. The valid licenses and permit shall be
prominently displayed within the daycare home during hours of operation.
      3.   Each operator shall make available to the village fire department
and police department, upon request, a list indicating the names, addresses,
and phone numbers of all children being cared for in the daycare home.
      4.   All child daycare homes shall provide parking and loading facilities
which will minimize traffic congestion, hazards to pedestrians, and adverse
impacts on adjoining properties.
   (F)   Bed And Breakfast Establishments: Bed and breakfast establishments
shall comply with the following requirements:
      1.   The use shall be an accessory use located within a single- family
detached dwelling.
      2.   Guestrooms shall not have been specifically constructed for rental
purposes and shall not include cooking facilities.
      3.   A maximum of four (4) bedrooms may be provided for registered guests
and no other bedrooms shall be used by other roomers, borders or guests.
      4.   The maximum stay by any guest shall be limited to seven (7) days.
      5.   All required guest parking shall be provided on site.
      6.   Any signage shall comply with chapter 14, "Signs", of this title.
      7.   The building shall comply with all applicable building, zoning,
fire, and other health and safety regulations of the village.
   (G)   Drive-Through Facility: Drive-through facilities shall provide
adequate stacking spaces, in accordance with chapter 12, "Off Street Parking
And Loading", of this title. In addition, all drive-through lanes shall be
configured so as not to interfere with vehicle circulation on the site. The
volume on all intercom menu displays shall be maintained at a level so as not
to create a public nuisance for adjoining residential districts. The operator
shall provide adequate on site outdoor waste receptacles and shall provide
daily litter cleanup along the rights of way abutting the property.
   (H)   Outdoor Cafe: An outdoor cafe, accessory to a restaurant, shall be a
permitted or special use, subject to the following:
      1.   Outdoor cafes shall be a permitted use in all business districts
when located within the front yard, corner side yard or interior side yard,
provided it does not abut a residential district. Outdoor cafes shall be
special uses in all business districts when outdoor seating is located in a
side or rear yard that abuts a residential district. Outdoor cafes are
permitted on a public sidewalk, subject to approval by the village board and
compliance with all applicable health code standards.
      2.   Outdoor cafes that propose hours of operation beyond nine o'clock
(9:00) P.M. shall be a special use.
      3.   The seating shall not interfere with the use of required parking
spaces and aisles. The outdoor café must provide for pedestrian passage in
accordance with the Americans with disabilities act, similar state laws and
similar local ordinances.
      4.   Any property owner requesting outdoor seating on a public sidewalk
shall provide proof of insurance, naming the village as additionally insured in
the form and amount acceptable to the village attorney.
      5.   Outdoor cafes located along any state or county road must obtain the
appropriate permits from the state of Illinois and/or Cook County prior to
consideration by the village.
   (I)   Dwelling, Townhouse: All townhouse dwelling units shall be encouraged
to be designed with garages at the rear of the units. In addition, curb cuts
shall be minimized on arterial or collector streets through the provision of
shared access, rather than individual driveways for each unit. Townhouse
buildings shall be designed with a maximum of five (5) dwelling units in a row.
   (J)   Home Occupation: Home occupations are required to meet the following
standards:
      1.   Only one nonresident of the premises may be employed to work at the
premises.
      2.   No exterior building signs shall be permitted unless authorized by
the sign regulations for the district.
      3.   No exterior storage or display of business equipment, materials,
merchandise, inventory or heavy equipment shall be permitted.
      4.   The home occupation shall not generate excessive customer or
delivery traffic, or excessive noise.
      5.   Motor vehicle repair is a prohibited home occupation.
      6.   Any business or occupation that utilizes hazardous substances, as
defined by any federal or state law, or any county or local ordinance is a
prohibited home occupation.
      7.   All home occupations shall be approved by the superintendent of
buildings.
   (K)   Mobile Homes: Mobile homes are allowed only in areas of the village
that have been specifically designated for such use by action of the village
board.
   (L)   Motor Vehicle Service, Convenience: Convenience motor vehicle service
establishments may not store vehicles outdoors overnight on the site unless the
village board has granted a variation. Gas pumps shall be erected no closer
than twenty feet (20') to any lot line and shall be located to serve vehicles
standing entirely on the premises. In addition, such uses will comply with the
following standards:
      1.   The use shall not create obstructions in traffic circulation on
public streets.
      2.   The location of curb cuts shall be subject to approval by the
village or the appropriate governmental jurisdiction. Curb cuts shall be
limited, where possible, to minimize traffic hazards.
      3.   All repair operations shall be fully enclosed.
   (M)   Motor Vehicle Service And Repair, Major And Minor: Minor motor vehicle
service and repair shops may not store vehicles outdoors on the site for longer
than five (5) days. Major motor vehicle service and repair shops may not store
vehicles outdoors on the site for longer than thirty (30) days. In addition,
such uses will comply with the following standards:
      1.   The use shall not create obstructions in traffic circulation on
public streets.
      2.   The location of curb cuts shall be subject to approval by the
village or the appropriate governmental jurisdiction.
      3.   All repair operations shall be fully enclosed, and wrecked or junked
vehicles shall not be stored for longer time periods than those specified above
and shall be screened from the public right of way and any adjacent residential
districts.
   (N)   Motor Vehicle Sales And Leasing, And Motorcycle Sales:
      1.   Motor vehicle sales and leasing operations shall have a minimum lot
size of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. All outdoor sales and display
areas shall be designed with a front landscaped yard with a minimum width of
five feet (5').
      2.   Motorcycle sales shall be located within a showroom with no outside
storage or display.
   (O)   Places Of Worship: Places of worship shall be designed in such a
manner that the location of entrances, exits, exterior lighting, service areas,
and parking and loading facilities will minimize traffic congestion, hazards to
pedestrians, and adverse impacts on adjoining properties.
   (P)   Planned Unit Development: See chapter 15, "Planned Unit Development",
of this title, for standards pertaining to planned unit developments.
   (Q)   Wireless Communications Towers, Facilities And Antennas:
      1.   Purpose: The general purpose of this subsection is to regulate the
placement, construction and modification of wireless communication towers,
facilities and antennas in order to protect the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare, while at the same time not unreasonably
interfering with the development of the competitive wireless communications
marketplace in the village. Specifically the purposes are:
         (a)   To regulate locations of wireless communication towers and
facilities in the village.
         (b)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impacts of wireless communication towers and facilities.
         (c)   To minimize visual impacts of towers and facilities, and
surrounding grounds through careful design techniques, landscaping and
innovative camouflaging techniques.
         (d)   To promote and encourage shared use or collocation of wireless
communication towers, facilities and antennas.
         (e)   To avoid potential damage to property caused by wireless
communication towers and facilities by ensuring structures are carefully
designed, constructed, modified, maintained and removed when no longer in use
or are determined to be structurally unsafe.
         (f)   To ensure that wireless communication towers and facilities are
compatible with surrounding land uses.
      2.   Permitted Locations:
         (a)   Subject to site plan approval, any wireless communication
antenna shall be considered a permitted use. Prior to permitting such antenna,
the petitioner must obtain a building permit from the superintendent of
buildings. This includes placement of additional antennas or arrays on any
freestanding tower or any preexisting antenna.
         (b)   A special use permit will be required for any wireless
communication tower that is attached to an existing structure or building
within any district.
         (c)   No tower shall be built, constructed or modified in the village
unless it is capable of supporting a minimum of three (3) major carriers (PCS
or cellular type).
      3.   Special Application Requirements: Each applicant requesting a
special use permit under this section shall apply as set forth in section 11-2-
16, "Special Uses", of this title. The supporting documents shall include a
scaled site plan, a scaled elevation view, a color rendering of the tower and/
or antenna and all facilities viewed from an adjacent street or streets, and
other supporting drawings, calculations and other documentation, signed and
sealed by the appropriate licensed professionals, showing the location and
dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography,
radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking,
fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information as deemed by the
governing authority to be necessary to assess compliance with this section. An
application to develop a tower and facilities shall also include:
         (a)   The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the owner and
lessee of the parcel of land where the tower and facilities are to be
constructed.
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the proposed user of
the tower and facilities.
         (c)   The legal description, tax ID number, and address of the parcel
of land where the tower and facilities will be constructed.
         (d)   Names, addresses and phone numbers of all owners of towers or
usable antenna support structures, and facilities within a one mile radius of
the proposed site, including village owned property.
         (e)   A description of the design plan proposed by the applicant must
identify its utilization of the most recent technology relating to design,
including microcell design, as part of the new design plan.
         (f)   An affidavit attesting to the fact that the applicant made
diligent, but unsuccessful, attempts to install antenna on a collocation tower
located within one mile of the proposed tower site. The affidavit must state
who was contracted and why collocation was not possible.
         (g)   Names and telephone numbers of at least three (3) persons to be
contacted in emergency maintenance situations must be supplied to the
superintendent of buildings and updated annually.
         (h)   A written statement from a qualified engineer that the
construction and placement of the tower and facilities will not interfere with
public safety, communication, and the transmission or reception of radio/
television and other wireless services by adjacent residential and
nonresidential properties.
         (i)   Applicant shall submit color photo simulations showing proposed
site of the tower and facilities with a photorealistic representation of the
tower and facilities, as they will appear from all sides and adjacent roadways.
         (j)   Applicant shall be required to submit information on the
proposed power density of the proposed facility and demonstrate how this meets
FCC standards.
         (k)   The applicant must acknowledge that to secure the obligation,
the applicant and/or owner of the communication facility shall post a bond in
the amount of one hundred seventy five percent (175%) of the cost of
dismantling the tower and facility. This cost will be determined by village
engineers and be approved by the village board. The bond must last as long as
the tower and facilities are standing. Periodic reviews of the bond will be
examined by the village and the village may require the bond to be increased in
order to ensure that the value of the bond is accurate in accordance with
inflation or any increase in demolition costs.
         (l)   The applicant must identify to the village all tenants that
collocate on their facility. Names, addresses and phone numbers must be
provided to the village and permits will be required before said applicant can
add any tenants to an existing site.
         (m)   Applicant must file eight (8) sets of all plans and any other
required documents with the village for disbursement to proper departments.
         (n)   Maps and data of the search ring, and verification that the
search ring is the only location that will support the needs of the said
wireless communications provider's customers, must be submitted to the village.
         (o)   A copy of the lease agreement signed by the appropriate parties
of the proposed site must accompany any application submitted to the village.
      4.   Additional Criteria For Wireless Communications Towers And
Facilities: Factors considered in granting special use permits will be
addressed by the zoning board of appeals and must be approved by the village
board. The following factors will be considered in determining whether to issue
a special use permit, although the village board may waive or reduce the burden
on the applicant on one or more of these criteria if the village board
concludes that the goals of this section are better served thereby:
         (a)   Height of the proposed tower.
         (b)   Proximity of the tower and facilities to residential structures
or zoning districts.
         (c)   Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
         (d)   Surrounding topography.
         (e)   Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
         (f)   Design of tower and facilities, with reference to design,
appurtenances and structures that have the effect of reducing visual
obtrusiveness.
         (g)   Proposed ingress and egress.
         (h)   Availability of towers suitable for collocation purposes.
      5.   Appearance:
         (a)   Freestanding wireless communication towers and their antenna
shall be painted a neutral color to blend in with their surroundings. Towers
and facilities shall be compatible in terms of architecture and site
characteristics with surrounding land development.
         (b)   The village requires landscaping in order to enhance
compatibility with adjacent land uses. A fence six feet (6') in height must be
erected around the tower and facilities. Landscaping shall be installed on the
outside of fencing. A fence and landscape plan must be submitted and approved
by the superintendent of buildings as a condition of this section. The tower
owner and/or tenant will be required to maintain all landscaping and provide
maintenance as long as the tower and facilities are in existence.
         (c)   The board may include conditions on the site where the tower and
facilities are to be located, if such conditions are necessary to preserve the
character and integrity of the neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and
facilities, and to mitigate any adverse impacts that arise in connection with
the approval of the tower and facilities.
         (d)   The parcel of land upon which the tower and facilities are
located must provide access to at least one paved parking space on site.
         (e)   Ground level buildings that house communication infrastructure
will require masonry construction on all sides.
         (f)   All support structures must be fitted with an anticlimbing
device, as approved by the manufacturer.
         (g)   Tower shall not be artificially illuminated, except as required
by the federal aviation administration (FAA).
         (h)   The exterior and interior of the operation shall be maintained
in a professional manner, and the landlord and tenant shall police the area and
keep it free from any debris. No signage, banners or advertising of any kind
will be allowed on any portion of the site, including the tower, antenna,
array, fencing, or any building, without village board approval. Appropriate
permits will be taken out for all work.
         (i)   Adequate off street parking shall be provided for customers and
employees of the landlord. No parking will be allowed on sidewalks, parkways or
streets.
         (j)   No hazardous waste material shall be stored on said property or
dumped in village or residential garbage depositories.
      6.   Maintenance:
         (a)   Owners shall at all times employ ordinary and reasonable care,
and shall install and maintain nothing less than commonly accepted methods and
devices for preventing failures or accidents which are likely to cause damage,
injuries or nuisances to the public.
         (b)   Owners shall install and maintain towers, facilities and all
other equipment in substantial compliance with the requirements of the national
electrical safety code and all FCC, state and local regulations in such a
manner that will not interfere with the use of other property.
         (c)   All wireless communication towers and facilities shall, at all
times, be maintained in good condition, order and repair so as not to endanger
the life of any property or any person.
         (d)   All maintenance or construction shall be performed by licensed
maintenance and construction personnel.
      7.   Height: An application for approval of a wireless communication
tower shall demonstrate that the tower does not exceed the minimum height
requirement necessary to function satisfactorily. Under any circumstances, the
wireless communications tower shall not exceed the following height
restrictions:
         (a)   The maximum height of a freestanding tower shall not exceed one
hundred fifty feet (150'), including all attachments (antennas, lightening
rods, arrays, etc.). However, the applicant must demonstrate that the tower is
the minimum height required to function satisfactorily.
         (b)   No wireless communications antenna or equipment shall increase
the height of any structure on which it is mounted by more than ten percent
(10%), or ten feet (10'), whichever is less.
      8.   Setbacks:
         (a)   Side Yard: All wireless communication towers and facilities
shall be set back a minimum of one and one-half feet (11/2') from the side lot
line for every one foot (1') in tower height.
         (b)   Rear Yard: All wireless communication towers and facilities
shall be set back a minimum of one and one-half feet (11/2') from the rear lot
line for every one foot (1') in tower height.
         (c)   Front Yard: All wireless communication towers and facilities
shall be set back a minimum of one and one-half feet (11/2') from the front lot
line for every one foot (1') in tower height.
         (d)   Measurements: Setbacks should be measured to the uppermost
beacons, including attachments (antennas, lightening rods, arrays, etc.).
Setback requirements for towers and facilities shall be measured from the base
of the tower or facility to the property lines of the parcel of land on which
it is located.
         (e)   Fall Zone: All wireless communication towers and facilities
shall be set back a minimum of one and one-half feet (11/2') from all other
site improvements for every one foot (1') in tower height, providing a clear
fall zone.
      9.   Engineering:
         (a)   All carriers must submit RF data (radio frequency data), which
supports their position for new tower construction. They must prove that no
existing structure will allow for the coverage they need. The proof must be
substantial.
         (b)   All new towers and facilities require a public notice. The
carrier must notify all residents who will be impacted by the site within two
hundred fifty feet (250') in all directions of the proposed site, excepting
from the calculation of said two hundred fifty feet (250') from all public
rights of ways.
         (c)   Any application requires a full public hearing to allow
residents to review the application and make suggestions as to alternative
locations.
         (d)   All towers must conform with electrical institute of America
(EIA) and telephone institute of America (TIA) standards pertaining to wind and
radial ice requirements in the state.
         (e)   All towers shall be certified by a licensed structural engineer
to be structurally sound and in compliance with the requirements of the
building code of the village and all other construction standards set forth by
this title, and federal and state laws and regulations. This certification
shall be submitted with an application and be recertified every three (3) years
thereafter. The tower owner may be required to submit more frequent
certifications should there be reason to believe that the structural or
electrical integrity of the structure is in jeopardy. The village shall have
authority to enter property between inspections and certifications required
above to inspect the tower for building code violations and construction
standards provided by this title, and federal and state laws and regulations.
The village reserves the right to conduct such inspections at any time upon
reasonable notice to the tower owner. All expenses related to such inspections
by the village shall be paid for by the owner and/or tenant.
         (f)   All towers shall remain in, and maintain compliance with,
current RF emissions standards of the FCC, and any and all regulations or
standards that supplement or supersede the standards effective on the effective
date hereof.
      10.   Modifications: Modifications to the requirements of this section
may be approved by the zoning board of appeals, with final approval by the
village board, as a special use, in accordance with the following guidelines.
In addition to the requirements of the application, if any proposed
modification of this section is requested, an application for modification must
be filed and include the following:
         (a)   A description of how the plan addresses any adverse impact that
might occur as a result of approving the modification.
         (b)   A description of off site or on site factors that mitigate any
adverse impacts, which might occur as a result of the modification.
         (c)   A technical study that documents and supports the criteria
submitted by the applicant upon which the request for modification is based.
The technical study shall be certified by a licensed engineer and shall
document the existence of the facts related to the proposed modifications and
their relationship to surrounding rights of way and properties.
         (d)   For a modification of the setback requirement, the application
shall identify all parcels of land where the proposed tower and facilities
could be located, attempts by the applicant to contract and negotiate an
agreement for collocation, and the results of such attempts.
         (e)   The zoning board of appeals or village board may require the
application to be reviewed by an independent engineer under contract to the
village to determine whether the study supports the basis for the modification
requested. The cost of review by the village engineer shall be reimbursed to
the village by the applicant.
         (f)   In the case of a requested modification to the setback
requirements, the applicant must also demonstrate, with written evidence, that
the setback requirement cannot be met on the parcel of land on which the tower
and facilities are proposed to be located and the alternative is to locate to
another site which is in closer proximity to other land uses. The zoning board
of appeals shall consider the application for modification based on the
following criteria:
            (1)   That the tower and facilities, as modified, will be
compatible with, and not adversely impact, the character and integrity of
surrounding properties.
            (2)   Off site or on site conditions exist which mitigate the
adverse impacts, if any, created by the modification.
            (3)   In addition, the zoning board of appeals may include
conditions on the site where the tower and facilities are to be located if such
conditions are necessary to preserve the character and integrity of the
neighborhoods affected by the proposed tower and facilities, and mitigate any
adverse impacts that might arise in connection with the approval of the
modification.
      11.   Abandonment:
         (a)   If any tower and facilities shall cease to be used for a period
of sixty (60) days, the village board shall notify the owner, with a copy to
the applicant, that the site will be subject to termination. The owner will
have thirty (30) days from receipt of said notice to show that the tower and
facilities have either been in use or under repairs during that period. If the
owner fails this request, the village board shall issue a final determination
of abandonment for the site.
Upon written notice by the village to the owner of a determination of
abandonment, the owner shall have sixty (60) days to dismantle and remove the
tower and accompanying buildings and structures, and restore the property to a
condition approved by the superintendent of buildings.
         (b)   If the owner fails to remove the tower and facility and restore
the property, the tower owner will forfeit the bond as discussed in subsection
(Q)3(k) of this section, and the village will remove the tower and facilities
and restore existing land, but will not remove the part belowground. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-9-3: TEMPORARY USES:
   (A)   General Provisions: Every permitted temporary use shall comply with
the limitations of this chapter. Except as expressly provided in this chapter,
every temporary use shall comply with the bulk, space and yard regulations
applicable in the zoning district in which the temporary use is located. Every
temporary use shall comply with, and the village may impose, such other
conditions as may reasonably be necessary to achieve the purposes of this title
or to protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare. No temporary use shall be permitted in any zoning district if it would
have a significant negative impact on any adjacent property or on the area as a
whole in which it is located. Temporary uses not specifically listed here may
be allowed in any zoning district, provided that such temporary use is
consistent with the purpose and intent of this title and of the zoning district
in which it is located. Any such temporary use shall require the specific prior
approval of the village board. Every temporary use shall comply with all the
requirements listed below:
      1.   No temporary use shall be permitted that causes, or threatens to
cause, an on site or off site threat to the public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare.
      2.   No temporary use shall be operated except in accordance with such
restrictions and conditions as the fire department may require. If required by
the village, the operator of the temporary use shall employ a fire watch team
and appropriate security personnel.
      3.   No temporary use shall be permitted if the additional vehicular
traffic reasonably expected to be generated by such temporary use would have
undue detrimental effects on surrounding streets and uses.
      4.   No temporary use shall be authorized that would, in the opinion of
the superintendent of buildings, unreasonably reduce the amount of parking
spaces available for use in connection with permanent uses located on the lot
in question. The superintendent may make an assessment of the total number of
parking spaces that will be reasonably required in connection with a proposed
temporary use, on the basis of the particular use, its intensity and the
availability of other parking facilities in the area. The superintendent shall
approve such temporary use, only if such parking spaces are provided.
      5.   No temporary use shall be permitted if such use would conflict with
another previously authorized temporary use.
      6.   Signs shall be permitted only in accordance with chapter 14,
"Signs", of this title.
   (B)   Permitted Temporary Uses:
      1.   Farmers' Markets: Farmers' markets are allowed in any nonresidential
district subject to the standards in title 5, chapter 14, "Farmers' Market", of
this code.
      2.   Christmas Tree Sales: Christmas tree sales are allowed in any zoning
district subject to approval by the village board and issuance of a temporary
business permit.
      3.   Carnivals And Circuses: Circuses and carnivals are allowed in any
zoning district subject to the standards in sections 5-2-3, "Carnivals, Parks,
Menageries, Exhibitions", and 5-2-4, "Circuses", of this code.
      4.   Sidewalk Sales: Sidewalk sales are allowed in any nonresidential
district subject to the standards in section 5-1-18, "Sidewalk Sales", of this
code.
      5.   Indoor And Outdoor Arts, Crafts, And Plant Shows, Exhibits And
Sales: Such sales are allowed in any zoning district. Any such use shall be
evaluated based on the adequacy of the parcel size, parking provisions, traffic
access, and the absence of undue adverse impact on other properties. Every such
sale, exhibit or show shall be limited to a period not to exceed three (3)
days.
      6.   Garage And Yard Sales: Such sales are allowed in any residential
district subject to the standards in section 5-4-37, "Garage Sales", of this
code. Participation in the Midlothian annual reuse sale (MARS) is excepted from
the permit requirement, but may be subject to other village requirements.
      7.   Temporary Contractor Trailers And Real Estate Model Units:
Contractor trailers and real estate model units are allowed in any zoning
district when accessory to a construction project or a new development,
respectively. Such use shall be limited to a period not to exceed the duration
of the active construction phase of such project or the active selling and
leasing of space in such development, respectively. No such use shall contain
any sleeping or cooking accommodations, except those located in a model unit
used for demonstration purposes only. No such trailer, unit or office shall be
used as the general office or headquarters of any firm. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-9-4: SHORT TERM RENTAL UNITS PROHIBITED:
   (A)   Purpose: The purpose of this article is to protect and preserve the
quiet enjoyment of residential properties and neighborhoods within the village
and to mitigate or eliminate adverse secondary effects the Village and its
residents may experience by reason of short term rentals of residential
structures in the Village, including, but not limited to, excessive noise,
litter, and light pollution; traffic congestion; overcrowded parking; and
criminal activity.
   (B)   Definitions: For the purpose of this article, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning:
 
                        All or part of a residential building or dwelling unit
                        located in any zoning district, being leased, rented,
                        offered for rent, hired out, licensed, or otherwise let
                        as an accessory use or occupancy to a person or persons
                        other than the owner of the subject property or a
                        family member of the owner thereof for a period or term
                        that is less than thirty (30) consecutive days. The
                        term "short term rental unit" shall also include a
                        dwelling unit or accessory building, or part thereof,
                        used for overnight accommodation that is available for
SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT: rent by transient guests for a period or term that is
                        less than thirty (30) consecutive days. The term "short
                        term rental unit" shall not include a Bed and Breakfast
                        located in a residential zone and holding a special use
                        permit and license as required in Section
                        11-5-2,
                        11-16-3 and
                        11-9-2(F), or a hotel or motel located in a commercial
                        zoning district that holds a permit as required in
                        Section
                        5-4-19 and
                        5-1-5 of this Code.
 
   (C)   Nuisance Declared: Short term rental units as defined in this article
are hereby declared to be and shall constitute nuisances and may be abated
accordingly pursuant to any and all available remedies.
   (D)   Short Term Rental Units Restricted; Exceptions:
      1.   Except as otherwise provided herein, leasing, renting, hiring out,
licensing, or letting; offering or inviting the leasing, renting, hiring out,
licensing, or letting; or otherwise permitting a short term rental unit or
occupancy thereof for a period or term that is less than thirty (30)
consecutive days shall be prohibited, and such conduct shall be prohibited,
whether engaged in or participated in by the owner of the property, one or more
agents of the property owner, or by any person leasing, or seeking to lease as
a lessor, or renting or seeking to rent as lessee or otherwise occupy a
premises, or part thereof, as tenant or temporary occupant thereof.
      2.   The term of any lease or occupancy agreement which has satisfied the
minimum term required by this article may be extended on a month-to-month basis
on the condition that the tenant or tenants remain the same.
      3.   The prohibition on short term rental units shall not apply when the
immediately preceding owner of a property maintains possession of the dwelling
unit after closing on a real estate transaction for the sale thereof and leases
said property back from the successor owner for a period of time pursuant to a
written agreement.
      4.   The prohibition on short term rental units shall not apply to Bed
and Breakfast businesses when permitted as a special use pursuant to Village
Code Sections
11-5-2 and
11-9-2(F).
   (E)   Penalty:
      1.   Notwithstanding anything otherwise provided in this Code to the
contrary, any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be fined in an amount not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00)
per day, nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) per day. Unless
exempted by this article, each day a residential building, dwelling unit, or
any accessory building, or part thereof, is offered for rent as a short term
rental unit; is leased, rented, hired out, licensed, or let as a short term
rental unit; or is occupied as a short term rental unit shall constitute a
separate violation of this article. Without any limitation on the foregoing,
each day a violation of this article occurs or continues shall be a separate
offense, and each such offense shall be subject to not less than the minimum
daily fine.
      2.   Except where otherwise permitted, the restrictions contained in this
article shall be interpreted as minimum standards and shall be in addition to
any other applicable Village Ordinances and requirements that apply to short
term rental units or the properties on which they are located. (Ord. 2090, 12-
22-2021)
CHAPTER 10
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
11-10-1: Purpose And Intent
11-10-2: Definitions
11-10-3: Establishment And Classification Of Businesses Regulated
11-10-4: Measurement Of Distance
11-10-5: Location Of Sexually Oriented Business
11-10-6: Regulations Governing Existing Sexually Oriented Businesses
11-10-7: Injunction
11-10-8: Permit Required
11-10-9: Investigation And Application
11-10-10: Issuance Of Permit
11-10-11: Inspection
11-10-12: Suspension Of Permit
11-10-13: Revocation Of Permit
11-10-14: Review Of Permit Denial, Suspension Or Revocation
11-10-15: Transfer Of Permit
11-10-16: Sexually Oriented Business Employee License
11-10-17: Exhibition Of Sexually Explicit Films Or Videos In Video Booths
11-10-18: Prohibition Of Alcohol
11-10-19: Prohibitions Regarding Minors And Sexually Oriented Businesses
11-10-20: Advertising, Lighting And Noise Regulations
11-10-21: Hours Of Operation
11-10-22: Nudity At Sexually Oriented Businesses Prohibited
11-10-23: Regulations Pertaining To Live Entertainment
11-10-24: Additional Criminal Prohibitions For Operation Of Sexually Oriented
Business Without Valid Permit
11-10-25: Exemptions
11-10-26: Distribution Of Sexual Devices
11-10-27: Criminal Penalties And Additional Legal, Injunctive Relief
11-10-28: Nuisance Declared
11-10-29: Immunity From Prosecution
11-10-30: Severability
11-10-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses to
promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of
the citizens of the village and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations
to prevent any deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the village, thereby reducing or eliminating the secondary
effects from such sexually oriented businesses. The provisions of this chapter
have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction
on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented
materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter
to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected
by the first amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of
sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the
intent nor the effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution
of obscene material. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined as
follows. Where these definitions conflict with those in chapter 16,
"Definitions", of this title, this section shall control for sexually oriented
businesses.
   (A)   Business Terms:
   ADULT ARCADE: An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or
more still or motion picture projectors, slide projectors or similar machines,
or other image producing machines, for viewing by five (5) or fewer persons
each, are regularly used to show films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides, or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the
depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified
anatomical areas" as defined herein.
   ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial
establishment which has fifteen percent (15%) or more of its floor space
devoted to or derives fifteen percent (15%) or more of its revenues from, or
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to the sale or rental for any consideration, any of the following:
      1.   Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other visual
representations, which are characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      2.   Instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for the stimulation
of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or
others.
      3.   An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale or rental or viewing of material depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still
be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store
so long as fifteen percent (15%) or more of its floor space is devoted to or
fifteen percent (15%) or more of its revenues is derived from the offering for
sale or rental, for any form of consideration, the specified materials which
depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT CABARET: A nightclub, bar, restaurant "bottle club", or similar
commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which
regularly features:
      1.   Persons who appear nude, or in a state of nudity, or seminude.
      2.   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
      3.   Films, motion pictures, videotapes, slides or other photographic
reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
   ADULT MOTEL: A motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment which offers
public accommodations, for any consideration, and provides patrons with closed
circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, slides or other
photographic reproductions characterized by the depiction or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, and which advertises
the availability of this sexually oriented type of material by means of a sign
visible from the public right of way, or by means of any off premises
advertising including, but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or
leaflets, radio, television or internet; and
      1.   Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time less than ten
(10) hours; or
      2.   Allows the tenant or occupant to subrent the sleeping room for a
period of time less than ten (10) hours.
   ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment where films, motion
pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
   ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment which, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons
who appear in a state of nudity or live performances which are characterized by
exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
   ESCORT: A person who, for any form of consideration, agrees or offers to act
as a companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
   ESCORT AGENCY: A person or business association who furnishes, offers to
furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
   MASSAGE PARLOR: Any place where, for any form of consideration or gratuity,
massage, alcohol rub, administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments or any other treatment of the human body occurs as a part of or in
connection with specified sexual activities, or where any person providing such
treatment or manipulation, or service related thereto, exposes his or her
specified anatomical areas. The definition of "massage parlor" or "sexually
oriented business" shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed
hospital, by a licensed hospital, by a licensed physician, surgeon,
chiropractor or osteopath, by any nurse or technician working under the
supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, or by
trainers for any amateur, semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic
team or school athletic program.
   NUDE MODEL STUDIO: Any place where a person, who regularly appears in a
state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided, for money
or any form of consideration, to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons.
   SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT: A business or commercial establishment,
which, as one of its primary business purposes, offers, for any form of
consideration, a place where two (2) or more persons may congregate, associate
or consort for the purpose of specified sexual activities or the exposure of
specified anatomical areas, or activities when one or more of the persons is in
a state of nudity or seminudity. The definition of "sexual encounter
establishment" or "sexually oriented business" shall not include an
establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or
similar professional person, licensed by the state, engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An "adult arcade", "adult bookstore", "adult
novelty shop", "adult video store", "adult cabaret", "adult motel", "adult
motion picture theater", "adult theater", "massage parlor", "sexual encounter
establishment", "escort agency" or "nude model studio", as defined herein. Any
business, whether or not the primary business is a sexually oriented business,
in which fifteen percent (15%) or more of the retail floor space is devoted to
one of these uses, or fifteen percent (15%) or more of revenues are derived
from one or more of these uses shall be defined as a sexually oriented
business.
   (B)   Additional Terms: For the purposes of this chapter, additional terms
are defined as follows:
   EMPLOYEE: A person who works or performs in and/or for a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not that person is paid a salary, wage or
other compensation by the operator of said business.
   ESTABLISHMENT: Means and includes any of the following:
      1.   The opening or commencement of any such business as a new business.
      2.   The conversion of greater than fifteen percent (15%) of an existing
business's retail floor space, whether or not the original business is a
sexually oriented business, to any of the sexually oriented businesses defined
in this chapter.
      3.   The addition of any of the sexually oriented businesses defined in
this title to any other existing sexually oriented business.
      4.   The relocation of any such sexually oriented business.
   NUDITY OR STATE OF NUDITY:
      1.   The appearance of bare human buttocks, anus, male genitals, female
genitals or the areola or nipple of the female breast.
      2.   A state of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover a human
buttock, anus, male or female genitals, pubic region, or areola or nipple of
the female breast.
   OPERATOR: Means and includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator or person in charge of any permitted or licensed premises.
   PERMITTED OR LICENSED PREMISES: Any premises that require a license and/or
permit, and that is classified as a sexually oriented business.
   PERMITTEE AND/OR LICENSEE: A person in whose name a permit and/or license to
operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual
listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or license.
   PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association
or other legal entity.
   PLACE OF RELIGIOUS WORSHIP: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or
building that is used primarily for religious worship and related religious
activities.
   PUBLIC PARK/RECREATION AREA: Public land which has been designated for park
or recreational activities including, but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis
courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, open space, forest preserve, wilderness areas
or similar public land within the village that is under the control, operation,
or management of the state of Illinois, park district, any school district,
village, county, or recreational authority.
   RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT OR USE: A single-family, duplex, townhouse, or multi-
family district identified as an R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 and R-5 district in the
current Midlothian zoning ordinance or, if amended, any similar residential
district or use.
   SCHOOL: Any public or private educational facility including, but not
limited to, child daycare facilities, nursery schools, preschools,
kindergartens, elementary schools, primary schools, intermediate schools,
junior high schools, middle schools, high schools, alternative schools,
vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation schools, special education
schools, junior colleges, colleges and universities. "School" includes the
school grounds.
   SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: As used in this title, means and includes any of
the following:
      1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts below a point immediately above the
top of the areolae.
      2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered, or any device, which when worn, simulates
human male genitals in a discernible turgid state.
   SPECIFIED CRIMINAL ACTS: As used in this title, means a conviction for a
crime set forth in articles 9, 10, 11, 12, 22, 24, 25, 28, 29, 29A, 29B, 33A,
33D, 38, 39, 39A or 46 of the Illinois criminal code of 1961 1 , as amended, or
convictions for crimes in other states, or federal crimes which are
substantially similar to those Illinois crimes set forth above, as well as a
conviction for any crime related to failure to pay taxes.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: As used in this title, means and includes any
of the following:
      1.   The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic
region, buttocks, anus or female breasts.
      2.   Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
      3.   Masturbation, actual or simulated.
      4.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or
tumescence.
      5.   Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in subsections 1 through 4 of this definition.
   SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: An increase in the
floor areas occupied by the business so that fifteen percent (15%) or more of
the total floor area (after enlargement) is used for the sexually oriented
portion of a business.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Means and includes
the following:
      1.   The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
      2.   The transfer of a portion of the ownership interest that constitutes
a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar
means.
      3.   The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal devise
which transfers ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a person possessing the
ownership or control. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. 720 ILCS.
11-10-3: ESTABLISHMENT AND CLASSIFICATION OF BUSINESSES REGULATED:
The establishment of a sexually oriented business shall be permitted subject to
the following restrictions:
   (A)   No person shall cause or permit the establishment of any of the
following sexually oriented businesses, as defined above:
      1.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any other such business.
      2.   Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any place of religious worship,
school, daycare facility, forest preserve or public park.
      3.   Within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of any property zoned for
residential use or used for residential purposes.
      4.   If Illinois state statutes or Cook County law or regulations require
a distance of over one thousand feet (1,000') for any of the sexually oriented
businesses, that requirement is hereby adopted by the village and said
distances shall apply (example, public act 93-1056).
   (B)   Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
      1.   Adult arcade.
      2.   Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store.
      3.   Adult cabaret.
      4.   Adult motel.
      5.   Adult motion picture theater.
      6.   Adult theater.
      7.   Escort agency.
      8.   Massage parlor.
      9.   Nude model studio.
      10.   Sexual encounter establishment. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-
2007)
11-10-4: MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCE:
The distance between any two (2) sexually oriented businesses shall be measured
in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the closest
exterior structural wall of each business. The distance between any sexually
oriented business and any place of religious worship, school, daycare facility,
forest preserve or public park, or any properties zoned for residential use or
used for residential purposes, shall be measured in a straight line, without
regard to intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the
building or structure used as part of the premises where the sexually oriented
business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the premises of
religious worship, school, daycare facility, forest preserve or public park,
park, or any properties zoned for residential use or used for residential
purposes. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-5: LOCATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS:
This title hereby requires that sexually oriented businesses shall be allowed
only as a special use. Permits for sexually oriented businesses shall be
required and governed by the procedures and policies specified in section 11-
10-10 of this chapter. In addition, any sexually oriented business shall be
subject to the following restrictions:
   (A)   A person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is
as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates, or causes to
be operated, a sexually oriented business except as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   A person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is
as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates, or causes to
be operated, a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of
any:
      1.   Place of worship.
      2.   School.
      3.   Daycare facility.
      4.   Forest preserve.
      5.   Public park.
If Illinois state statutes or Cook County law or regulations require a distance
of over one thousand feet (1,000') for any of the sexually oriented businesses,
that requirement is hereby adopted by the village and said distances shall
apply (example, public act 93-1056).
   (C)   A person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is
as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates, or causes to
be operated, a sexually oriented business within seven hundred fifty feet
(750') of the boundary of any residential district.
   (D)   A person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is
as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates, or causes to
be operated, a sexually oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of
another such business, which will include any adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, massage parlor, sexual encounter
establishment, escort agency or nude model studio.
   (E)   A person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is
as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she causes or permits the
operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one sexually oriented
business within the same building, structure, or portion thereof, or causes the
substantial enlargement of any sexually oriented business in any building,
structure or portion thereof containing another sexually oriented business.
   (F)   It is a defense to prosecution under this chapter if a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      1.   By a proprietary school, licensed by the state of Illinois, a
college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
      2.   By a private college or university, which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university, supported partially or entirely by taxation.
      3.   In a structure:
         (a)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and
no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing.
         (b)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll
at least three (3) days in advance of the class.
         (c)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-6: REGULATIONS GOVERNING EXISTING SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
   (A)   Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on the effective
date hereof shall be deemed a nonconforming use. A nonconforming use will be
permitted to continue as long as the business is owned and/or operated by the
permittee and/or licensee of record on the effective date hereof, unless
terminated sooner for any reason, or voluntarily discontinued for a period of
thirty (30) days or more. Such nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered except that the use may be changed to a
conforming use. If two (2) sexually oriented businesses are within one thousand
feet (1,000') of one another and otherwise in a permissible location, the
sexually oriented business which was first established and continually
operating at the particular location is the conforming use and the later
established business is nonconforming.
   (B)   A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as conforming use is
not rendered nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the grant or
renewal of a sexually oriented business permit and/or license, of a place of
religious worship, school, daycare facility, forest preserve or public park
within one thousand feet (1,000'), or the establishment of a residential
district or lot within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the sexually oriented
business. This provision applies only to the renewal of a valid permit and/or
license and does not apply when an application for a permit and/or license is
submitted after a permit and/or license has been revoked.
   (C)   Any establishment subject to the provisions of this section shall
apply for the permit provided for in section 11-10-10 of this chapter within
thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof. Any establishment, existing
prior to the effective date hereof, shall comply with the regulations
pertaining to sections 11-10-18, 11-10-19 and 11-10-21 of this chapter, and all
other applicable sections, within sixty (60) days of the effective date hereof,
and all other applicable permit regulations within thirty (30) days of the
effective date hereof. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-7: INJUNCTION:
A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business
without having a valid permit due to location restrictions is subject to a suit
for injunction, as well as prosecution for the criminal violation. Such
violation shall be punishable by a fine in accordance with section 1-4-1 of
this code for each day of violation and, if an injunction must be sought,
attorney fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against
the sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-8: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   (A)   No sexually oriented business shall be permitted to operate without a
valid sexually oriented business permit issued by the village for the
particular classification of business as defined in section 11-10-2 of this
chapter and listed in section 11-10-3 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful and
a person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is as
prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates or causes to be
operated a sexually oriented business without said permit.
   (B)   The village president, and/or his/her designee, is responsible for
granting, denying, revoking, renewing, suspending and canceling sexually
oriented business permits for proposed or existing sexually oriented
businesses. The village president, and/or his/her designee, is also responsible
for ascertaining whether a proposed sexually oriented business, for which a
permit is being applied, complies with all location requirements of sections
11-10-3, 11-10-4 and 11-10-5 of this chapter, this title and/or regulations now
in effect, or as amended or enacted subsequent to the effective date hereof,
and the Midlothian comprehensive plan.
   (C)   The police department is responsible for providing information on
whether an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act during the
time period set forth.
   (D)   The superintendent of buildings, health department, police department,
fire department, and/or department of administration and finance are authorized
to inspect a proposed, permitted or nonpermitted sexually oriented business in
order to ascertain whether it is in compliance with applicable statutes and
ordinances.
   (E)   An application for a permit must be made on a form provided by the
village. The form will be made available at the office of the village clerk
during regular business hours.
   (F)   The completed application shall contain the following information and
shall be accompanied by the following documents:
      1.   If the applicant is:
         (a)   An individual:
            (1)   The applicant's legal name and all of the applicant's
aliases.
            (2)   The applicant's business address.
            (3)   The applicant's social security number.
            (4)   Written proof that the applicant is at least twenty one (21)
years of age.
            (5)   The citizenship and place of birth of the applicant and, if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his/her naturalization.
         (b)   A corporation:
            (1)   The applicant corporation's complete name and official
business address.
            (2)   The legal name, all aliases, ages, business addresses and
social security numbers of all of the directors, officers and managers of the
corporation, and of every person owning or controlling more than five percent
(5%) of the voting shares of the corporation.
            (3)   The corporation's date and place of incorporation and the
objects for which it was formed.
            (4)   Proof that the corporation is a corporation in good standing
and authorized to conduct business in the state of Illinois.
            (5)   The name of the registered corporate agent and the address of
the registered office for service of process.
            (6)   Copy of the corporation's charter and all amendments thereto.
         (c)   A partnership (general or limited), joint venture, limited
liability company or any other type of organization where two (2) or more
persons share in the profits and/or liabilities of the organization:
            (1)   The applicant organization's complete name and official
business address.
            (2)   The legal name, all aliases, ages, business addresses and
social security numbers of each partner or any other person entitled to share
in the profits of the organization, whether or not any such person is also
obligated to share in the liabilities of the organization.
            (3)   Copy of the organization's operating documents (e.g.,
partnership agreement) and all amendments thereto.
         (d)   A land trust:
            (1)   The applicant land trust's complete name.
            (2)   The legal name, all aliases and the business address of the
trustee of the land trust, the legal name, all aliases, ages, business
addresses and social security numbers of each beneficiary of the land trust,
and the specific interest of each such beneficiary in the land trust.
            (3)   The interest, if any, that the land trust holds in the
licensed premises.
            (4)   Copy of the land trust operating document (e.g., land trust
agreement) and all amendments thereto.
      2.   If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business
under a name other than that of the applicant, he must state:
         (a)   The sexually oriented business's assumed name.
         (b)   Submit the required proof of registration.
      3.   Whether the applicant, or any other individuals listed pursuant to
this section has, within the five (5) or ten (10) year period specified in
subsection 11-10-10(C) of this chapter, immediately preceding the date of the
application, been convicted of a specified criminal act, and, if so, the
specified criminal act involved, the date of conviction and the place of
conviction.
      4.   Whether the applicant or any of the other individuals listed
pursuant to this section has had a previous permit under this chapter or other
similar sexually oriented business from another municipality or county denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant or any
other individual listed pursuant to this section has been a partner in a
partnership, an officer, director, or principal stockholder if a corporation
that is permitted under this chapter whose permit has previously been denied,
suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the sexually oriented
business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the
date of the denial, suspension or revocation.
      5.   Whether the applicant or any other individuals listed pursuant to
this section holds any other permits and/or licenses under this chapter, or
other similar sexually oriented business from another municipality or county,
and, if so, the names and locations of such other permitted businesses.
      6.   The single classification of permit for which the applicant is
filing, as defined and listed in section 11-10-2 of this chapter.
      7.   The location of the proposed sexually oriented business, including a
legal description of the property, a title report, survey, street address,
telephone number(s) and photos of the property.
      8.   The mailing address(es) and residential address(es) of the applicant
(s).
      9.   A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
      10.   The applicants' drivers license number(s), social security number
(s), and his/her state or federal tax identification number.
      11.   A diagram showing the internal and external configuration of the
proposed premises, including all doors, windows, entrances, exits, the fixed
structural internal features of the licensed premises, plus the interior rooms,
walls, partitions, stages, performance areas and restrooms. A professionally
prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall
not be required; provided, however, that each diagram shall be oriented to the
north or to some designated street or object, and shall be drawn to a
designated scale or with marked dimensions to an accuracy of plus or minus six
inches (±6") and sufficient to show clearly the various interior dimensions of
all areas of the premises and to demonstrate compliance with the provisions of
this chapter. The requirements of this subsection shall not apply for renewal
applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted
for the license sought to be renewed and certifies that the premises has not
been altered since the immediately preceding issuance of the license and that
the previous diagram continues to accurately depict the exterior and interior
layouts of the licensed premises. The approval or use of the diagram required
pursuant to this subsection shall not be deemed to be, and shall not be
interpreted or construed to constitute, any other village approval otherwise
required pursuant to applicable village ordinances and regulations.
      12.   A current certificate and straight line drawing prepared within
thirty (30) days prior to the application by a registered land surveyor
depicting the property lines and the structures containing any established
existing uses regulated by this title within one thousand feet (1,000') of the
exterior structural wall of the property to be certified, the property lines of
any place of religious worship, school, daycare facility, forest preserve and/
or public park within one thousand feet (1,000'), and any residentially zoned
areas or residential property within seven hundred fifty feet (750') of the
property to be certified. If Illinois state statutes or Cook County law or
regulations require a distance of over one thousand feet (1,000') for any of
the sexually oriented businesses, that requirement is hereby adopted by the
village and said distances shall apply (example, public act 93-1056). For
purposes of this section, a use shall be considered existing or established if
it is in existence at the time an application is submitted.
      13.   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is
an individual, he/she must sign the application for a permit as an applicant.
If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who has a five percent (5%) or greater interest in
the business must sign the application for a permit as an applicant. If a
corporation is listed as the owner of a sexually oriented business or as the
entity that desires to operate such a business, each individual having a five
percent (5%) or greater interest in the corporation must sign the application
for a permit as an applicant.
      14.   If a person desires to operate a sexually oriented business that
shall exhibit on the premises films, videocassettes or other video
reproductions which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas, then said person shall comply with the requirements stated at section
11-10-17 of this chapter.
      15.   The name of the individual or individuals who shall be the day to
day, on site managers of the proposed sexually oriented business. If the
manager is other than the applicant, the applicant shall provide, for each
manager, all of the information required of an individual applicant under this
chapter.
      16.   Applicants for a permit under this chapter shall have a continuing
duty to promptly supplement application information required by this chapter in
the event that said information changes in any way from what is stated on the
application. The failure to comply with said continuing duty within thirty (30)
days from the date of such change, by supplementing the application on file
with the village president, or his/her designee, shall be grounds for
suspension of a permit.
      17.   In the event that the village president, or his/her designee,
determines or learns at any time that the applicant has improperly completed
the application for a proposed sexually oriented business, he/she shall
promptly notify the applicant of such fact and allow ten (10) days to properly
complete the application. The time period for granting or denying a permit
shall be stayed during the period in which the applicant is allowed an
opportunity to properly complete the application.
      18.   The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with
health, fire and building codes and laws.
      19.   The applicant shall be required to pay a nonrefundable application
fee as specified in the fee schedule available in the office of the village
clerk.
      20.   Prior to obtaining any permit or license to operate any "sexually
oriented business" defined in section 11-10-2 of this chapter, and as part of
any application for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall obtain
from the village a certification that the proposed location of such business
complies with the location requirements of sections 11-10-3, 11-10-4 and 11-10-
5 of this chapter.
      21.   The fact that a person possesses other types of state or village
permits and/or licenses does not exempt him/her from the requirement of
obtaining a sexually oriented business permit.
      22.   By applying for a permit under this chapter, the applicant shall be
deemed to have consented to the provisions of this chapter and to the exercise
by the village president, or his/her designee, the Midlothian police department
and all other village departments charged with enforcing the laws, ordinances
and codes applicable to their respective responsibilities under this title.
      23.   The applicant shall be required to provide the village with the
names of any and all employees who are required to be licensed pursuant to
section 11-10-16 of this chapter. This shall be a continuing requirement even
after a permit is granted or renewed. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-9: INVESTIGATION AND APPLICATION:
   (A)   Upon receipt of a complete application properly filed with the
village, and upon payment of the nonrefundable application fee, the village
shall immediately stamp the application as received and shall immediately
thereafter send photocopies of the application to the police department and any
other village departments responsible for enforcement of health, fire and
building codes and laws. Each department shall promptly conduct an
investigation of the applicant, application and the proposed sexually oriented
business in accordance with its responsibilities under law, and as set forth in
this chapter. The village shall complete said investigation within thirty five
(35) working days, counted as Monday through Friday excluding weekends and
federal holidays, of receipt of the application. At the conclusion of its
investigation, each department shall indicate on the photocopy its approval or
disapproval of the application, date it, sign it and, in the event it
disapproves, state the reason therefor. The Midlothian police department shall
only be required to certify the records check indicated in section 11-10-10 of
this chapter. The Midlothian police department shall not be required to approve
or disapprove applications.
   (B)   A village department shall disapprove an application if it finds that
the proposed sexually oriented business will be in violation of any statute,
code, ordinance, regulation or other law in effect in the village. After its
indication of approval or disapproval, each department shall immediately return
the photocopy of the application to the village. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-10-10: ISSUANCE OF PERMIT:
   (A)   Permit Term Limitations: The village president, or his/her designee,
shall grant or deny an application for a permit within forty five (45) working
days, counted as Monday through Friday excluding weekends and federal holidays,
from the date of its proper filing. Upon the expiration of the forty fifth day,
unless the applicant requests and is granted a reasonable extension of time,
the application, if a permit has not been issued, shall be deemed to be denied.
Thereafter, the village shall notify the applicant of a denial of the
application and state the reason(s) for that denial.
   (B)   Grant Of Application For Permit: The village president, or his/her
designee, shall grant the permit unless one or more of the criteria set forth
in subsection (C) of this section is present. The permit, if granted, shall
state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the
expiration date, the classification of the sexually oriented business as listed
in section 11-10-3 of this chapter, and the address of the sexually oriented
business. The permit shall also indicate that the sexually oriented business,
whether permitted or not, may be subject to prohibitions against public nudity
and indecency pursuant to the United States supreme court decision in Barnes v.
Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991). The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so
that it can be read easily at any time.
   (C)   Denial Of Application For Permit: The village president, and his/her
designee, shall deny the application for any of the following reasons:
      1.   An applicant is under twenty one (21) years of age.
      2.   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his/her payment
to the village of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him/her or
imposed upon him/her in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a permit
by the village to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding
twelve (12) months, or is residing with a person whose permit to operate a
sexually oriented business has been revoked within the preceding twelve (12)
months.
      4.   An applicant has failed to provide information required by this
chapter or the permit application for the issuance of permit or has falsely
answered a question or request for information on the application form.
      5.   The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business has not
been approved as being in compliance with health, fire and building codes by
the department responsible under law for investigating said compliance.
      6.   The application fees or permit fees required by this section have
not been paid.
      7.   An applicant for the proposed sexually oriented business is in
violation of, or is not in compliance with, any of the provisions of this
chapter including, but not limited to, the locational requirements for a
sexually oriented business under sections 11-10-3, 11-10-4 and 11-10-5 of this
chapter.
      8.   The granting of the application would violate a statute, ordinance
or court order.
      9.   The applicant has a permit under this chapter that has been
suspended or revoked.
      10.   An applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for
which:
Cite articles of Illinois criminal code and similar federal laws and similar
laws of other states.
         (a)   Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a violation of this chapter, for which the
penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, offense for the
"specified criminal acts".
         (b)   Less than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a felony offense for the "specified criminal
acts".
         (c)   Less than ten (10) years have elapsed since the date of
conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses for
"specified criminal acts".
         (d)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification of the applicant.
         (e)   An applicant who has been convicted of the above described
"specified criminal acts" may qualify for a sexually oriented business permit
only when the time periods required above have elapsed.
         (f)   An applicant knowingly has in his/her employ, an employee who
does not have a valid license as required in section 11-10-16 of this chapter.
         (g)   If the village president, or his/her designee, denies the
application, he/she shall notify the applicant of the denial and state the
reason(s) for the denial.
         (h)   If a person applies for a permit for a particular location
within a period of twelve (12) months from the date of denial of a previous
application for a permit at the location, and there has not been an intervening
change in the circumstances which could reasonably be expected to lead to a
different decision regarding the former reasons for denial, the application
shall be denied.
         (i)   An applicant is residing with a person who has been convicted of
a crime as set forth in subsections (C)10(a), (C)10(b) and (C)10(c) of this
section. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-11: INSPECTION:
   (A)   An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the county
health department, village health department, building department, police
department and/or fire department to inspect the premises of a sexually
oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law at any
time it is occupied or open for business.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person who operates a sexually oriented
business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said
business under this title, or his/her agent or employee, shall commit a
violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-
4-1 of this code, if he/she refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the
premises at any time that it is occupied or open for business. (Ord. 1650, 10-
10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-12: SUSPENSION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   The village president, or his/her designee, shall suspend a permit for
a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if he/she determines that a permittee,
or an employee of a permittee, has:
      1.   Violated, or is not in compliance with, any section of this chapter.
      2.   Been under the influence of alcoholic beverages while working in the
sexually oriented business premises.
      3.   Refused to allow an inspection of sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
      4.   Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
      5.   Operated the sexually oriented business in violation of a building,
fire, health or zoning statute, code, ordinance, law, or regulation, whether
federal, state or local, said determination being based on investigation by the
division department or agency charged with enforcing said rules or laws. In the
event of such statute, code, ordinance, law or regulation violation, the
village shall promptly notify the permittee of the violation and shall allow
the permittee a seven (7) day period in which to correct the violation. If the
permittee fails to correct the violation before the expiration of the seven (7)
day period, the village shall forthwith suspend the permit and shall notify the
permittee of the suspension.
      6.   Engaged in permit transfer contrary to section 11-10-15 of this
chapter. In the event that the village suspends a permit on the grounds that a
permittee engaged in a permit transfer contrary to section 11-10-15 of this
chapter, the village president, or his designee, shall forthwith notify the
permittee of the suspension. The suspension shall remain in effect until the
applicable section of this chapter has been satisfied.
      7.   Operated a sexually oriented business in violation of the hours of
operation in section 11-10-21 of this chapter.
      8.   Knowingly employs a person who does not have a valid license as
required in section 11-10-16 of this chapter.
      9.   Allowed another employee or any other person at any adult
entertainment establishment to appear or perform while nude.
      10.   Appeared or performed while nude.
      11.   Allowed any minor on the premises in violation of section 11-10-19
of this chapter.
      12.   Allowed alcoholic liquor on the premises in violation of section
11-10-18 of this chapter.
   (B)   With regard to subsections (A)1, (A)3, (A)5 and/or (A)6 of this
section, the suspension shall remain in effect until the violation of the
statute, code, ordinance, law or regulation in question has been corrected.
   (C)   With regard to subsections (A)2, (A)4, (A)7, (A)8, (A)9, (A)10 and/or
(A)11 of this section, the suspension shall remain in effect for the period of
time determined by the village president (or designee). (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-13: REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
   (A)   The village president, or his/her designee, shall revoke a permit upon
determination that:
      1.   A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted during the application process that tended to enhance the applicant's
opportunity for obtaining a permit.
      2.   A permittee or an employee has knowingly allowed possession, use or
sale of controlled substances in or on the premises.
      3.   A permittee or an employee knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises.
      4.   A permittee or an employee knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the permittee's permit was suspended.
      5.   A permittee has been convicted of a "specified criminal act" for
which the time period required in section 11-10-10 of this chapter has not
elapsed.
      6.   On two (2) or more occasions, within a twelve (12) month period, a
person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the permitted
premises, constituting a "specified criminal act" for which a conviction has
been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the sexually
oriented business at the time the offenses were committed. The fact that a
conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the
permit.
      7.   A permittee is convicted of tax violations for any taxes or fees
related to a sexually oriented business.
      8.   A permittee or an employee has allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or any other specified
sexual activities to occur in or on the permitted premises.
      9.   A permittee has been operating more than one sexually oriented
business under a single roof.
      10.   That two (2) suspensions have occurred within a twelve (12) month
period.
   (B)   When the village president, or his/her designee, revokes a permit, the
revocation shall continue for one year and the permittee shall not be issued a
sexually oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation became
effective. If the permit was revoked under this section, an applicant may not
be granted another permit until the number of years required under this title
have elapsed. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-14: REVIEW OF PERMIT DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION:
After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application, or
suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or permittee may seek
prompt review of such administrative action through the village board by filing
a written request for review within twenty one (21) days. The village board
shall hear the review request within thirty (30) days after it is received by
the village. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-15: TRANSFER OF PERMIT:
   (A)   A permittee shall not transfer his/her permit to another person unless
and until such other person satisfies the following requirements:
      1.   Obtains an amendment to the permit from the village president, or
his/her designee, which provides that he/she is now the permittee. The
amendment may be obtained only if he/she has completed and properly filed an
application with the village president, or his/her designee, setting forth the
information called for under sections 11-10-8 and 11-10-9 of this chapter in
the application, and an investigation is performed as set out in section 11-10-
9 of this chapter, which warrants the issuance of a permit.
      2.   Pays a transfer fee as specified in the fee schedule, available in
the office of the village clerk.
   (B)   No permit may be transferred when the village president, or his/her
designee, has notified the permittee that suspension or revocation hearing has
been, or will be, brought against the permittee.
   (C)   A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another location.
   (D)   Any attempt to transfer a permit, either directly or indirectly, in
violation of this section is hereby declared void and the permit shall be
deemed revoked. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-16: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEE LICENSE:
   (A)   Employee License Required; Application Fee: Each individual to be
employed in a "sexually oriented business", as defined in section 11-10-2 of
this chapter, and who engages in the services rendered by a nude model studio,
escort or escort agency, sexual encounter establishment, massage parlor, or a
live performer or entertainer shall be required to obtain a sexually oriented
business employee license. Each applicant for said license shall pay a
nonrefundable application fee as specified in the fee schedule available in the
office of the village clerk.
   (B)   Required Information: Before any applicant may be issued a sexually
oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit on a form
provided by the village president, or his/her designee, the following
information:
      1.   The applicant's name or any other names, including "stage" names or
aliases used by the individual.
      2.   Age, date, and place of birth.
      3.   Height, weight, hair and eye color.
      4.   Present residence address and telephone number.
      5.   Present business address and telephone number.
      6.   State driver's license or identification number.
      7.   Social security number.
      8.   Acceptable written proof that the individual is at least eighteen
(18) years of age.
      9.   Attached to the application form as provided above, a color
photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face, and the
applicant's fingerprints on a form provided by the Midlothian police
department. The applicant shall pay any fees for the photographs and
fingerprints.
      10.   A statement detailing the license or permit history of the
applicant for the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of the filing
of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated or
sought to operate a sexually oriented business, in this or any county, city,
state or country, whether such applicant has ever had a license, permit or
authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or whether such
applicant has had any professional or vocational license or permit denied,
revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or
suspension, a statement of the date, the name of the issuing or denying
jurisdiction and a full description of the reasons for the denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application.
   (C)   Prior Conviction: Whether the applicant has been convicted of a
"specified criminal act" as defined in section 11-10-10 of this chapter. This
information shall include the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of
"nolo contendere" and identifying the convicting jurisdiction.
   (D)   Investigation By Police: The village president, or his/her designee,
shall refer the sexually oriented business employee license application to the
Midlothian police department for an investigation to be made of such
information as is contained on the application. The application process shall
be completed within twenty (20) days from the date the completed application is
filed. After the investigation, the village president, or his/her designee,
shall issue a license unless the report from the police department finds that
one or more of the following findings is true:
      1.   That the applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or
fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application for a license, or in
any report or record required to be filed with the police department or other
department of the village.
      2.   That the applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      3.   That the applicant has been convicted of a "specified criminal act"
as defined in section 11-10-10 of this chapter.
      4.   That the sexually oriented business employee license is to be used
for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or
regulation, or prohibited by particular provisions of this chapter.
      5.   That the applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee
license revoked by the village within two (2) years of the date of the current
application.
   (E)   Renewal Of License:
      1.   A license granted pursuant to this section shall be subject to
annual renewal by the village president, or his/her designee, upon the written
application of the applicant and a finding by the village president, or his/her
designee, and the Midlothian police department that the applicant has not been
convicted of any "specified criminal act", as defined in section 11-10-10 of
this chapter or committed any act during the existence of the previous license
period, which would be grounds to deny the initial permit application.
      2.   The renewal of the license shall be subject to payment as specified
in the fee schedule, available in the office of the village clerk. (Ord. 1650,
10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-17: EXHIBITION OF SEXUALLY EXPLICIT FILMS OR VIDEOS IN VIDEO BOOTHS:
   (A)   A person who operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented
business, other than a sexually oriented motel/hotel, and regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued to said business under this chapter, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space, a film, videocassette or other video reproduction
which depicts sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply
with the following requirements:
      1.   Upon application for a sexually oriented business permit, the
application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan
thereof specifying the location of one or more managers' stations, the location
of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises
in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet of floor area with no dimension greater than eight
feet (8'). The diagram shall also designate the place at which this permit will
be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the
nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required.
However, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated
street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale with marked
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of
the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches (±6").
The village president, or his/her designee, may waive the foregoing diagram for
renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously
submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been
altered since it was prepared.
      2.   The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
      3.   No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's
station may be made without the prior approval of the village.
      4.   It is the duty of the owners and operator of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager's station at
all times that any patron is present inside the premises.
      5.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video reproduction equipment. If the
premises have two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior
of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted
access for any purpose from at least one of the managers' stations. The view
required in this subsection must be by direct line of sight from the manager's
station.
      6.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the view area specified above in subsection (A)5 of this section remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials
or person at all times and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any
area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will
not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to this section.
      7.   No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any one
time. No holes, commonly known as "glory holes", shall be allowed in the walls
or partitions which separate each viewing room from an adjoining viewing room
or restroom.
      8.   The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted
access and an illumination of not less than two (2.0) foot-candles as measured
at the floor level.
      9.   It shall be the duty of the owners and operator, and it shall also
be the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to ensure that
the illumination described above is maintained at all times when any patron is
present on the premises.
   (B)   A person having a duty under this section commits a violation of this
chapter, for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code,
if he/she knowingly fails to fulfill that duty. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-10-18: PROHIBITION OF ALCOHOL:
No alcoholic liquor of any kind shall be sold, used, consumed or possessed at
any time on any licensed premises or at any adult entertainment establishment.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-19: PROHIBITIONS REGARDING MINORS AND SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES:
A person commits a violation of this chapter, for which the penalty is as
prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she operates, or causes to be
operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit
has been issued for said business under this chapter, and knowingly or with
reasonable cause to know, permit, suffer or allow:
   (A)   Admittance of a person under eighteen (18) years of age to the
business premises.
   (B)   A person under eighteen (18) years of age to remain at the business
premises.
   (C)   A person under eighteen (18) years of age to purchase goods or
services at the business premises.
   (D)   A person who is under eighteen (18) years of age to work at the
business premises as an employee. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-20: ADVERTISING, LIGHTING AND NOISE REGULATIONS:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this chapter,
for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she
operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and advertises the presentation of any activity prohibited by any applicable
state statute or local ordinance.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this chapter,
for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she
operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and displays, or otherwise exhibits, the materials and/or performances at such
sexually oriented business in any advertising which is visible outside the
premises. This prohibition shall not extend to advertising of the existence or
location of such sexually oriented business.
   (C)   The permittee shall not allow any portion of the interior premises to
be visible from outside the premises.
   (D)   All off street parking areas and premises entries of the sexually
oriented business shall be illuminated from dusk to closing hours of operation
with a lighting system which provides an average maintained horizontal
illumination of one (1.0) foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. This required lighting level is established in order to provide
sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the sexually
oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees, and to
reduce the incidences of vandalism and criminal conduct. The lighting shall be
shown on the required sketch or diagram of the premises.
   (E)   No loudspeakers or sound equipment audible beyond the licensed
premises shall be used at any time.
   (F)   Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the operator(s) of a
sexually oriented business from complying with the requirements of this chapter
and this title, as amended from time to time, or any subsequently enacted
village ordinances or regulations. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-21: HOURS OF OPERATION:
   (A)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this chapter,
for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she
operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and allows such business to remain open for business, or to permit any employee
to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale,
provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on any weekday or Saturday. No
sexually oriented business shall be open for business at any time on any Sunday
or any legal state of Illinois or federal holiday.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this chapter,
for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if,
working as an employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether
or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, said
employee engages in a performance, solicits a performance, makes a sale,
solicits a sale, provides a service, or solicits a service between the hours of
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on any weekday
or Saturday. No sexually oriented business shall be open for business at any
time on any Sunday or any legal state of Illinois or federal holiday. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-22: NUDITY AT SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES PROHIBITED:
   (A)   The United States supreme court decision in Barnes v. Glen Theatre,
Inc., 501 U.S. 560, 111 (1991), which upheld the rights of cities to prohibit
live public exposure of a person's private parts, specifically applies to
sexually oriented businesses (regardless of whether or not a permit has been
issued to said businesses under this chapter), including said businesses where
no alcoholic beverages are sold, served or consumed at the premises.
   (B)   Public nudity is prohibited within the village, including any sexually
oriented business. Any sexually oriented business found in violation of this
section shall have its permit suspended pursuant to the provisions of section
11-10-12 of this chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-23: REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO LIVE ENTERTAINMENT:
   (A)   Live Entertainment Defined: For purposes of this section, "live
entertainment" is defined as a person who appears seminude. A performance which
is characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified
sexual activities or by nudity is prohibited.
   (B)   Stage: No person shall perform live entertainment for patron(s) of a
sexually oriented business establishment except upon a stage at least eighteen
inches (18") above the level of the floor, which is separated by a distance of
at least ten feet (10') from the nearest area occupied by patrons. No patron
shall be permitted within ten feet (10') of the stage while the stage is
occupied by a performer.
   (C)   Dressing Rooms Provided: The sexually oriented business establishment
shall provide separate dressing room facilities for female and male performers,
which shall not be occupied or used in any way by anyone other than performers.
   (D)   Dressing Room Access: The sexually oriented business establishment
shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms
completely separated from patrons. If such separate access is not physically
feasible, the establishment shall provide a minimum four foot (4') wide walk
aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a
railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers,
which prevents any physical contact between patrons and performers.
   (E)   Physical Contact: No entertainer, either before, during or after a
performance, shall have physical contact with any patron, and no patron shall
have physical contact with any entertainer either before, during or after a
performance. This section shall only apply to physical contact while in or on
the premises of the establishment.
   (F)   Rails: Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches (30") in height shall be
maintained establishing the separation between performers and patrons required
by this section.
   (G)   Gratuity: No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any
entertainer. A patron who wishes to pay or give a gratuity to a performer shall
place the gratuity in a container that is, at all times, located separately
from the performers for the purpose of preventing any physical contact between
a patron and a performer. No performer shall solicit any gratuity from any
patron.
   (H)   Dance: No operator of a sexually oriented business establishment shall
cause or allow a performer to contract or engage in any entertainment, such as
a "couch or a straddle dance", with a patron while in or on the establishment
premises. No performer shall contract to or engage in a "couch or straddle
dance" with a patron while in or on the establishment premises. For purposes of
this subsection, "couch or straddle dance" is defined as an employee of the
establishment intentionally touching or coming within ten feet (10') of any
patron while performing. For purposes of this subsection, "employee" is defined
as it is in section 11-10-2 of this chapter.
   (I)   Employee Contact And Conduct: This section shall not apply to an
employee of an establishment who, while acting as a waiter, waitress, host,
hostess or bartender, comes within ten feet (10') of a patron. No employee
shall engage in any specified sexual activity or display or expose any
specified anatomical area.
   (J)   Compliance With This Section:
      1.   For purposes of this section, an "establishment" is defined in
section 11-10-2 of this chapter. No establishment shall be considered to be in
compliance with this section until the village's designated agent(s) has
inspected and approved the establishment's compliance. The village shall have
ten (10) days from the date it receives written notice from the operator that
the establishment is ready for inspection to approve or disapprove of
compliance as required by this section. Failure to approve or disapprove of
compliance within ten (10) days shall constitute a finding of compliance under
this section.
      2.   The operator of an establishment that has been providing live
entertainment under a valid sexually oriented business permit, shall have the
time periods listed below in this chapter to bring the establishment into
compliance. Failure to do so while continuing to provide live entertainment
shall cause the establishment's permit to be suspended under section 11-10-12
of this chapter. The permit shall remain suspended until the establishment is
approved by the village's designated agent(s) as being in full compliance with
this section.
      3.   The operator of an establishment, that has been operating under a
valid permit for another classification of sexually oriented business, and who
wishes to provide live entertainment at that establishment, shall apply for and
receive a sexually oriented business permit for the operation of an
establishment providing live entertainment before any live entertainment is
provided at that establishment. No live entertainment permit shall be issued
until the establishment is approved as being in full compliance with this
section and all other applicable requirements of this chapter.
      4.   The applicant for a permit to operate a new establishment, who
wishes to provide live entertainment, shall apply for and receive a sexually
oriented business permit for the operation of an establishment providing live
entertainment before any live entertainment is provided. No live entertainment
permit shall be issued until the establishment is approved as being in full
compliance with this section and all other applicable requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-24: ADDITIONAL CRIMINAL PROHIBITIONS FOR OPERATION OF SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS WITHOUT VALID PERMIT:
   (A)   In addition to the criminal provisions found at other sections of this
chapter, the following additional criminal provisions shall also apply to
sexually oriented businesses.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and a person commits a violation of this chapter,
for which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, if he/she
operates, or causes to be operated, a sexually oriented business, regardless of
whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter,
and said person knows or should know that:
      1.   The business does not have a sexually oriented business permit under
this chapter for any applicable classification.
      2.   The business has a permit that is under suspension.
      3.   The business has a permit that has been revoked.
      4.   The business has a permit that has expired. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-25: EXEMPTIONS:
   (A)   It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that
a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
      1.   By a college, junior college, or university, supported entirely or
partly by taxation.
      2.   By a private college or university, which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university, supported entirely or partly by taxation or:
         (a)   In a structure:
            (1)   Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure
and no other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing.
            (2)   Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must
enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class.
            (3)   Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any
one time.
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution for a violation of this chapter that an
employee of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether or not it is
permitted under this chapter, exposed any specified anatomical area during the
employee's bona fide use of a restroom, or during the employee's bona fide use
of a dressing room, which is accessible only to employees. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-26: DISTRIBUTION OF SEXUAL DEVICES:
   (A)   It is unlawful for anyone to distribute, for commercial purposes, sell
or offer for sale any device, instrument or paraphernalia designed or marketed
primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or
abuse of themselves or others.
   (B)   Such devices, instruments or paraphernalia include, but are not
limited to, phallic shaped vibrators, dildos, muzzles, whips, chains, bather
restraints, racks, nonmedical enema kits, body piercing implements (excluding
earrings or other decorative jewelry), or other tools of sadomasochistic abuse.
   (C)   A violation of this section is a violation of this chapter, for which
the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, punishable by a
fine as specified in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-10-27: CRIMINAL PENALTIES AND ADDITIONAL LEGAL, INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
   (A)   In addition to whatever penalties are applicable under the Illinois
criminal code, if any person fails or refuses to obey or comply with or
violates any of the criminal provisions of this chapter, such person, upon
conviction of such offense, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter, for
which the penalty is as prescribed in section 1-4-1 of this code, and shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), in the
discretion of the court. Each violation or noncompliance shall be considered a
separate and distinct offense. Further, each day of continued violation or
noncompliance shall be considered as a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall prevent or restrict the village from
taking such other lawful action in any court of competent jurisdiction as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation or noncompliance. Such other
lawful actions shall include, but shall not be limited to, an equitable action
for injunctive relief or an action at law for damages.
   (C)   Further, nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the
village from prosecuting any violation of this chapter by means of a code
enforcement board or officers established pursuant to the authority as provided
by the laws of the state of Illinois.
   (D)   All remedies and penalties provided for in this section shall be
cumulative and independently available to the village and the village shall be
authorized to pursue any and all remedies set forth in this section to the full
extent allowed by law. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-28: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any sexually oriented business established, operated or maintained in violation
of any of the provisions or requirements of this title or of any sexually
oriented business license shall be, and the same is, declared to be unlawful
and a public nuisance. The village may, in addition to or in lieu of any other
remedies set forth in this chapter, commence an action to enjoin, remove or
abate such nuisance in the manner provided by law and shall take such other
steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such
relief as will abate or remove such public nuisance, and restrain and enjoin
any person from establishing, operating or maintaining a sexually oriented
business contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-29: IMMUNITY FROM PROSECUTION:
The village, the police department and all other departments and agencies, as
well as all other village officers, agents and employees, charged with
enforcement of state and local laws and codes shall be immune from prosecution,
civil or criminal, for reasonable, good faith trespass upon a sexually oriented
business while acting within the scope of authority conferred by this chapter.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-10-30: SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any provision of this chapter, or any part thereof, or any
application thereof to any person or circumstance, is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or otherwise invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction on its face or as applied, such holding shall not affect the
validity or effectiveness of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter,
or any part thereof, or any application thereof to any person or circumstance
or of said provision as applied to any other person or circumstance. It is
hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the village that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, invalid or other ineffective
provisions not been included herein. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 11
GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
11-11-1: General Provisions
11-11-2: Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses
11-11-3: Permitted Encroachments; Table 11-1
11-11-4: Environmental Performance Standards
11-11-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Number Of Buildings On A Lot: In the R-1 and R-2 districts, there
shall be no more than one principal building on a lot.
   (B)   Activities Within An Enclosed Building: Within all nonresidential
zoning districts, all activities, including outdoor storage, merchandise
display, repairs, services, commercial and manufacturing activities, shall be
conducted wholly within an enclosed building, except in accordance with section
11-13-11, "Screening Of Manufacturing Activities And Outdoor Storage", of this
title.
   (C)   Frontage On A Public Or Private Street: All lots shall front on a
public or private street.
   (D)   Maintenance Of Required Yards: No lot shall be reduced in area so that
the yards become less than required by this title. The minimum yard required
for a building or structure shall not be considered a yard space for any other
building or structure.
   (E)   Control Over Bulk: All buildings and structures erected after the
effective date hereof shall meet the requirements for the zoning district in
which the structure or building is located. No existing building shall be
enlarged, altered, reconstructed or relocated in such a manner that conflicts
with the requirements of the zoning district in which the building or structure
shall be located.
   (F)   Prohibited Use Of Land And Buildings: No building, structure, or land
shall be used for any use other than one that is allowed as a permitted or
special use in the zoning district in which such building, structure or land is
located. However, buildings, structures or land may be used for a temporary use
or accessory use as specified in this title, provided that such building,
structure or use complies with all other requirements of this title.
   (G)   View Obstruction: Notwithstanding any provisions relating to height
hereinbefore stated, the visional clearance area at the intersection of two (2)
streets, which shall be defined as a triangular area measured twenty five feet
(25') on the front lot line and fifty feet (50') on the corner side lot line of
a corner lot, shall not be obstructed by any sign, wall, fence, hedge,
shrubbery or other object which exceeds four feet (4') in height. In the event
that the grade of a lot is higher than the street grade, the height of the
wall, fence, hedge or shrubbery shall be reduced so that the visional clearance
is not obstructed four feet (4') over the grade of the street. The site
distance triangle is illustrated below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2625.gif]
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-11-2: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   (A)   Garages, Sheds, Cabanas And Gazebos:
      1.   Compliance With Building And Fire Codes: Garages, sheds, cabanas and
gazebos shall comply with the village building code and fire code.
      2.   Time Of Construction: No accessory building shall be constructed
prior to construction of the principal building to which it is accessory.
      3.   Permitted Yards: No accessory building shall be permitted to be
constructed within a front or corner side yard, beyond the building line of the
house.
      4.   Size Of Accessory Buildings: One attached or detached garage is
permitted on each single-family residential zoning lot. Attached or detached
garages on single-family residential zoning lots shall not exceed eight hundred
sixty four (864) square feet. Sheds shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120)
square feet.
      5.   Maximum Permitted Height Of Accessory Buildings: No detached
accessory building shall exceed fourteen feet (14') in height.
      6.   Required Rear Yard Setbacks: Accessory buildings shall be located a
minimum of five feet (5') from a rear property line, unless it abuts an alley.
      7.   Required Interior Side Yard Setback: Accessory buildings, including
any eaves or overhangs, shall be located a minimum of one foot (1') from any
interior side yard line.
      8.   Required Corner Side Yard Setback: Accessory buildings, including
any eaves or overhangs, shall meet the minimum corner side yard setback
requirement for principal buildings in the zoning district in which they are
located.
      9.   Minimum Distance From Other Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be
located a minimum of ten feet (10') from any principal building on any lot and
a minimum of five feet (5') from all other buildings on the zoning lot or
abutting properties.
      10.   Occupancy Prohibited: Occupancy of any accessory building as a
dwelling unit is prohibited.
   (B)   Porches, Decks, Terraces And Patios:
      1.   Decks, terraces and patios are permitted in the front or corner side
yard if they meet the front or corner side yard setback requirement for
principal buildings in the zoning district in which they are located. Attached,
roofed or unroofed, porches may encroach a maximum of eight feet (8') into the
required front yard. Porches, decks, terraces and patios are permitted in any
required interior side or rear yard, provided that they conform to all other
requirements of this section and are set back a minimum of five feet (5') from
any interior side or rear lot line.
      2.   Porches, decks, terraces and patios shall comply with the village
building code, and all porches, decks, terraces and patios require a building
or pavement permit. Stoops are not considered porches.
   (C)   Mechanical Equipment:
      1.   In any zoning district, heating, ventilation and air conditioning
(HVAC) equipment may only be located in the interior side or rear yard. Ground
mounted mechanical equipment shall be located a minimum of eight feet (8') from
any interior side lot line and a minimum of three feet (3') from any rear lot
line.
      2.   Any heating, ventilation or air conditioning equipment located on
the roof of any structure in any zoning district shall be screened either by an
architectural element of the building (e.g., a parapet) or by a solid wall.
Roof mounted equipment shall be located at least six feet (6') from any
supporting wall of the building, so as to permit safe access to the roof by the
fire department.
      3.   The location of mechanical equipment shall comply with the village
building code.
   (D)   Exterior Lighting: All exterior lighting shall be designed, located
and mounted at heights no greater than twenty five feet (25') above grade, with
the exception of street lighting and athletic field lighting. All light
fixtures shall be completely shielded and directed downward at all times. Light
intensity shall comply with the current electrical standards of the village as
determined by the superintendent of buildings.
   (E)   Fences:
      1.   Compliance With Building Code: Fences shall comply with the
applicable provisions of the village building code, except as modified within
this section.
      2.   Height: Fences shall be constructed so as not to exceed the
following heights:
         (a)   On the side or front of a lot which is adjacent to a street, the
height of the fence shall not exceed four feet (4') with fifty percent (50%)
opacity, except where the fence is on or behind the required front or corner
side building setback line. In that area the fence may be up to six feet (6').
These provisions shall not apply to fences built on property zoned for
commercial or industrial purposes.
         (b)   On all other lot lines or portions of lot lines the height of
the fence shall not exceed six feet (6').
      3.   Location:
         (a)   The fence may be constructed on the lot line or inside the lot
line.
         (b)   Fences around swimming pools shall meet the requirements of
subsection (F) of this section.
         (c)   Fences shall comply with the view obstruction regulations of
this title.
      4.   Design:
         (a)   All fences shall be constructed with the finished side facing
the exterior of the property. All posts shall be placed on the inside of the
fence.
         (b)   Barbed or razor wire is prohibited in all districts.
   (F)   Swimming Pools: It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, install
or enlarge any swimming pool in the village except in compliance with all the
provisions of this section. Swimming pools shall also be subject to the
construction requirements of title 4, chapter 5 of this code, in addition to
the following location standards:
      1.   No portion of an aboveground swimming pool outside a building shall
be located at a distance less than six feet (6') from any side or rear property
line or building line, and ten feet (10') from overhead or underground current
carrying electrical conductors.
      2.   No portion of an inground swimming pool outside a building shall be
located at a distance less than eight feet (8') from any side or rear property
line or building line, and ten feet (10') from overhead or underground current
carrying electrical conductors.
      3.   No portion of a swimming pool shall be located on any easement.
      4.   All outdoor swimming pools shall be completely enclosed by a fence.
All fence openings or points of entry into the pool enclosure shall be equipped
with gates. The fence and gates shall be a minimum of six feet (6') in height
and above grade level, and shall be constructed of a minimum number nine (#9)
gauge woven wire mesh corrosion resistant material, or similar material, or a
fence approved by the village. All gates shall be equipped with self-closing or
self-latching devices installed as to be inaccessible from the outside to
toddlers. Fence posts shall be decay or corrosion resistant and shall be set in
concrete bases.
      5.   When provided around elevated pool decks, deck rails shall have the
entire outside perimeter protected by a rail with a minimum height of three
feet (3') above the deck.
   (G)   Satellite Dish Antennas:
      1.   Mounting Of Satellite Dish Antenna:
         (a)   In residential areas, construction shall be roof or wall
mounted. Roof or wall mounted satellite dish antennas shall not exceed eighteen
inches (18") in diameter, unless approved as a special use.
         (b)   In nonresidential areas, construction of satellite dish antennas
shall be roof or wall mounted. Where practical, installation shall avoid
mounting antennas on roof appurtenances, such as chimneys, towers, poles or
spires. Roof or wall mounted installations shall have a certification from a
licensed structural engineer regarding the location, stating that the structure
is capable of handling the antenna and said antenna does not provide any
additional stress that the structure cannot bear. All installations shall be
screened if possible. Where practical, installations shall be located at the
rear of a structure. Roof or wall mounted satellite dishes shall not exceed
eighteen inches (18") in diameter, unless approved as a special use.
      2.   Structure On Same Lot: No structure shall be linked physically or
electronically to a receiver that is not located on the same lot, premises or
parcel of land as said structure.
      3.   Construction: Construction shall be performed by a licensed
contractor registered with the village or, in appropriate circumstances, may be
performed by the individual homeowner. Licensed electrical contractors are
required to install all line voltage work.
      4.   Materials; Color: The structure shall be constructed with galvanized
structural supports and shall be nonreflective. Coloration shall blend with
surroundings.
      5.   Advertising; Signage: Structure shall have no advertising or signage
of any type displayed on it other than the name of the manufacturer in letters
not to exceed two inches (2").
   (H)   Outdoor Fireplaces: Barrels, half barrels, fire pits and drums are not
allowed as outdoor fireplaces. Permitted outdoor fireplaces shall comply with
the Midlothian fire code and the following standards:
      1.   Fuel shall be dry wood, producing a minimum of smoke and particulate
matter.
      2.   When in use, adult supervision shall be present at all times.
      3.   Such fireplaces shall be used only on an approved noncombustible
surface.
      4.   Such fireplaces shall be used with screening and cover in place as
originally manufactured and shall comply with manufacturer's fire safety
standards.
      5.   Outdoor fireplaces shall be approved by the Underwriters Laboratory
(UL).
   (I)   Driveways:
      1.   All driveways shall be paved. Appropriate paving materials include
bituminous asphalt, concrete and paving blocks. An appropriate substrate
material must be used to prevent degradation of the paved surface. Gravel
driveways and driveways constructed of materials similar to gravel, including,
but not limited to: sand, screenings, crushed gravel; flagstone and wood chips,
are not allowed. Semipervious surfaces such as "Grasscrete" are not allowed.
      2.   In the R-1 district, the width of driveways shall be limited to
forty percent (40%) of the width of the lot.
      3.   In the R-2 district, the width of driveways shall be limited to
forty percent (40%) of the width of the lot or twenty feet (20'), whichever is
less.
      4.   In the R-3 district, the width of the driveway shall be no wider
than the width of the garage opening or parking space for each unit. When two
(2) garages are built adjacent to one another, there shall be green space
provided between the driveways for each unit.
      5.   In the R-4, R-5, B-1, B-2, B-3, O/I and OS districts, the driveway
width shall be determined by the superintendent of buildings with the approval
of the site plan review committee.
      6.   The width of a driveway may be increased between the village
sidewalk and the curb by thirty percent (30%) of the width of the driveway
between the street and village sidewalk, provided the paved area does not
extend beyond the property line. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-11-3: PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS; TABLE 11-1:
Permitted encroachments can be found in table 11-1, as follows:
TABLE 11-1:   PERMITTED ENCROACHMENTS
 
Y = Permitted N = Not permitted
Type Of Structure Or Use Yards Where Permitted
Encroachment             Front Yards And Corner Interior Side Yards Rear Yards
                         Side Yards
Type Of Structure   Yards Where Permitted
Or Use Encroachment Front Yards And     Interior Side Yards Rear Yards
                    Corner Side Yards
Accessibility ramps Y                   Y                   Y
Air conditioners    Y                   Y                   Y
Arbors and          Y                   Y                   Y
trellises
Awnings and
canopies, which
project no more
than 5 feet from an
exterior wall; see  Y                   Y, must comply with Y
chapter 14,                             village fire code
"Signs", of this
title for sign
requirements, where
applicable
Balconies, which
project no more     N                   N                   Y
than 5 feet from an
exterior wall
Bay windows, which
are no more than 1
story in height, do
not project more
than 3 feet into a  Y                   Y                   Y
required yard and
occupy no more than
33 percent of the
exterior length of
the adjoining wall
Carport/covered     N                   Y                   Y
parking
Chimneys, which
project no more     Y                   Y                   Y
than 18 inches into
a required yard
Compost pile/       N                   N                   Y
structures
Eaves and dormers,  Y, provided they do Y, provided they do Y, provided they do
including gutters   not project into a  not project into a  not project into a
                    required yard       required yard       required yard
Exterior lighting,
subject to          Y                   Y                   Y
subsection 11-11-2
(D) of this chapter
Fences, subject to
subsection 11-11-2  Y                   Y                   Y
(E) of this chapter
Fire escapes (open) N                   Y                   Y
Flag poles          Y                   Y                   Y
Garages, detached,
subject to          N                   Y                   Y
subsection 11-11-2
(A) of this chapter
Gazebos and                             Y, provided they do Y, provided they do
cabanas, subject to N                   not extend past the not exceed 144 sq.
subsection 11-11-2                      front building line ft. in area
(A) of this chapter
Ground or roof or
wall mounted
mechanical units,
including central
air conditioning,
heating,
ventilating,        N                   Y                   Y
compressors, pool
and filtering
equipment, subject
to subsection 11-
11-2(C) of this
chapter
Laundry drying
equipment (clothes  N                   Y                   Y
lines and poles)
Ornamental lighting
standards and
permanently
anchored lawn
furniture and       Y                   Y                   Y
decorations, such
as benches,
statues, birdbaths,
sculptures, etc.
Outdoor fireplaces,
subject to          N                   N                   Y
subsection 11-11-2
(H) of this chapter
                    Y, see also chapter Y, see also chapter Y, see also chapter
Parking (open, off  12, "Off Street     12, "Off Street     12, "Off Street
street)             Parking And         Parking And         Parking And
                    Loading", of this   Loading", of this   Loading", of this
                    title               title               title
Playground and
recreational
equipment and
playhouses,
excluding equipment                     Y, provided they    Y, provided they
located on park/                        are located no      are located no
playground, school  N                   closer than 3 feet  closer than 3 feet
or daycare center                       from any property   from rear property
sites (except                           line                line
basketball
standards and
backboards shall be
permitted in all
yards)
Porches, decks,     Y, provided they    Y, provided they    Y, provided they
terraces and        are located no      are located no      are located no
patios, subject to  closer than 5 feet  closer than 5 feet  closer than 5 feet
subsection 11-11-2  from any property   from any property   from any property
(B) of this chapter line                line                line
Satellite dish
antenna, subject to
the standards of    Y                   Y                   Y
subsection 11-11-2
(G) of this chapter
Sheds and storage
structures for
garden equipment,
subject to                                                  Y, provided they
subsection 11-11-2  N                   N                   are 5 feet from the
(A) of this chapter                                         rear property line
(sheds for keeping
of birds, poultry
or livestock are
prohibited)
Signs, subject to
chapter 14,         Y                   Y                   Y
"Signs", of this
title
Steps and stoops,
not exceeding 4
feet in height,
provided they do    Y                   Y                   Y
not extend more
than 5 feet into
the required yard
                                                            Y, provided they
Swimming pools,                                             are located no
subject to                                                  closer than 6 feet
subsection 11-11-2  N                   Y                   from any property
(F) of this chapter                                         or building line
                                                            and not on any
                                                            easement
Tennis courts,
basketball courts                       Y, provided they    Y, provided they
and racquetball/                        are located no      are located no
hardball courts     N                   closer than 10 feet closer than 10 feet
excluding those                         from any property   from any property
located on park/                        line                line
playground or
school sites
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-11-4: ENVIRONMENTAL PERFORMANCE STANDARDS:
All uses shall comply with the performance standards established in this
section unless any federal, state, county or village law, ordinance or
regulation establishes a more restrictive standard, in which event the more
restrictive standard shall apply.
   (A)   Noise: No activity or use shall be conducted in a manner that
generates a level of sound as measured on another property greater than that
allowed by noise regulations of the state pollution control board, as amended
from time to time. The limits shall not apply to construction noises, noises
emanating from safety signals or warning devices, noises not directly under the
control of the owner or occupant of the property, and transient noises from
moving sources, such as railroads and aircraft.
   (B)   Glare And Heat: Any activity, or operation of any use, producing glare
or heat shall be conducted so that no glare or heat from the activities or
operations shall be detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is
located. Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded
so as not to cause a nuisance across lot lines.
   (C)   Vibration: No earth borne vibration from any operation of any use
shall be detectable at any point off the lot on which the use is located.
   (D)   Dust And Air Pollution:
      1.   Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from
sources, such as storage areas, yards, roads, conveying equipment and the like,
within lot boundaries, shall be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping,
screening, sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting, collecting or other acceptable
means. No persons shall cause, or allow, the emission of fugitive particulate
matter across lot lines visible to an observer looking generally toward the
zenith, beyond the property line.
      2.   This requirement shall not apply when the wind speed is greater than
twenty five (25) miles per hour. Determination of wind speed for the purposes
of this rule shall be by a one hour average or hourly recorded value at the
nearest official station of the U.S. weather bureau or by wind speed
instruments operated on the site.
   (E)   Discharge And Disposal Of Radioactive And Hazardous Waste: The
discharge of fluid and the disposal of solid radioactive and hazardous waste
materials shall comply with applicable village, state and federal laws and
regulations governing such materials or waste. No operation that produces
radioactive or hazardous waste material shall commence without prior notice to
the village. Notice shall be given at least three (3) weeks before the
operation is commenced. Radioactive and hazardous material waste shall be
transported, stored and used in conformance with all applicable federal, state
and village laws.
   (F)   Electromagnetic Interference: Electromagnetic interference from any
operation of any use in any district shall not adversely affect the operation
of any equipment located off the lot on which such interference originates and
is subject to state and federal regulations.
   (G)   Odors: The release of materials intrinsically odorous, or capable of
being odorous, by either bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, which
renders it perceptible from beyond the lot and constitutes a public nuisance,
shall be prohibited.
   (H)   Toxic Substances: The storage, handling or transport of toxic
substances shall comply with the laws of the state of Illinois and all federal
laws and all state and federal regulations.
   (I)   Water Pollution: All uses shall comply with the state of Illinois
pollution control board rules and regulations, 35 Illinois administrative code,
subtitle C, "water pollution", as well as all applicable federal laws and
regulations.
   (J)   Fire And Explosion Hazards: Materials that present potential fire and
explosion hazards shall be transported, stored and used only in conformance
with all applicable federal, state and local laws. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 12
OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
11-12-1: General Provisions
11-12-2: Computation
11-12-3: Design And Size
11-12-4: Location Of Spaces
11-12-5: Shared Parking
11-12-6: Accessible Parking
11-12-7: Parking Facilities For Alternative Modes Of Transportation
11-12-8: Stacking Spaces For Drive-Through Facilities
11-12-9: Off Street Loading; Table 12-1
11-12-10: Commercial Vehicles In Residential Districts
11-12-11: Recreational Vehicles In Residential Districts
11-12-12: Off Street Parking Requirements; Table 12-2
11-12-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Off street parking is permitted as an accessory use in all zoning districts,
provided that it complies with the requirements of this chapter. Off street
parking as a principal use is permitted only when expressly authorized by the
regulations of the applicable zoning district.
   (A)   No Reduction Of Required Spaces: Any off street parking or loading
space required in connection with buildings or structures existing on the
effective date hereof shall not be removed, except in conformance with the
requirements of this title. Any building or structure that is erected or
substantially altered after the effective date hereof shall provide off street
parking and loading spaces in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Provision Of Additional Spaces: Nothing in this title shall be deemed
to prevent the voluntary establishment of off street parking or loading
facilities, provided that such facilities meet the requirements of this title
governing the location, design and operation of such facilities.
   (C)   Limitations On Use Of Parking And Loading Spaces: No motor vehicle
repair work of any kind shall be permitted in any parking space, parking lot or
loading berth. The repair or maintenance of motor vehicles conducted as a
business or commercial activity is prohibited in off street parking facilities
located in a residential district.
   (D)   Change In Land Use: Whenever the existing use of a building or
structure shall hereafter be changed to a new type of use, parking and loading
facilities shall be provided as required for such new type of use. For those
buildings and structures erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional
parking and loading facilities shall be provided only in the amount by which
the requirements for the new type of use exceed the requirement for the
existing type of use.
   (E)   Change In Intensity Of Use: When a building or structure shall undergo
any increase in the number of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity or other unit of measurement, parking and loading facilities shall be
provided for such increase in intensity. If, however, additional parking or
loading facilities cannot be added, in whole or in part, due to a lack of
available land area, a property owner may request a variation from this
provision. The village board shall consider each variation request as it
relates to the standards established in section 11-2-17, "Variations", of this
title.
   (F)   Buildings Erected Prior To Effective Date Hereof: This chapter shall
not be construed to require the addition of any parking or loading spaces for
uses in buildings or structures existing on the effective date hereof. When a
building permit has been issued prior to the effective date hereof and
construction has begun within one year, and has been diligently pursued,
parking and loading facilities shall be provided in the amount required for the
issuance of the permit, regardless of any amount required by this chapter.
   (G)   Site Plan Review And Building Permit For Paving, Driveways, Parking
Areas And Sidewalks: Any application for a building permit or occupancy permit
for a new or enlarged building, structure or use shall include a site plan,
drawn to scale and fully dimensioned, showing any off street parking or loading
facilities to be provided. In accordance with section 11-2-14, "Site Plan
Review", of this title, the site plan review committee shall review the plan
for compliance with this chapter and this title. A building permit shall be
required prior to installation of any paved parking areas, driveways or
sidewalks on private property in all districts. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-12-2: COMPUTATION:
   (A)   Basis For Computation: The total number of required parking and
loading spaces shall be based upon the requirements for the principal use of
the lot. However, when more than one use occupies the same lot, the number of
required spaces shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use. All
off street parking facilities shall be completed before occupancy of the
building or structure for which it serves. When the determination of the number
of parking spaces is based on the number of employees, the owner or manager
shall be counted as an employee.
   (B)   Fractional Spaces: When determination of the number of required off
street parking or loading spaces results in a requirement of a fractional
space, any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be dropped, while a fraction
in excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
   (C)   Bench Seating: In places of assembly in which patrons or spectators
occupy benches, pews or similar seating facilities, each twenty two inches
(22") of such seating facility shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of
determining the requirement for off street parking facilities under this title.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-3: DESIGN AND SIZE:
   (A)   Dimensions: A required off street parking space shall be at least nine
feet (9') in width and at least twenty feet (20') in length, which includes
space for vehicle bumper overhang, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps
and columns. Such space shall have vertical clearance of at least seven feet
(7'). The dimensions of parking spaces, aisles and/or driveways are set forth
in figure 12-1 below:
FIGURE 12-1
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2627.gif]
 
Parking Parking Space Parking Space Aisle Width  Single Loaded Double Loaded
Angle   Width (W)     Length (L)    (A)          Module Width  Module Width
                                                 (SL)          (DL)
0°     9.0           21.0          18.0/24.0*   27.31*        36/40*
45°    9.0           20.0          18.0         31.25         48.5
60°    9.0           20.0          18.0         32.25         51.25
90°    9.0           20.0          24.0*        40.0*         58.0*
 
*Two-way traffic authorized.
   (B)   Surfacing And Striping: Any and all open parking areas and driveways
shall be surfaced with bituminous, asphalt, concrete, or a like material, with
adequate drainage provided. Striping of the surface to define each parking
space shall be provided and shall be visible at all times.
   (C)   Bumper Stops: Bumper stops, curbing or wheel checks shall be provided
to prevent any vehicle from damaging or encroaching upon any adjacent parking
or loading space, sidewalk, landscaped area, fence, wall or building.
   (D)   Access: Each off street space shall open directly upon an aisle or
driveway of such width as will provide adequate means of vehicular access to
such parking space. All off street parking facilities shall be provided with
appropriate means of vehicular access in a manner that least interferes with
traffic movement and allows the driver of the vehicle to proceed forward into
street or alley traffic rather than back out. All required off street parking
facilities shall have vehicular access from a street, alley, driveway or cross
access connection, consisting of all weather, hard surfaced pavement. Access to
a public street shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in width.
   (E)   Drainage: Adequate drainage shall be provided. Surface drainage across
a public sidewalk is not permitted where village storm sewers are available.
Adequate maintenance of surface and drainage is the responsibility of the
owner.
   (F)   Screening: All open parking areas containing more than three (3)
parking spaces shall be screened in accordance with chapter 13, "Landscaping
And Screening", of this title.
   (G)   Lighting: Parking lot lighting shall be in accordance with subsection
11-11-2(D), "Exterior Lighting", of this title. All parking lot lighting shall
be shielded and directed downward at all times so as not to project or reflect
rays of light onto adjacent properties and so as not to create a traffic hazard
on adjacent streets.
   (H)   Slope: Except for parking spaces accessory to a single-family detached
dwelling, no area of any parking facility shall have a slope of more than five
percent (5%). No access ramp shall have a slope of more than eight percent
(8%).
   (I)   Maintenance: Except in the manufacturing district, no cleaning or
maintenance of parking lots utilizing motorized equipment may be performed
between eleven thirty o'clock (11:30) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. each
day, except for the removal of snow. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-4: LOCATION OF SPACES:
   (A)   Yards: Off street parking spaces may be provided in surface lots,
below grade, beneath a building and, in those zoning districts where
specifically allowed, in parking structures. Parking is permitted in required
and nonrequired yards, provided the required screening and landscaping is
provided. No parking is allowed in the front yard of any use in the B-
2 district.
   (B)   Off Site Spaces: Parking spaces required for single-family or two-
family dwelling units shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served.
Parking spaces required for all other uses shall be located on the same lot as
the use served. In cases where parking facilities are permitted on land other
than the zoning lot on which the use is located, the applicant shall be
required to provide written documentation in the form of a letter of agreement
from the property owner that controls the land where parking is proposed to be
used. The letter shall, to the satisfaction of the superintendent of buildings,
ensure that the parking will serve the proposed use. Parking may be provided on
land other than the lot on which the use is located. Such facilities shall be
located within three hundred feet (300') of the closest property line for the
use(s) served.
   (C)   On Street Parking: In the B-2 district, on street parking spaces
located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of the front or side property line
of the site may be counted toward the required off street parking spaces.
   (D)   Parking Garages Or Structures: Parking garages or structures that
enclose all parking spaces may occupy eighty percent (80%) of the entire lot
area of a site to provide area for landscaping the frontage and corner side
frontage. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-5: SHARED PARKING:
   (A)   Standards: Off street parking and loading facilities for separate uses
may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements of each such use, and if all
regulations governing the location of accessory parking spaces in relation to
the use served are observed. However, no parking or loading space, or portion
thereof, shall serve as the required space for more than one use, unless
otherwise authorized in accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Procedures:
      1.   The zoning board of appeals may authorize a reduction in the total
number of required parking or loading spaces for two (2) or more uses jointly
providing off street parking when their respective hours of operation do not
substantially overlap. The petitioner shall provide sufficient data to indicate
that there is not a substantial conflict in the principal hours of operation of
the uses.
      2.   The petitioner shall submit a legal agreement guaranteeing that the
parking spaces or loading spaces shall be maintained so long as the uses are in
existence unless the required parking is provided elsewhere in accordance with
this chapter. The instrument shall be approved by the village attorney and
shall be recorded with the county recorder of deeds. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-6: ACCESSIBLE PARKING:
   (A)   Required Spaces: In all off street parking facilities, except for
single-family detached or attached dwellings, parking spaces for disabled
persons shall be provided. The number of accessible parking spaces shall be
included in the total number of required parking spaces and shall be in
accordance with the applicable requirements of Illinois statutes and the
Illinois administrative code, as amended from time to time.
   (B)   Dimensions And Design: Such spaces shall comply with the design
standards presented in the state of Illinois accessibility standards, provided
that in no instance shall the width of any one space be less than sixteen feet
(16'). Such spaces shall be identified by a sign and by pavement markings
indicating parking for the disabled only. Such spaces shall be the spaces
closest to the entrance of the building or structure and shall be connected by
a paved surface designed to provide safe and easy access. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-7: PARKING FACILITIES FOR ALTERNATIVE MODES OF TRANSPORTATION:
It is the intent of the village to accommodate all modes of transportation,
including bicycles, motorcycles and scooters. Therefore, it is required that,
wherever possible, private property owners in B-1, B-2, B-3 and OS districts
provide facilities for these modes of transportation as part of the provision
for off street parking facilities. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-8: STACKING SPACES FOR DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITIES:
   (A)   Required Spaces: Every drive-through facility shall provide a minimum
of six (6) stacking spaces per facility, plus one space per waiting area
provided.
   (B)   Design And Layout: The stacking spaces shall be designed so as not to
interfere with the ingress and egress of the off street parking provided on the
site. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-9: OFF STREET LOADING; TABLE 12-1:
   (A)   Required Spaces:
      1.   Any building or structure, which is erected or substantially altered
after the effective date hereof, and requires the receipt or distribution of
materials or merchandise by trucks or other similar vehicles, shall provide no
less than the number of off street loading berths specified in this section in
table 12-1, with the exception of those businesses served by an alley.
      2.   Any loading operation shall not create traffic congestion or traffic
hazards on the public streets. Space allocated for an off street loading berth
shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off street parking
facilities. All required off street loading spaces shall be completed before
occupancy of the building or structure.
   (B)   Dimensions: A required off street loading berth shall be at least
twelve feet (12') in width by at least thirty feet (30') in length, exclusive
of aisle and maneuvering space, and shall have vertical clearance of at least
fourteen feet (14'). No curb cut across public property that serves an off
street loading space shall exceed thirty feet (30') in width.
   (C)   Surfacing And Screening: All open off street loading berths shall be
surfaced with bituminous asphalt, concrete or a like material. Screening of the
loading berths shall be provided in accordance with chapter 13, "Landscaping
And Screening", of this title. For newly constructed buildings, loading spaces
shall be screened from the public right of way wherever feasible.
   (D)   Access: Each required off street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements.
   (E)   Location:
      1.   Loading berths shall be located within the rear yard, or within the
confines of a building, whenever possible. All required loading spaces shall be
located on the same lot as the use to be served and no portion of any vehicle
shall, while occupying any loading space, project into a street or alley.
      2.   Uses which require off street loading facilities, but which are
located in buildings or structures of less floor area than is specified for
such use, shall be provided with receiving facilities, accessible by motor
vehicles, off any adjacent alley, service drive or open space on the same lot.
   (F)   Maneuvering Space: Every loading space shall be provided with
sufficient maneuvering space on the lot where it is located to allow vehicles
to access and exit the space without having to make a backing movement onto any
public street.
TABLE 12-1:   OFF STREET LOADING REQUIREMENTS
 
Commercial office or institutional uses:      
10,000 – 100,000 sq. ft. of floor area     1 loading space
Each additional 10,000 sq. ft. of floor area 1 loading space
Manufacturing:                                
5,000 – 20,000 sq. ft. of floor area       1 loading space
Each additional 20,000 sq. ft. of floor area 1 loading space
 
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-10: COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
The following restrictions shall apply to the parking or storage of commercial
vehicles on property zoned for residential use:
   (A)   Vehicles engaged in loading or unloading or vehicles in connection
with current work being done on the premises shall be permitted.
   (B)   No stored or parked commercial vehicle shall be occupied or used for
human habitation.
   (C)   Only standard sized passenger vehicles including, but not limited to,
automobiles, vans, sports utility vehicles (SUVs) and pickup trucks are
permitted to be stored or parked outdoors overnight on residentially zoned
property. This shall include such vehicles that are owned and used for
commercial purposes by the occupant of a dwelling or guest, provided that the
vehicle is stored or parked in the occupant's driveway or designated parking
area, and not on the front lawn. All other commercial vehicles including, but
not limited to, semitruck tractor units, with or without attached trailers,
commercial trailers, step vans, buses, limousines, tow trucks, construction
vehicles, farm implements or other large commercial or livery vehicles required
to register for a "D-plate" or other classification for commercial vehicles,
are not permitted to be stored or parked outside overnight on residentially
zoned property.
   (D)   No commercial vehicle shall be parked for more than one hour on any
public right of way in a residential district, except for vehicles making a
delivery or pick up or providing services to the adjacent premises. (Ord. 1650,
10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-11: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
For the purposes of this section, recreational vehicles shall include all
trailers, campers, motor homes, boats, pop up campers and trailers that
transport snowmobiles, wave runners, ATVs, etc.
   (A)   No recreational vehicle or trailer licensed to transport recreational
vehicles or equipment shall be parked in the public right of way in a
residential district.
   (B)   No recreational vehicle shall be parked on private property in such a
manner as to impair the safety of pedestrians or vehicular traffic, including
the safe entrance and exit of any vehicle from and upon adjacent properties.
   (C)   Parking and/or storage of recreational vehicles is permitted, if the
vehicle is properly covered and located behind the front or corner side
building line. Parking and/or storage will be permitted only on a pad
constructed of a proper base as approved by the superintendent of buildings.
Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored a minimum of five feet (5')
from the rear lot lines and three feet (3') from any interior side lot line.
   (D)   No recreational vehicle shall be used for living, sleeping or
housekeeping purposes in any zoning district.
   (E)   No recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored on a zoning lot in
a business district or the office/light industrial district, except when
located in a garage or fully enclosed structure, or if properly covered and
located in the rear yard, unless the item is displayed for sale on a lot
licensed to sell said item. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-12-12: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS; TABLE 12-2:
   (A)   The parking and loading requirements applicable in each district are
set forth in table 12-2, as follows:
TABLE 12-2:   PARKING REQUIREMENTS
Use Minimum Parking Requirements
Use                                     Minimum Parking Requirements
Residential:                             
Multi-family:                            
Efficiency and 1 bedroom unit           1.5 spaces per dwelling unit
2 bedroom unit                          2 spaces per dwelling unit
3 or more bedroom unit                  21/2 spaces per dwelling unit
Single-family dwelling                  1 space per dwelling unit
Townhouse dwelling                      2 spaces per dwelling unit
Two-family dwelling                     2 spaces per dwelling unit
Institutional:                           
Assisted living facility                1 space per 4 beds plus 1 space per 2
                                        employees (on maximum working shift)
Colleges and universities               1 per employee plus 1 per 3 students
Daycare center                          1 per 3 children on site during period
                                        of heaviest use
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Hospital                                working shift) plus 1 space per staff
                                        doctor
Library                                 11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
                                        working shift)
Place of worship                        1 space per 6 seats
School auditorium                       1 space per 6 seats
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
School, primary or secondary            working shift)
                                        Secondary schools: plus 1 space per 10
                                        students
Cultural entertainment:                  
Clubs/lodges                            Number of spaces = 25 percent of
                                        capacity
Community center                        Number of spaces = 25 percent of
                                        capacity
Community recreational building         Number of spaces = 25 percent of
                                        capacity
Cultural facilities                     Number of spaces = 25 percent of
                                        capacity
Exhibition hall                         Number of spaces = 25 percent of
                                        capacity
Theater                                 1 space per 6 seats
Commercial:                              
                                        1 per 300 square feet plus stacking
Bank                                    spaces in accordance with section 11-
                                        12-8 of this chapter
Bed and breakfast establishment         1 per guestroom
Billiard parlor                         2 per table
Bowling alley                           5 spaces per alley plus 1 space per 2
                                        employees (on maximum working shift)
Funeral parlor                          1 space per 6 seats
Hotel/motel                             1 space per 3 rooms plus 1 space per 2
                                        employees (on maximum working shift)
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Indoor amusement (excluding those uses  working shift) plus 1 space per 200
listed herein specifically)             square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Indoor recreation (excluding those uses working shift) plus 1 space per 200
listed herein specifically)             square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
Medical/dental clinic                   3 spaces per staff doctor
Miniwarehouse                           1 per 1,000 square feet
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Motor vehicle sales                     working shift) plus 1 space per 200
                                        square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Motor vehicle service and repair, major working shift) plus 1 space per 200
and minor                               square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Office                                  working shift) plus 1 space per 200
                                        square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
Outdoor amusement                       Number of spaces = 50 percent of
                                        capacity
Outdoor recreation                      Number of spaces = 50 percent of
                                        capacity
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Personal service establishment, tattoo  working shift) plus 1 space per 200
parlor, currency exchange               square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
                                        Number of spaces = 25 percent of
Restaurants                             capacity plus stacking spaces in
                                        accordance with section 11-12-8 of this
                                        chapter
                                        11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
Retail goods establishment              working shift) plus 1 space per 200
                                        square feet of floor area in excess of
                                        1,000 square feet
Tavern, bar, cocktail lounge            Number of spaces = 25 percent of
                                        capacity
Industrial:                              
Industrial/research and development     11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
                                        working shift)
Public utility                          1 per employee plus any additional
                                        spaces required by the zoning board
Warehouse/distribution                  11/2 spaces per 2 employees (on maximum
                                        working shift)
 
   (B)   Due to the pedestrian orientation of the village center, the village
board shall have the ability to approve a reduced number of parking spaces in
the B-2 district. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 13
LANDSCAPING AND SCREENING
SECTION:
11-13-1: Purpose
11-13-2: Landscape Plan
11-13-3: Selection, Installation And Maintenance Of Plant Materials
11-13-4: Design Criteria
11-13-5: Minimum Landscaping Of Yards
11-13-6: Parkway Landscaping
11-13-7: Parking Lot Landscaping
11-13-8: Landscape Buffers Between Uses
11-13-9: Screening Of Refuse Disposal Dumpsters
11-13-10: Screening Of Loading Berths
11-13-11: Screening Of Manufacturing Activities And Outdoor Storage
11-13-12: Changes To Approved Landscape Plans
11-13-1: PURPOSE:
The landscaping and screening requirements established herein are intended to
preserve and enhance the appearance, public health, safety, comfort,
convenience and general welfare of the village by fostering an aesthetically
pleasing development. The regulations are intended to increase the
compatibility of adjacent uses, and minimize the adverse impact of noise, dust,
motor vehicle headlight glare or other artificial light intrusions, and other
objectionable activities or impacts conducted on, or created by, adjoining or
neighboring uses. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-2: LANDSCAPE PLAN:
   (A)   Landscape Plan Required: A detailed landscape plan shall be submitted
to the village and approved prior to the issuance of building permits.
   (B)   Content Of Landscape Plan:
      1.   The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures,
property lines, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights of way,
sidewalks, ground signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas, sidewalks,
bicycle paths and parking facilities, fences, electrical equipment,
recreational facilities, drainage facilities, and other freestanding
structures, as determined necessary by the superintendent of buildings.
      2.   The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of
all existing plant materials, including trees and other material in the right
of way, and indicating plant material to be retained and removed.
      3.   The location, quantity, size and name, both botanical and common, of
all proposed plant material including, but not limited to, shade trees, shrubs,
ground cover, annuals/perennials and turf.
      4.   The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at
two foot (2') intervals. Proposed berming shall be indicated using one foot
(1') contour intervals.
      5.   Elevations of all fences and retaining walls proposed for location
on the site.
      6.   Elevations, cross sections and other details, as determined
necessary by the superintendent of buildings. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-
15-2007)
11-13-3: SELECTION, INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PLANT MATERIALS:
   (A)   Selection: All planting materials used shall be of good quality and of
a species capable to withstand the climate extremes of northeastern Illinois,
as well as the individual site microclimates. Size and density of plant
material, both at the time of planting and at maturity, are additional criteria
that shall be considered when selecting plant material. The use of drought
tolerant and salt tolerant plant material is preferred.
   (B)   Installation: All plant materials shall be free of disease and shall
be installed in a fashion that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and
water to sustain healthy growth. For new construction in residential districts,
front and corner side yard lawn areas shall be planted with sod and interior
side and rear yards may be seeded prior to issuance of a certificate of
occupancy.
   (C)   Maintenance:
      1.   All landscaping materials shall be maintained in good condition to
present a healthy, neat and orderly appearance. Landscaped areas shall be kept
free of refuse and debris. Plant material not in this condition shall be
replaced when necessary. Fences and barriers shall be maintained in good
repair. The owner of the premises shall be responsible for the maintenance,
repair and replacement of all landscape materials, fences, barriers and refuse
disposal areas. Irrigation systems, if needed, shall be maintained in good
operating condition to promote the health of the plant material and the
conservation of water.
      2.   The owner of the premises and any leasee shall be jointly and
severally responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all
landscape materials, fences and barriers. Irrigations, where required, shall be
maintained in good operating condition to promote the health of the plant
material. Violation of this chapter shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of section 11-2-21, "Enforcement And Penalties", of this title.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-4: DESIGN CRITERIA:
Landscape plans described above shall be prepared, evaluated and approved based
on the following design criteria:
   (A)   Scale And Nature Of Landscaping Material: The scale and nature of
landscaping materials shall be appropriate to the size of the structures. Large
scale buildings, for example, should generally be complemented by large scale
plants.
   (B)   Selection Of Plant Material: Plant material shall be selected for its
form, texture, color, pattern of growth and suitability to local conditions.
   (C)   Shade Trees: All shade trees shall have a minimum trunk size of two
and one-half inches (21/2") in caliper, unless otherwise specified.
   (D)   Evergreen Trees: Evergreens trees shall have a minimum height of six
feet (6') when year round screening and buffering is required.
   (E)   Shrubs: All deciduous and evergreen shrubs shall have minimum height
of twenty four inches (24") at planting, unless otherwise specified.
   (F)   Softening Of Walls And Fences: Plant material should be placed
intermittently against long expanses of building walls, fences and other
barriers to create a softening effect.
   (G)   Planting Beds: Planting beds should be mulched with bark chips,
feather rocks or similar materials. Mulch or lava stones used in landscaping
shall be subordinate to and not a substitute for plant material. When used, the
material must be compatible and appropriate.
   (H)   Detention/Retention Basins And Ponds: Detention/retention basins and
ponds shall be landscaped. Such landscaping should include shade and ornamental
trees, evergreens, shrubbery, hedges, turf, ground cover and/or other plant
materials. Where appropriate, wetland plants may be utilized for these areas.
   (I)   Irrigation: Landscape design pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter must recognize the need for irrigation and water conservation.
Sprinkler irrigation systems may be required for certain landscape areas,
however, all irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use of water.
   (J)   Domestic Turf Grasses: Domestic turf grasses should be used in areas
with little or no slope to prevent the runoff of irrigation water.
   (K)   Energy Conservation: Plant material placement should be designed to
reduce the energy consumption needs of the development.
      1.   Deciduous trees should be placed on the south and west sides of
buildings to provide shade from the summer sun.
      2.   Evergreens and other plant materials should be concentrated on the
north and west sides of buildings to dissipate the effect of winter winds.
   (L)   Preservation Of Existing Plant Material: Existing plant material
should be incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site. Effort should be
made to preserve and protect existing trees with trunk diameters in excess of
twelve inches (12"). Construction equipment and personnel should be kept away
from such trees and their root systems by the installation of fencing at the
drip line of trees.
   (M)   Berming: Earthen berms and existing topographic features should be
incorporated into the landscape treatment of a site where there is sufficient
space and particularly when combined with plant material to facilitate
screening. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-5: MINIMUM LANDSCAPING OF YARDS:
   (A)   Turf Required: All yards within the village shall be landscaped
primarily with turf or other acceptable plant materials. Paving of yards is
prohibited unless approved by the superintendent of buildings.
   (B)   Required Trees: Shade trees (a minimum trunk size of 21/2 inches in
caliper) shall be provided for all yards on multiple- family residential and
nonresidential lots at a rate of one tree for every two thousand five hundred
(2,500) square feet of yard. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-6: PARKWAY LANDSCAPING:
The following requirements shall apply to the ground areas within the public
right of way that are not covered by pavement or sidewalks. All parkways shall
be landscaped in conformance with the provisions of this title and with the
approval of the superintendent of public works. This shall involve improving
the ground surface of the parkway with turf or other plant material, including
parkway trees, shrubs or hard surface treatments where permitted.
   (A)   Parkway Trees:
      1.   Quantity And Spacing: Parkway trees shall be provided at the
equivalent of one tree for every forty (40) linear feet in the right of way
adjacent to the parcel. Where appropriate, parkway trees may be clustered or
spaced linearly in the right of way as determined by the superintendent of
public works.
      2.   Species: A variety of compatible species should be included in the
planting plan for a specific site or development. The selecting of tree species
shall be reviewed and approved by the superintendent of public works with
particular regard for site appropriate species.
   (B)   Other Landscape Materials: No plant material or barrier, except as
specified herein, may be located in a dedicated public right of way, without
the approval of the superintendent of public works. The remainder of the ground
surface area within the parkway shall be planted with turf, with the exception
that driveways and walkways may be permitted in all parkways. Materials
prohibited in parkways, unless approved by the superintendent of public works,
include brick pavers, gravel, asphalt, ground cover and shrubs exceeding
eighteen inches (18") in height at maturity, and concrete, except in
conjunction with driveways and walkways. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-
2007)
11-13-7: PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING:
All parking lots designed for ten (10) or more parking spaces shall provide
landscaping in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Parking lots
designed for three (3) to nine (9) cars shall only be subject to the parking
lot screening requirements from adjacent residential properties. Motor vehicle
sales and leasing establishments with outdoor display are not subject to these
requirements.
For existing parking lots that currently do not contain the required parking
lot landscaping, the required landscaping shall be provided when the parking
lot is expanded or when a building addition or exterior remodeling of a
building is proposed, unless waived by the zoning board of appeals. Resealing
of and repairs to an existing parking lot that do not entail paving or
resurfacing by replacement of the asphalt or concrete shall not be subject to
this requirement.
   (A)   Interior Parking Lot Landscaping:
      1.   Parking Lot Island Required: In rows of parking spaces, one parking
lot island shall be provided for every eight (8) parking spaces. Double rows of
parking shall provide islands that extend the entire width of the double row.
      2.   Landscaped Areas: The landscaped areas defined above shall be
improved as follows:
         (a)   Location: Interior parking lot landscaped areas (planting
islands at least 6 inches above the surface of the parking lot and protected
with concrete curbing) shall be dispersed throughout the parking lot in a
design and configuration that aesthetically corresponds to the size and shape
of the parking lot. Generally, islands should be located at the ends of rows
and evenly dispersed in the interior of rows of parking.
         (b)   Size: Interior parking lot landscaped areas shall be a minimum
of one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area and shall be a minimum of eight
feet (8') in width, as measured from back of curb to back of curb.
         (c)   Type Of Landscape Material: The primary plant materials used in
parking lots shall be a tree species approved by the superintendent of public
works. Shrubbery, hedges and other plant materials may be used to supplement
the tree plantings, but shall not be the sole contribution to such landscaping.
         (d)   Quantity Of Landscape Material: A minimum of one shade tree
shall be provided for every one hundred twenty (120) square feet of interior
parking lot landscaped area.
         (e)   Ground Cover: A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of every parking
lot island shall be planted with an approved ground cover in the appropriate
density to achieve complete cover within two (2) years.
   (B)   Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping: Perimeter parking lot landscaping
is to provide for the enhancement and screening of parking lots by requiring a
uniform scheme of landscaping along public streets and between uses.
      1.   Applicability: Perimeter landscaping is required for parking lots
with ten (10) or more spaces, and shall be established along the corresponding
edge of the parking lot in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
      2.   Landscape Area: Where perimeter landscaping is required, it shall be
at least ten feet (10') in width, as measured from the back of curb, and
excluding any parking space overhang area.
      3.   Required Improvements: The following landscape improvements shall be
provided within the perimeter landscape area:
         (a)   Trees: One tree for every forty feet (40') of yard length. Trees
may be clustered based on specific site requirements.
         (b)   Shrubs: One shrub, measuring a minimum of twenty four inches
(24") in height at planting and not to exceed four feet (4') in height at
maturity, for every three feet (3') of yard length, clustered or spaced
linearly as approved by the village. The landscape treatment shall run the full
length of the yard when abutting a residential use or the public right of way,
and fifty percent (50%) of the yard when abutting a nonresidential use. The
number of shrubs may be reduced or combined with a berm or low pedestrian wall,
the height of which provides effective screening to a maximum height of four
feet (4').
         (c)   Ground Cover: Landscaped areas outside of shrub and tree masses
shall be planted in turf or other live ground cover.
      4.   Site Size: Where site size is a constraint, the superintendent of
public works may approve alternate location for plantings and/or waive
requirements. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-8: LANDSCAPE BUFFERS BETWEEN USES:
The regulations of this section shall establish the dimensions and improvement
requirements of landscape buffers as required for transitions between uses.
Landscape buffers shall be reserved for the planting of material and
installation of fencing, as required within this section. No parking,
driveways, sidewalks, accessory buildings or other impervious surfaces shall be
permitted within the buffer area. Landscape buffers may be located within
required yards. Where both landscape buffers and parking lot landscaping is
required, the more restrictive shall apply. The village shall have the
discretion to require additional landscape material, where necessary, to
minimize adverse impacts to adjacent property and maximize screening.
In some instances, a buffer may not be required. These include, but are not
limited to, instances where: a) the rear wall of a commercial building is
located on the rear property line; b) where an alley is located between a
commercial property that abuts a residential property; or c) where a
residential property abuts a residential property and the buffer requirements,
as written, would mandate two (2) fences. Where it proves excessively difficult
to meet the landscape buffer requirements of this section and this title, the
site plan review committee may approve alternative approaches, but may not
waive requirements. A complete waiver of buffer requirements is subject to the
discretion of the village board upon recommendation of the zoning board of
appeals.
The minimum size and improvement of landscape buffers for various situations
shall be as follows:
   (A)   R-3, R-4, R-5 And B-1 District: Where an R-3, R-4, R-5 or B-1 district
abuts an R-1 or R-2 district, a landscape buffer a minimum of five feet (5') in
width, a solid opaque masonry fence or wall six feet (6') in height, a berm
and/or combination thereof shall be provided unless an alley separates the
districts. Within the required landscape buffer, the following improvements
shall be provided:
      1.   Shade trees, a minimum of two and one-half inches (21/2") in
caliper, shall be planted on an average of one tree for every thirty feet (30')
of the yard length.
      2.   A solid opaque masonry fence or wall six feet (6') in height shall
be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length.
      3.   Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as turf or other
ground cover. If required by the village, this buffer shall be supplemented
with shrubs.
   (B)   B-2, B-3, Or O/I District: Where a lot in the B-2, B-3 or O/I district
directly abuts any residential district, except in areas where the districts
are separated by an alley, a row of parking with a landscape buffer a minimum
of eight feet (8') in width shall be provided. The exception is that in the B-
2 district, the buffer requirement may be reduced when the site lacks
sufficient space to provide the full buffer, as determined by the site plan
review committee if a permitted use, and village board if a special use or
planned unit development. Within the required landscape buffer, one, or a
combination of the following improvements shall be provided:
      1.   A mix of shade trees, a minimum of two and one-half inches (21/2")
in caliper, and evergreen trees, a minimum of eight feet (8') in height, shall
be planted on an average of one (1) tree for every twenty feet (20') of the
yard length.
      2.   A solid opaque masonry fence or wall six feet (6') to eight feet
(8') in height shall be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard
length. A berm, planted with the above required plant material may be
substituted for the screen fence or wall, where approved by the village.
      3.   Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as turf or other
ground cover. If required by the village, this buffer shall be supplemented
with shrubs.
   (C)   Nonresidential Uses In Residence Districts: Where a nonresidential use
within a residential district directly abuts a residential property, a
landscaped yard a minimum of five feet (5') in width shall be provided. The
buffer and/or screening requirement may also be waived where the zoning board
of appeals determines that screening along a property line that abuts an alley
may create a hazardous condition or poor visibility. Within the landscape
buffer required, the following improvements shall be provided:
      1.   Shade trees, a minimum of two and one-half inches (21/2") in
caliper, shall be planted on an average of one tree for every thirty feet (30')
of the yard length.
      2.   A solid opaque screen fence or wall six feet (6') to eight feet (8')
in height shall be erected along one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length.
      3.   Areas not planted with trees shall be maintained as turf or other
ground cover. If required by the village, this buffer shall be supplemented
with shrubs. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-9: SCREENING OF REFUSE DISPOSAL DUMPSTERS:
Refuse disposal dumpsters in all zoning districts shall not be visible from
roadway rights of way. If visible from roadway rights of way, such dumpsters
shall be screened on three (3) sides by a solid wood fence or masonry wall to a
height of not less than six feet (6') but no more than eight feet (8'). Slatted
chainlink fences are prohibited. Where required, the dumpster enclosure shall
be gated, and situated on a concrete apron that extends a minimum of six feet
(6') beyond the opening of the enclosure so as to support the weight of the
waste disposal vehicle during unloading. Refuse shall not be permitted to
accumulate such that it is visible above the height of the enclosure. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-10: SCREENING OF LOADING BERTHS:
Loading berths in all zoning districts shall be screened as much as possible
while still allowing access to the use it is serving, unless such screening is
determined unnecessary by the site plan review committee for a permitted use,
or village board for a special use or planned unit development. Such screening
shall consist of a solid wood fence or masonry screen wall to a height of not
less than six feet (6') or a continuous evergreen or dense deciduous shrub
hedge, or a combination of the two (2). Slatted chainlink fences are
prohibited. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-11: SCREENING OF MANUFACTURING ACTIVITIES AND OUTDOOR STORAGE:
   (A)   All business, operations or processing, except for off street parking
and off street loading, shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. All storage within twenty five feet (25') of a residential district
boundary, except of motor vehicles in operable condition, shall be within
completely enclosed buildings.
   (B)   All outdoor storage areas adjacent to a residential or business
district shall be screened therefrom by a wall, fence or continuous evergreen
or dense deciduous shrub hedge a minimum of six feet (6') in height. In
addition, outdoor storage areas shall be screened by a wall, fence or dense
hedge six feet (6') in height from the public right of way. Slatted chainlink
fences are prohibited. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-13-12: CHANGES TO APPROVED LANDSCAPE PLANS:
Any change to an approved landscape plan shall only be authorized by the
superintendent of public works, provided the alternative plan meets the intent
of this title. Landscape improvements made to a lot that are not in conformance
with an approved landscape plan shall be a violation of this title. The
superintendent of public works shall recommend landscape plans that do not
fully comply with this chapter, only upon hardship shown by applicant, to the
village board, which must approve such landscape plan. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 14
SIGNS
SECTION:
11-14-1: Purpose
11-14-2: Prohibited Signs
11-14-3: Exempt Signs
11-14-4: General Sign Provisions
11-14-5: Illumination
11-14-6: Sign Area Computation
11-14-7: Construction And Design Standards
11-14-8: Litter Control
11-14-9: Maintenance
11-14-10: Landscape Requirements
11-14-11: Wind Pressure And Direct Load Requirements
11-14-12: Sign Standards By Sign Type
11-14-13: Regulation By District Classification
11-14-14: Nonconforming Signs
11-14-15: Sign Permit
11-14-16: Enforcement
11-14-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish a framework for a comprehensive
system of sign controls governing the display, design, construction,
installation and maintenance of signs that will:
   (A)   Balance the right of individuals to identify their businesses and
convey their messages, and the right of the public to be protected against the
unrestricted proliferation of signs.
   (B)   Protect the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general
welfare.
   (C)   Reduce traffic hazards.
   (D)   Enhance the attractiveness of the village.
   (E)   Protect property values.
   (F)   Promote economic development.
   (G)   Further the objectives of the comprehensive plan.
   (H)   Preserve the right of free speech exercised through the use of signs
containing noncommercial messages. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-2: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs:
   (A)   Signs Which Constitute A Traffic Hazard: No sign or other advertising
structure as regulated in this chapter shall:
      1.   Obstruct free and clear vision at any street, intersection, parking
lot entrance or exit, or driveway.
      2.   Interfere with, obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal or device because of its position, shape or
color.
      3.   Make use of the words "STOP", "LOOK", "DETOUR", "DANGER" or any
other word, phrase, symbol or character in a manner that misleads, interferes
with or confuses traffic.
   (B)   Signs In Violation Of Permit Requirements: No sign or other
advertising structure shall be erected or maintained in violation of the permit
requirements of section 11-2-13, "Sign Permits", of this title. (Ord. 1650, 10-
10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
   (C)   Billboards: Billboards that are erected after the effective date
hereof are in violation of the provisions of section 11-2-13, "Sign Permits",
of this title, unless such billboards are constructed and located within an O/
I office/limited industrial zoning district and within two hundred fifty feet
(250') from the right of way of an interstate highway or interstate tollway.
Any billboard lawfully existing prior to the effective date hereof, but which
could not be erected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
be subject to the provisions set forth in section 11-2-13, "Sign Permits", of
this title. (Ord. 1709, 11-10-2009)
   (D)   Pasted Signs: Any signs pasted on the exterior surface of a building
or structure are prohibited.
   (E)   Moving Parts: No sign or other advertising structure shall have
visible, moving, revolving or rotating parts or visible mechanical movement of
any kind, except for the movable hands of street clocks.
   (F)   Roof Signs: Roof signs, which have not been erected prior to the
effective date hereof, are prohibited. Subsequent to the effective date hereof,
no erection permits will be issued by the superintendent of buildings for roof
signs. When nonconforming roof signs are removed, the bracket and supporting
structure shall also be removed.
   (G)   Illegally Affixed Signs: Any sign which is painted, pasted or
otherwise affixed to any tree, rock, utility pole, hydrant, bridge, sidewalk,
curb or street, bench or trash receptacle is prohibited.
   (H)   Searchlights: Searchlights without a permit and special approval by
the superintendent of buildings are prohibited.
   (I)   Beacons And Strobes: Beacons or strobe lights are prohibited.
   (J)   Signs On Public Property: Signs on public property without prior
approval of the village board are prohibited.
   (K)   Signs Attached To Trailers: No sign or other advertising structure
shall be painted or attached to a vehicle or trailer being used primarily for
the display of such sign. This shall not prohibit the identification of a
business, or its products or services, on its vehicle(s) operated and/or parked
in a manner appropriate to the normal course of business.
   (L)   Signs Of An Offensive Nature: No sign or advertising device shall
display or depict in any manner (graphically, in words, photographically, and/
or visually), the following as those terms are defined in chapter 10 of this
title: "specified criminal acts", "specified sexual activities", "seminude",
"nudity", or "state of nudity" and/or "specified anatomical areas".
   (M)   A-Frame Signs: A-frame signs, which are used to identify a business,
are prohibited. A-frame signs may be used as temporary signs, which are exempt
from permit under this chapter.
   (N)   Signs In Residential Districts: Any advertising sign or displays
within a residential district classified as single- family residential, R-1 or
R-2, as defined in this title.
   (O)   Window Signs: Window signs that exceed fifty percent (50%) of the
window surface area of each windowpane are prohibited.
   (P)   Banners: Banners used to identify a business are prohibited. Banners
that do not identify the business may be used as temporary signs, which are
exempt from the sign permit requirements of section 11-2-13, "Sign Permits", of
this title, provided such banners do not extend over public property. "Grand
opening" banners with the business name are permitted and are exempt from sign
permit requirements, but are limited to display for thirty (30) days.
   (Q)   Flashing Signs: No sign or other advertising structure shall have
lights or illuminations that flash, move, rotate, scintillate, blink, flicker,
vary in intensity or color, or use intermittent electrical pulsations except
time-temperature-date signs and electronic message boards.
   (R)   Electrical Mobile Signs: Electrical mobile signs are prohibited.
   (S)   Inadequately Maintained Signs: No sign or other advertising structure
shall be inadequately maintained so as to show evidence of deterioration,
including peeling, rust, dirt, fading, discoloration or holes.
   (T)   Unsafe Signs: No sign or other advertising structure shall constitute
a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate design, construction,
repair or maintenance.
   (U)   Obstruction Of Doors, Windows Or Fire Escapes: No sign or other
advertising structure shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to
prevent free ingress to and egress from any door, window or fire escape. No
sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape.
   (V)   Illuminated Signs: No sign or other advertising structure shall be
illuminated with lights which glare into or upon the surrounding area or any
residential premises, or distract operators of vehicles or pedestrians in the
public right of way.
   (W)   Signs On Parked Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle
anywhere in the village with a "for sale" or similar sign displayed on it,
unless the vehicle is parked on lots where businesses have been licensed to
sell new or used cars. In addition, signs placed on parked vehicles or trailers
where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product or service, or to direct
the public to a business or activity located on or off the premises, are
prohibited.
   (X)   Temporary Directional Signs And Garage Sale Signs: Temporary
directional signs and garage sale signs which are maintained in violation of
section 11-14-3, "Exempt Signs", of this chapter, are prohibited. If such a
sign is maintained in violation of this title, the person or entity erecting
the sign shall be subject to a fine. If the person erecting the sign cannot be
determined, the person holding the garage sale or event shall be held
responsible.
   (Y)   Political Signs: It shall be unlawful to erect any political sign in
violation of section 11-14-3, "Exempt Signs", of this chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-
10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-3: EXEMPT SIGNS:
The following signs and operations are exempt from the permit requirements of
this title. If the limitations set forth in this section are violated, the
penalty provisions of this title shall apply.
   (A)   Exempt Permanent Signs:
      1.   Changeable Copy: Changing of the advertising copy or message on an
existing changeable copy sign or similar approved sign whether illuminated or
nonilluminated.
      2.   Maintenance: Painting, repainting, cleaning or other normal
maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving structural changes or changes
in the electrical components of the sign.
      3.   Window Signs: Window signs attached to the inside of a window not
exceeding fifty percent (50%) of the window surface area of each windowpane.
Illuminated window signs which require electrical permits are not considered
exempt from permit requirements.
      4.   Historic District Or Landmark Signs: Signs that are an integral part
of the historic nature of a landmark building or historic district.
      5.   Municipal Directional Signs: Municipal signs regulating vehicular or
pedestrian traffic or designating or giving direction to streets, schools,
historic sites or public buildings.
      6.   Flags: Flags shall be allowed in the B-1, B-2, B-3, and O/
I districts as long as such flags are otherwise in compliance with this code
and do not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area. Flags shall be
allowed in residential districts as long as such flags are otherwise in
compliance with this code and do not exceed forty (40) square feet in area.
      7.   Commercial Building Occupants: Commercial building occupational
signs identifying the name and profession of the occupant(s) and not exceeding
two (2) square feet in area.
      8.   Plaques: Memorial or commemorative plaques or tablets denoting a
building name and/or date of erection or a location of historic significance,
and not exceeding four (4) square feet in area.
      9.   Address Signs: Property identification signs indicating address and/
or name and not exceeding two (2) square feet in area for residential use and
six (6) square feet in area for nonresidential land uses.
      10.   Bulletin Boards: Bulletin boards not over sixteen (16) square feet
in area for public or religious institutions when same are located on premises
of said institution.
      11.   Subdivision And Planned Unit Development Signs: Permanent
residential development signs at major entrances designed to identify a
residential subdivision or planned unit development, containing no commercial
advertising, constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent
nature than the material used in the development, not to exceed fifteen (15)
square feet.
      12.   Multi-Family Residence: Multi-family residences and residential
projects of all types may display identification signs indicating nothing other
than the name and/or address of the premises and/or the name and/or address
and/or telephone number of the management company or agent. Such signs shall
not exceed nine (9) square feet in area. Only one sign per street frontage
shall be permitted.
      13.   Public Recreation And Community Facility: Each public recreation or
community facility shall be permitted one identification sign not to exceed
sixty four (64) square feet in area to each sign face. Illuminated signs in
this category shall be subject to a no fee permit requirement.
   (B)   Exempt Temporary Signs:
      1.   Real Estate Signs: Real estate signs shall not exceed eight (8)
square feet in display surface area in residential districts and sixteen (16)
square feet in display surface area in all other districts, and shall not
violate this chapter. Such signs shall be removed from the subject property no
later than seven (7) days after the sale or rental of said property. No more
than one real estate sign allowed per tenant space. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
      2.   Political Signs: Political signs, provided:
         (a)   Signs shall be no more than eight (8) square feet in area on
each side.
         (b)   Signs shall not be posted on any public property.
         (c)   Signs are to be posted on private property only and only with
the permission of the property owner. (Ord. 1736, 9-22-2010)
      3.   Directional Signs: Temporary directional signs which advertise the
date, time, and location of a licensed or permitted garage sale or an event
which is held in a public building, park or educational institution. Such signs
shall be posted no earlier than twenty four (24) hours prior to and removed no
later than twenty four (24) hours after the conclusion of the event to which
the sign relates.
      4.   Charitable And Not For Profit Organization Signs: Temporary signs in
conjunction with special events conducted by charitable, not for profit
organizations of the village. Such signs shall not exceed thirty two (32)
square feet in area. They shall not be erected earlier than fourteen (14) days
in advance of the event and shall be removed within three (3) days after the
termination of the event. This time limitation may be extended by means of a
written appeal made to the village board thirty (30) days prior to the date of
erection of the sign.
      5.   Temporary Displays: Temporary displays or decorations customarily
associated with any national, state, local or religious holiday or celebration.
Such signs shall be erected no earlier than forty five (45) days before and
removed no later than fourteen (14) days after the termination of the event.
      6.   Hand Held Signs: Hand held signs of a noncommercial nature not set
in or affixed to the ground and not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area.
      7.   Construction Site Signs: Signs identifying the architect, engineer,
developer and/or contractor when placed upon a construction site which is not
located within a single-family residential area. Such signs shall not exceed
thirty two (32) square feet in area. Such signs shall not be erected prior to
approval of a site plan and shall be removed no later than seven (7) days after
issuance of an occupancy permit or completion of the project.
      8.   Temporary Special Occasion Signs: Temporary signs announcing special
occasions, including, but not limited to, the birth of a child, a birthday, and
holiday greetings; provided, however, that such signs do not exceed twenty four
(24) square feet in display surface area. The display of such signs shall be
limited to seven (7) days.
      9.   Banners: Banners which are made of cloth, or other material approved
by the superintendent of buildings, mounted in a manner that the vertical
dimension is greater than the horizontal dimension, secured to rigid frames at
both top and bottom and supported by a pole such as a light pole or similar
structure, are no longer than nine feet (9') long and twenty four inches (24")
wide, are designed to be viewed on both faces, whose purpose is decorative, and
may be displayed as a part of a series of banners of the same or similar
design. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-4: GENERAL SIGN PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Conflicting Provisions; Most Restrictive Governs: All signs erected in
the village shall be in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter. If any provision or requirement of this chapter is found to be in
conflict with any other provision or requirement of this chapter, or any other
applicable governmental law, ordinance, resolution, rule or other governmental
law of any kind, the regulation which establishes the more restrictive rule or
higher standard will govern.
   (B)   Interpretation: In their interpretation and application, the
provisions of this chapter shall be held to the minimum requirements necessary
for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, comfort, morals,
convenience and welfare.
   (C)   Placing Signs On Public Or Private Property:
      1.   Placing Signs On Public Property: No signs other than those placed
by agencies of government or those signs whose placement has been authorized by
the village board shall be erected on any public property. Any sign placed on
public property which is not in compliance with this section may be removed by
the village without notice.
Directional signs may be erected upon village street name signposts under the
following conditions:
         (a)   The sign directs the reader to a location within the village.
         (b)   The sign directs the reader to the location of a public
facility, or a facility operated by a nonprofit entity, or to a facility
relating to the public health, safety or welfare, or to scenic or historic
trails or districts, or to a garage sale, which has been properly authorized
and permitted.
         (c)   The signs are fabricated, erected, maintained and removed by the
entity requesting the erection of such signs.
         (d)   The signs are erected no sooner than twenty four (24) hours
prior to the beginning of the event to which they refer and are removed no
later than twenty four (24) hours after the conclusion of said event.
         (e)   The entire cost of the sign is borne by the entity requesting
the signs.
         (f)   The signs are installed at locations where they will not
constitute a traffic hazard.
         (g)   No more than four (4) directional signs permitted under this
section are erected for each entity. The limitation provided hereby shall not
apply to signs directing the reader to scenic or historic trails or districts.
         (h)   The signs shall have a display surface area of no more than two
(2) square feet.
      2.   Placing Signs On Private Property: No signs shall be placed on any
private property without prior consent of the owner thereof and proper village
permit, where appropriate.
   (D)   Sign Limitations: The gross number of square feet of display surface
area of any signs on a lot shall not exceed the linear street frontage of the
lot. Each side of a lot which abuts upon a street, or each side of a building
which abuts against a paved parking area, shall be considered as a separate
frontage. The gross surface area of all signs located on each side of a lot
shall not exceed the linear feet in the separate frontage.
   (E)   Protection Of First Amendment Rights: Any sign allowed under this
chapter may contain, in lieu of any other copy, a lawful noncommercial message
that does not direct attention to a business operated for a profit or to a
commodity or service for sale and that complies with all other requirements of
this chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-5: ILLUMINATION:
   (A)   Sign Illumination: The illumination of a sign permitted by this
chapter shall be from a steady, nonflashing source of light. Illuminated signs,
or the source of light for such signs, shall be designed, located, shielded and
directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent
publicly dedicated roadways and surrounding properties.
   (B)   Illumination Of Buildings, Structures, And Sales Lots:
      1.   The use of unshielded lighting, including incandescent light bulbs
hung or strung on poles, wires or any other type of support, to illuminate
buildings, structures, outdoor sales areas or outdoor storage areas is
prohibited except:
         (a)   During the holiday season.
         (b)   On a temporary basis for areas in which carnivals, fairs or
other similar activities are held.
         (c)   On a temporary basis as otherwise determined by the village.
      2.   A lot, building or other structure may be illuminated, but all light
sources used for this purpose must be designed, located, shielded and aimed in
such a manner that the light is directed onto the property for which the
illumination was intended and not onto adjacent or surrounding properties or
toward any roadway in such a manner that the glare may impede drivers'
visibility. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-6: SIGN AREA COMPUTATION:
The following principles shall control the computation of sign area:
   (A)   Computation Of Area Of Individual Signs: The area of a sign face shall
be computed by means of the smallest square, circle, rectangle or triangle, or
combination thereof, that will encompass the extreme limits of the writing,
representation, emblem or other display, together with any material or color
forming an integral part of the background or the display or used to
differentiate the sign from the backdrop or structure against which it is
placed, but not including any supporting framework or bracing, unless such
framework or bracing is made part of the message or face of the sign.
   (B)   Computation Of Area Of Multiple-Faced Signs: The sign area for a sign
with more than one face shall be computed by adding together the area of all
sign faces visible from any one point. When two (2) identical sign faces are
placed back to back, so that both faces cannot be viewed from any point at the
same time, and when such sign faces are part of the same sign structure and are
not more than forty two inches (42") apart, the sign area shall be computed by
the measurement of one of the faces.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2629.gif]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2631.gif]
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-7: CONSTRUCTION AND DESIGN STANDARDS:
All signs constructed, erected, modified or altered shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the village building code.
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-8: LITTER CONTROL:
All signs, and the premises surrounding the sign, shall be maintained in a
clean, sanitary and inoffensive condition, and free and clear of all noxious
substances, rubbish and weeds. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-9: MAINTENANCE:
   (A)   Identification And Marking: Every sign or other advertising structure
hereafter registered or permitted shall show in a conspicuous place thereon,
which is visible to the superintendent of buildings and is readable by the
superintendent of buildings from the ground, the following:
      1.   The permit number.
      2.   The date of installation.
      3.   The voltage of any electrical apparatus used in connection with the
sign.
   (B)   Sign And Premises Maintenance: All signs and the premises surrounding
the same shall be maintained by the owner thereof in a clean, sanitary and
inoffensive condition and free and clear of all noxious substances, rubbish and
weeds. If the superintendent of buildings shall find that any sign or other
advertising structure regulated herein is unsafe or insecure, abandoned or
maintained in a dilapidated condition or has been constructed, erected or is
being maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, written notice
shall be presented to the property owner instructing him to remove or alter the
sign or advertising structure so as to comply with the standards herein set
forth within a reasonable time set forth in such notice. Failure to comply with
this notice shall be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
   (C)   Removal Of Signs: Any sign erected, affixed, placed, pasted, painted,
depicted or otherwise displayed which exists in order to identify a commercial
business at the particular location where the sign is located, shall be taken
down and/or removed so that the commercial business is no longer identified by
the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the structure upon
which such sign may be found within thirty (30) days of the commercial business
identified within said sign no longer having a valid business license at the
location where the sign is located and/or when said commercial business has
moved, closed or otherwise failed to operate for a period of thirty (30)
consecutive days. Enforcement of this subsection shall take place in the same
manner as set forth in subsection 11-14-16(A) of this chapter. (Ord. 1906, 11-
11-2015)
11-14-10: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
Pole and monument signs shall be required to be maintained with landscaping at
the base of the sign. The landscaping provided shall consist of a square,
rectangle, oval or circle, the area of which shall be a minimum of three feet
(3') in width on each side of the sign base. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-
15-2007)
11-14-11: WIND PRESSURE AND DIRECT LOAD REQUIREMENTS:
All signs and sign structures shall be designed and constructed to withstand
wind pressures and dead loads as required by the village building code. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-12: SIGN STANDARDS BY SIGN TYPE:
   (A)   Freestanding Pole Sign:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to erect any freestanding pole sign whose total
height is greater than thirty feet (30') in the B-1, B-3 and O/I districts and
greater than ten feet (10') in height in the B-2 and residential districts
above the level of the street upon which the sign faces, or above the adjoining
ground level if such ground level is above street level. There shall be only
one freestanding pole sign per lot, except that on a corner lot two (2) signs,
one facing each street, shall be permitted. Traffic control signs at the
entrance and egress of a parking lot which are less than five feet (5') in
height and the primary function of which is to direct the movement of traffic
in an orderly fashion may be permitted by the superintendent of buildings in
addition to other freestanding pole signs on that lot. Freestanding pole signs
shall have a space of not less than nine feet (9') between the bottom of said
sign and ground level unless approved by the superintendent of buildings. This
open space may be filled in with a platform or decorative latticework which
does not close off more than one-half (1/2) of any square foot of such open
space.
      2.   The display surface and supporting structure of a freestanding pole
sign shall be constructed of wood, metal or other material approved by the
superintendent of buildings.
      3.   All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed
upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign
structure.
      4.   The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated may be
composed of glass or other transparent or semitransparent noncombustible
material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate
glass at least one-fourth inch (1/4") thick. In case any single piece or pane
of glass has an area exceeding three (3) square feet in area it must be
constructed of wire glass or safety glass.
      5.   Any poles or similar structures which are the primary support of a
freestanding pole sign shall be erected in such a manner that at least forty
two inches (42") of the length the poles are underground. This requirement may
be modified based upon the size of the sign, the height of the sign, at the
discretion of the superintendent of buildings. The superintendent of buildings
may require, in cases of signs over ten feet (10') in height, proper
documentation from a structural engineer or manufacturer that indicates proper
installation instructions for the sign as well as the sign's ability to
withstand wind pressures. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
      6.   Notwithstanding any provisions of this subsection (A), a billboard
allowed under subsection 11-14-2(C) of this chapter shall not exceed one
hundred ten feet (110') in height and shall not exceed one thousand four
hundred (1,400) square feet per face. (Ord. 1714, 12-23-2009)
   (B)   Freestanding Monument Sign:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to erect any freestanding monument sign whose
total height is greater than eight feet (8') in the B-1, B-2, B-3 and O/
I districts and greater than six feet (6') in height in the residential
districts above the level of the street upon which the sign faces, or above the
adjoining ground level if such ground level is above street level. There shall
be only one freestanding monument sign per lot.
      2.   The maximum gross sign area for a monument sign shall not exceed
fifty (50) square feet in the B-1, B-3 and O/I districts and thirty two (32)
square feet in the B-2 and residential districts.
      3.   All letters, figures, characters or representations in cutout or
irregular form, maintained in conjunction with, attached to or superimposed
upon any sign shall be safely and securely built or attached to the sign
structure.
      4.   The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated may be
composed of glass or other transparent or semitransparent noncombustible
material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate
glass at least one-fourth inch (1/4") thick. In case any single piece or pane
of glass has an area exceeding three (3) square feet in area it must be
constructed of wire glass or safety glass.
      5.   Freestanding monument signs shall be mounted on a concrete footing
that supports a masonry base or base made of material that matches the facade
of the buildings.
   (C)   Wall Sign:
      1.   Wall signs shall not extend beyond the ends and/or top of the
building. Any sign extending more than six inches (6") from the wall of a
building shall be located at a height of not less than nine feet (9') above
grade. No wall sign shall cover wholly or partially any wall opening, nor
project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. Any one
wall sign shall not exceed an area of five hundred (500) square feet or a
number calculated according to the formula of one square foot of signage per
one foot (1') of lot frontage of the lot on which it is erected, whichever is
smaller, as provided in section 11-14-6 of this chapter.
      2.   Wall signs shall be constructed of wood, metal or any material
approved by the superintendent of buildings. Wall signs may also be painted
onto the building facade in accordance with this chapter.
      3.   Wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building
wall by means of metal anchors, bolts, or expansion screws of not less than
three-eighths inch (3/8") diameter embedded into the wall at least five inches
(5"). However, such signs may rest in or be bolted to strong, heavy metal
brackets or saddles set not over six feet (6') apart, each of which shall be
securely fixed to the wall. No wall sign shall be secured with wire, strips of
wood or nails.
      4.   Wall signs that are painted onto the facade must be properly
maintained and are subject to the same size requirements as other wall signs.
   (D)   Projecting Sign:
      1.   Projecting signs shall be limited in area as follows:
         (a)   Horizontal projecting signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square
feet in display surface area on each side.
         (b)   Vertical projecting signs shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet in display surface area on each side.
The distance measured between the principal faces of any projecting sign (the
thickness of said sign) shall not exceed eighteen inches (18"). Every
projecting sign shall be placed at least nine feet (9') above the public
sidewalk over which it is erected, no more than two feet (2') from the face of
the building or other structure to which it is attached, measuring from the
point on the sign which is nearest the wall, and must be at least three feet
(3') inside the curb line.
      2.   Projecting signs, including frames, braces and supports, shall be
designed by a structural engineer or manufacturer, constructed of
noncombustible materials, illuminated and two (2) faced.
      3.   The lettering or advertising designs to be illuminated may be
composed of glass or other transparent or semitransparent noncombustible
material. Any glass forming a part of any sign shall be safety glass or plate
glass at least one-fourth inch (1/4") thick. In case any single piece or pane
of glass has an area exceeding three (3) square feet in area, it must be
constructed of wire glass or safety glass.
      4.   Any movable part of a projecting sign such as the cover of a service
opening shall be securely fastened by chains or hinges.
      5.   Projecting signs exceeding ten (10) square feet in area or fifty
(50) pounds in weight shall neither be attached to, nor supported by, frame
buildings nor the wooden framework of a building. Such signs shall be attached
to a masonry wall with galvanized expansion bolts at least three-eighths inch
(3/8") in diameter, shall be fixed in the wall by means of bolts extending
through the wall and shall contain properly sized metal washer or plat on the
inside of the wall. This provision may be waived in lieu of an alternate method
approved by the superintendent of buildings.
      6.   No projecting sign shall be secured with wire, strips of wood or
nails nor shall any projecting sign be hung or secured to any other sign.
      7.   No floodlights or spotlights shall be permitted on projecting signs.
      8.   V-shaped signs consisting of two (2) single face signs erected on a
roof or ceiling shall not be permitted.
   (E)   Marquee Sign:
      1.   Signs attached to or hung from a marquee shall be completely within
the borderline of the marquee outer edge and in no instance lower than nine
feet (9') above the sidewalk. No marquee shall be permitted to extend beyond a
point three feet (3') inside the curb line. No marquee shall be wider than the
entrance or entrances of a building, plus five feet (5') on each side. However,
where the entrances to a building are not more than twenty feet (20') apart, a
marquee may be made a continuous single structure between the entrances.
      2.   Marquees, including the anchors, bolts, supports, rods and braces,
shall be constructed of noncombustible materials and designed by the structural
engineer or manufacturer. The marquee shall be illuminated.
      3.   Marquee roofs shall be properly guttered and connected by downspouts
to a storm sewer so that rainwater will not drip or flow onto public property.
      4.   Marquee roofs shall be used for no other purposes than to form a
roof and at least twenty five percent (25%) of the area of the roof of every
marquee shall be of glass or other noncombustible transparent material.
      5.   Marquees shall be supported solely by the building to which they are
attached. No columns or posts shall be used as supports.
      6.   Marquee roofs, except the glass area required, shall be designed and
constructed to support a live load of not less than one hundred fifty (150)
pounds per square foot.
   (F)   Awnings And Canopies:
      1.   Advertising, including the name of the business, product or service
and/or logo, may occupy no more than twenty five percent (25%) of the surface
of any side of an awning or canopy. The address may be in addition to the
advertising copy and is excluded from the twenty five percent (25%). No portion
of an awning shall be less than nine feet (9') above the level of the public
sidewalk or thoroughfare over which it is erected. No portion of a canopy shall
be less than nine feet (9') above the level of the public sidewalk or
thoroughfare over which it is erected. No awning or canopy shall be permitted
to extend beyond a point three feet (3') inside the curb line.
      2.   Awnings and canopies may be constructed out of metal, cloth or other
material approved by the superintendent of buildings. However, all frames and
supports shall be made of metal. All awning signs in the R-5 village center
multi-family residential district and the B-2 village center district shall
contain advertising on only twenty five percent (25%) of the surface of any
side. If the address of the business cannot be mounted at a visible location on
the building, the address number may also be placed on the awning. However, all
frames and supports shall be made of metal or other similar nonrigid material.
Backlit, rigid canopies or awnings are prohibited in the B-2 district.
      3.   Awnings shall be securely attached to and supported by a building.
Posts or columns beyond the building shall not be permitted for awnings. No
awning shall be attached to the wood jambs, frames or other wooden members of a
building when such building is less than ten feet (10') from public property.
      4.   Canopy frameworks shall be designed by a structural engineer or
manufacturer and approved by the superintendent of buildings in compliance with
the building code.
   (G)   Advertising Benches:
      1.   No advertising bench shall be allowed upon public property. This
does not include any bus shelter approved by village officials.
      2.   Advertising benches are allowed if they are placed upon private
property zoned for business and if the bench advertises products or services of
the business located on said property. Said advertising benches are considered
signs and are subject to permit requirements, fees and other local ordinances.
      3.   If at any time an advertising bench is found located on any public
sidewalk, right of way, public way or public street within the village, the
village shall notify the owner and/or the advertiser, in writing, that said
advertising bench must be removed. In the event that said advertising bench is
not removed within seven (7) days of the date of the written notice, the
village may remove and store said advertising bench and the owner and/or the
advertiser thereof shall be responsible for the village's cost in removing and
storing said advertising bench.
      4.   In addition to the removal of any advertising benches in violation
of this subsection, any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall
be fined in accordance with section 1-4-1 of this code. This penalty shall be
applicable to both the owner of the bench and to the advertiser thereon.
   (H)   Nonelectrical Mobile Signs, Inflatable Advertising Devices And
Searchlights: Specific regulations for the use of nonelectrical mobile signs,
inflatable advertising devices and searchlights, hereinafter sometimes referred
to as "signs", shall include the following:
      1.   Number Of Days Allowed: No nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable
advertising device or searchlight shall be permitted to stand at any business
within the village for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days in
any year, nor more than a total of sixty (60) days in any year. No
nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable advertising device or searchlight permit
shall be issued for consecutive thirty (30) day periods without at least a
period of thirty (30) days intervening.
      2.   Placement: No nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable advertising
device or searchlight shall be permitted to stand upon any public right of way.
They shall be placed on private property only when a permit is issued.
      3.   Traffic, Line Of Sight Hazard: All nonelectrical mobile signs,
inflatable advertising devices or searchlights shall meet all village
requirements concerning traffic hazards and line of sight hazards.
      4.   Flashing, Blinking Lights: No nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable
advertising device or searchlight shall be permitted with lights that flash,
blink or vary in intensity.
      5.   Signs To Comply With Codes: All nonelectrical mobile signs,
inflatable advertising devices and searchlights shall comply with applicable
code provisions of the village including, but not limited to, the applicable
electrical code provisions.
      6.   Owner Identification: Each nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable
advertising device and searchlight shall have clearly and permanently stamped,
painted or affixed thereon, in a prominent and visible location, the name and
address of the owner.
      7.   Electrically Powered Devices: In cases of electrically powered
inflatable devices and searchlights, the following regulations shall also apply
thereto:
         (a)   The source of power shall be a weatherproof receptacle, equipped
with a ground fault interrupter (GFI) device.
         (b)   There shall not be any other connector of any kind between the
sign and the source of power.
         (c)   In no case shall the cord be in such a position that it will be
walked over by pedestrian traffic or be driven over by any form of wheeled
vehicle.
         (d)   No sign shall be operated with any power source unless the sign
has a Underwriters Laboratory (UL) label affixed thereto.
         (e)   Temporary electrical permits shall be required for all
electrically powered inflatable advertising devices or searchlights.
      8.   Sign And Area Maintenance: All signs shall be maintained in good
working order and in a structurally safe condition, and the immediate area
surrounding said sign shall be kept free from litter and debris.
      9.   Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to place a
nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable advertising device or searchlight within
the village without having first obtained a permit therefor from the
superintendent of buildings. The application for said permit shall be on a form
provided by the superintendent of buildings and contain such information as
required by the superintendent of buildings.
      10.   Permit Period: All permits for nonelectrical mobile signs,
inflatable advertising devices and searchlights shall be valid for a period not
to exceed thirty (30) days and shall set forth thereon the date of issuance and
the date of expiration.
      11.   Size: No nonelectrical mobile sign shall be allowed which is larger
than four feet by eight feet (4' x 8') on each sign face.
      12.   Construction; Placement: All nonelectrical mobile signs shall be
firmly and solidly constructed and must be firmly and securely set in place.
      13.   Penalty Provisions:
         (a)   Any person who places a nonelectrical mobile sign, inflatable
advertising device or searchlight upon property within the village without
first having obtained and kept in full effect a permit as required above, shall
be required to procure a permit for such sign and shall pay a fee therefor that
is equal to twice the fee which is otherwise charged hereunder.
         (b)   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this
subsection, in addition to the penalties provided herein, shall have his/her
permit revoked and no new permit shall be allowed to that person or on that
location for one year.
         (c)   When the person responsible for violating the provisions of this
subsection cannot reasonably be determined, then the person holding the permit
to place the sign at such location shall be the person who is in violation of
this subsection. In the event that at the time of the violation there exists no
valid permit for the particular sign in violation, then the owner of the sign,
or the owner of the property or business where the sign is located, shall be
the person who is in violation of this subsection. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-14-13: REGULATION BY DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION:
   (A)   Residential Districts: For all residential uses, only the following
signs are hereby permitted and then only if accessory and incidental to a
permitted or special use:
      1.   Unilluminated Nameplates: Unilluminated nameplates are permitted
subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   R-1 And R-2 Districts: A nameplate shall not exceed two (2)
square feet in area and shall indicate only the name or name and address of the
occupant. There shall be not more than one such nameplate for each dwelling,
provided that it is affixed to the dwelling flat against the door or on the
wall adjacent thereto, or may be located elsewhere on an accessory building or
structure or piece of land within the boundaries of the lot.
         (b)   R-3, R-4 And R-5 Districts: Only a nameplate as described above
for a single- or two-family dwelling shall be permitted. For a multi-family
dwelling, a nameplate may not exceed nine (9) square feet in area, provided it
indicates only the name or name and address of the building, but not located
higher than one story, or twenty feet (20') above curb level, whichever is
lower. Such a nameplate may also be in the form of a freestanding sign,
provided it is not nearer to the street line than one-half (1/2) the depth of
the required front yard and does not exceed four feet (4') in height.
         (c)   Exempt Signs: Exempt signs identified in section 11-14-3 of this
chapter.
      2.   Nonresidential Uses In Residential Districts: Unilluminated or
nonflashing, illuminated church, school or community building signs are
permitted in all areas subject to the following regulations:
         (a)   There shall not be more than one sign per lot, except on a
corner lot, two (2) signs, one facing each street, shall be permitted, provided
that such signs shall be located on the same lot as the principal church use.
         (b)   No sign shall exceed thirty two (32) square feet of display
surface area unless it is a double faced sign, which shall be allowed a total
of sixty four (64) square feet of display surface area.
         (c)   No sign shall be closer than eight feet (8') to any side and
rear lot line.
         (d)   No sign, when affixed against the building, shall project higher
than the height of the building, or thirty feet (30') above the curb level,
whichever is lower.
         (e)   No sign in the form of a freestanding sign shall project higher
than ten feet (10') above ground grade.
         (f)   Signs used to identify a preschool or other school in a
residential area are permitted, provided such signs do not exceed ten (10)
square feet in display surface area and are used for identification purposes
only.
         (g)   Signs used to identify the occupant of a lot who has been
granted permission for a special use of that lot shall comply with any
requirements set forth by the village board at the time when the special use
was permitted.
         (h)   Exempt signs identified in section 11-14-3 of this chapter are
allowed as stated in section 11-14-3 of this chapter.
   (B)   B-1, B-3, And O/I Districts: In B-1, B-3 and O/I districts, only the
following signs are hereby permitted and then only if accessory and incidental
to a permitted or special use and are in compliance with the provisions set
forth elsewhere in this chapter and other ordinances of the village:
      1.   All signs permitted in the residential districts.
      2.   Wall signs in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter are permitted.
      3.   Freestanding pole signs in compliance with the provisions set forth
in this chapter are permitted.
      4.   Freestanding monument signs in compliance with the provisions set
forth in this chapter are permitted.
      5.   In a unified shopping center in single ownership or control, one
additional sign may be erected. The sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square
feet in area and not display more than the name and location of the shopping
center. For pole signs, its bottom edge shall be at least ten feet (10') above
the level of the ground and its overall height shall not exceed thirty feet
(30') above the curb level.
      6.   Projecting signs in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter are permitted.
      7.   Marquees in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter
are permitted.
      8.   Awnings in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter
are permitted.
      9.   Canopies in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter
are permitted.
      10.   Window signs in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter are permitted.
      11.   Directory signs indicating the names of the occupants of a complex,
provided no advertising material is included, are permitted.
      12.   Real estate signs are permitted provided that not more than one
such sign shall be allowed per lot.
      13.   Inflatable advertising devices which have been permitted by the
superintendent of buildings.
      14.   Searchlights which have been permitted by the superintendent of
buildings.
      15.   Nonelectrical mobile signs which have placed in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
      16.   All exempt signs identified in section 11-14-3 of this chapter.
   (C)   B-2 District: In the B-2 district, only the following signs are hereby
permitted and then only if accessory and incidental to a permitted or special
use and are in compliance with the provisions set forth elsewhere in this
chapter and other ordinances of the village:
      1.   All signs permitted in the residential districts.
      2.   Wall signs in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter are permitted.
      3.   Freestanding monument and pole signs are permitted only on property
which has a front and/or corner side yard setback and is in compliance with the
provisions set forth in this chapter.
      4.   Overall height of freestanding monument and pole signs shall not
exceed ten feet (10'). (See subsections 11-14-12(A) and (B) of this chapter.)
      5.   In a unified shopping center, in single ownership or control, which
has a front and/or corner side yard setback, one additional sign may be
erected. The sign shall not exceed sixty (60) square feet in area, no display
more than the name and location of the shopping center. Its overall height
shall not exceed ten feet (10') above the curb level.
      6.   Projecting signs in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter are permitted.
      7.   Marquees in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter
are permitted.
      8.   Awnings in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter
are permitted.
      9.   Canopies in compliance with the provisions set forth in this chapter
are permitted.
      10.   Window signs in compliance with the provisions set forth in this
chapter are permitted.
      11.   Directory signs indicating the names of the occupants of a complex,
provided no advertising material is included, are permitted.
      12.   Real estate signs are permitted provided that not more than one
such sign shall be allowed per lot.
      13.   Inflatable advertising devices which have been permitted by the
superintendent of buildings.
      14.   Searchlights that have been permitted by the superintendent of
buildings.
      15.   A-frame portable signs which are temporary and which have been
placed in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-14: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
Any sign lawfully existing prior to the enactment of this chapter, but which
could not be erected in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall
be deemed to be a nonconforming sign and may continue to be in existence with
the following conditions:
   (A)   The sign must be properly maintained in a safe condition. No
nonconforming sign shall have any changes made in the words or symbols used or
the message displayed on the sign unless the sign is specifically designed for
changeable copy. Any other changes made will be to bring the nonconforming sign
into conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   No nonconforming sign shall be allowed to remain after the activity,
business or use to which it relates has been discontinued. Sign removal shall
include removal of all brackets and supporting structures.
   (C)   If a nonconforming sign is damaged in such a manner that the estimated
expense of repairs exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, the
sign shall not be allowed to remain and must be removed.
   (D)   Any sign that did not lawfully exist prior to the enactment of this
chapter and any signs constructed after the enactment of this chapter that do
not comply with this code are illegal, nonconforming signs. Such illegal,
nonconforming signs shall be removed forthwith by the owner or lessee. If the
owner or lessee fails to remove the sign, written notice shall be sent by the
superintendent of buildings to the owner or lessee. For failure to remove the
sign within ten (10) days, the superintendent of buildings may cause the
removal of said signs and assess the owners and/or lessees the cost of removal
and storage. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-15: SIGN PERMIT:
The superintendent of buildings or his/her designee may revoke any permit where
there has been a violation of the provisions of this title or a
misrepresentation of fact on the permit application. Except as provided in
section 11-2-13, "Sign Permits", of this title, it shall be unlawful for any
person to erect, relocate, structurally alter, within the village, any sign or
other advertising structure as defined in this chapter, without first obtaining
an erection permit from the village and making payment of the permit fee. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-14-16: ENFORCEMENT:
   (A)   Unlawful Signs: If the superintendent of buildings or his/her designee
finds that any sign or other advertising structure is prohibited by the
provisions of this chapter, the superintendent of buildings shall give written
notice to the permittee or the owner or lessee of the property upon which the
structure is located. If the permittee or owner fails to alter the structure so
as to comply with the standards set forth in this chapter within ten (10) days
after such notice, the superintendent of buildings will cite the permittee or
owner of the property upon which the structure is located for violation of this
chapter. The superintendent of buildings may cause such removal or alteration
as is necessary to bring the structure into compliance and assess the costs to
the permittee or owner or lessee. The superintendent of buildings may cause any
sign or other advertising structure that presents an immediate peril to persons
or property to be removed or altered immediately without notice. (Ord. 1650,
10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
   (B)   Penalty For Violation Of This Chapter: Unless otherwise provided, any
person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding the penalty as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code or the
maximum allowed by state statutes. Each day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007; amd. 2010 Code)
CHAPTER 15
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-15-1: Purpose
11-15-2: Description; Exemption
11-15-3: Planned Unit Development Standards
11-15-4: Procedure
11-15-5: Changes To Planned Unit Development
11-15-6: Construction Of Improvements
11-15-7: Street Classifications
11-15-8: Conditions And Guarantees
11-15-9: Denial Of Special Use For Planned Unit Development
11-15-10: Termination Of Special Use Permit
11-15-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of planned unit development is to encourage the most orderly
development of properties through advanced planning and thus to:
   (A)   Assure adequate standards for the development of residential
neighborhoods.
   (B)   Establish a pattern of development to preserve natural vegetation,
endangered species, topographic and geologic features.
   (C)   Provide regulations to encourage a variety of dwelling types.
   (D)   Assure adequate open space, recreation areas and public facilities.
   (E)   Protect residential areas from the intrusion of business, industrial
and other land uses that may create an adverse effect upon the living
environment.
   (F)   Promote the general welfare of the community. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-2: DESCRIPTION; EXEMPTION:
   (A)   A planned unit development (PUD) may be described as the subdivision,
development and use of land, containing four (4) or more acres, developed as an
integral unit and combining more than one primary land use, which may provide
for single-family or multi-family residential, educational, business,
commercial, industrial, recreational, park and common use areas. However, in
the B-2 village center district, a planned unit development may be twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet or more so long as it complies with the
requirements of subsection 11-15-3(C) of this chapter and this chapter.
   (B)   The planned unit development may be exempt from the provisions of the
subdivision regulations and this title to the extent specified in the final
authorization of the planned unit development by the village board. (Ord. 1650,
10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-3: PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS:
No planned unit development shall be authorized unless the zoning board of
appeals and village board shall find, in addition to those standards
established herein for special uses, that the following standards are met:
   (A)   General Standards:
      1.   The uses permitted by such exceptions, as may be requested or
recommended, are necessary or desirable and appropriate to the purpose of the
development.
      2.   The uses permitted in such development are not of such a nature, or
so located, as to exercise an undue detrimental influence or effect upon the
surrounding neighborhood.
      3.   That any park areas established in the planned unit development
conform to all requirements as set forth in this title.
      4.   That all minimum requirements pertaining to commercial, residential,
institutional or other uses established in the planned unit development shall
be subject to the requirements for each individual classification as
established elsewhere in this title, except as may be specially varied in the
ordinance granting and establishing a planned unit development.
      5.   When private streets and common driveways are made a part of the
planned unit development, or private common open space or recreation facilities
are provided, the applicant shall submit, as part of the application, the
method and arrangement whereby these private facilities shall be guaranteed to
be operated and maintained. Such arrangements for operating and maintaining
private facilities shall be subject to the approval of the village board.
   (B)   Residential Planned Unit Development Standards:
      1.   Residential density for a planned unit development shall not be
greater than the allowable density as provided in this title, nor shall any lot
used for residential purposes be less in area or dimension than that required
by the district regulations applicable to the district in which the planned
unit development is located, except that the zoning board of appeals may
recommend, and the village board may grant, a reduction in such lot and
dimension, but not more than ten percent (10%) when the planned unit
development provides common open space equal to not less than twenty percent
(20%) of the gross area of the planned unit development.
      2.   Business uses may be included as part of a residential planned unit
development when the zoning board of appeals and village board find that such
business uses are beneficial to the overall planned unit development and will
not be injurious to adjacent or neighboring properties. Such business uses
shall not be greater in area than ten percent (10%) of the residential planned
unit development.
      3.   The open areas provided in the part of the planned unit development
containing only residential structures shall be preserved over the life of the
planned unit development for use only by the residents of the planned unit
development, and the developer shall permanently establish guarantees for the
maintenance of such common areas.
      4.   For that part of a planned unit development devoted to residential
uses, the zoning board of appeals may recommend, and the village board may
approve, access to a dwelling by a driveway or pedestrian walk easement, and
spacing between buildings of lesser widths or depths than required by district
regulations for the district in which the planned unit development is located,
provided:
         (a)   That adequate provisions are made, which perpetuate during the
period of the special use, for access easements and off street parking spaces
for use by the residents of the dwellings served.
         (b)   The spacing between buildings shall be approved by the zoning
board of appeals and village board, and shall be consistent with the
application of recognized site planning principles for securing a unified
development and due consideration is given to the openness normally afforded by
intervening streets and alleys.
         (c)   The yards for principal buildings along the peripheral of the
development shall not be less in width or depth than required for permitted
uses in the district regulations applicable to the district in which the
planned unit development is located, and adequate screening and buffering, is
provided with landscape protection to neighboring properties, as recommended by
the zoning board of appeals and approved by the village board.
   (C)   B-2 Village Center Planned Unit Development:
      1.   B-2 village center district planned unit developments shall include
clearly identifiable communitywide benefit improvements to the village.
Benefits may include, but not be limited to:
         (a)   Provision of streetscape amenities such as street furniture and
landscaping in addition to that required by this title.
         (b)   Creation of a community open space.
         (c)   Utilization of transit oriented development design principles.
         (d)   Expansion of village infrastructure that can serve other parts
of the community.
      2.   A planned unit development in the B-2 village center district is
permitted to exceed the height limits of the district up to seven (7) stories,
subject to the approval of the village board and zoning board of appeals.
      3.   The village board may grant a density bonus for a planned unit
development in the B-2 village center district. The total number of bonus units
shall be determined on a case by case basis, based on the merits of the plan;
however, the density bonus may not exceed more than twenty five percent (25%).
The village board and zoning board of appeals shall grant the bonus based on
its review of the proposed planned unit development, and finding that the
proposed development offers a superior layout and quality design based on
design and environmental amenities which are demonstrated to exceed established
development standards.
      4.   If more intensive uses are permitted than are allowed by the
district regulations, there must be clear evidence that such uses are desirable
and are appropriate with respect to the primary purpose of the development. The
uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature, or so located, as to
exercise a detrimental influence on the development nor on the surrounding
neighborhood.
      5.   The amount of off street parking must be adequate to serve the needs
of the project. If determined that the planned unit development warrants
deviation from the parking requirements of this title, the village board and
the zoning board of appeals may require more or less off street parking than is
otherwise required.
      6.   Planned unit developments that front on any major collector or
arterial roadway shall provide landscaped open space between each building and
parking lot in accordance with the requirements of this title. Said landscaped
area shall include combinations of trees, shrubs and seasonal plantings. The
appropriate land area and exact plant material specifications shall be reviewed
and approved by the village board and zoning board of appeals as part of the
planned unit development review and approval process.
      7.   Business uses may be included as part of a village center planned
unit development when the zoning board of appeals and village board find that
such business uses are beneficial to the overall planned unit development and
will not be injurious to adjacent or neighboring properties. Such business uses
shall not be greater in area than twenty five percent (25%) of the village
center planned unit development. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-4: PROCEDURE:
In its establishment and authorization as a special use, in addition to the
provisions in section 11-15-2 of this chapter and standards of section 11-15-
3 of this chapter, the following procedures, requirements, restrictions and
conditions shall be observed:
   (A)   Preapplication Conference Procedure:
      1.   Applicant shall request, by letter to the plan commission, a
preapplication conference, at the expense of the applicant, for a preliminary
discussion of the proposed planned unit development.
      2.   A preapplication conference shall be held with the plan commission
and superintendent of buildings at a regular meeting open to the public.
      3.   At such conference, included on the agenda in advance of the
meeting, the applicant shall provide information as to the location of the
proposed planned unit development, the uses and approximate area of use for
each use category, a list of any and all exceptions to the subdivision
regulations and this title, and any other information necessary to clearly
explain the planned unit development to the plan commission and superintendent
of buildings.
      4.   The plan commission and superintendent of buildings shall review and
consider the proposed plan as to its compatibility with the comprehensive plan,
and the goals and objectives for planning of the village, and advise the
applicant on the information, documents, exhibits, drawings and any limitations
of the proposal that should be included in the application to the village for
the special use permit for the planned unit development.
   (B)   Preliminary Plan Procedure:
      1.   The applicant shall request the special use permit, by letter
addressed to the chairman of the zoning board of appeals (hereafter sometimes
referred to as the "zoning officer"), to be placed on the agenda of the meeting
of the zoning board of appeals for a preliminary discussion of the proposed
planned unit development, and the zoning board of appeals shall consider the
proposed planned unit development at such meeting, which may be continued from
time to time.
      2.   The applicant shall present such exhibits and written information as
may be necessary to fully acquaint the zoning board of appeals with the
proposed planned unit development, which shall include, but not necessarily be
limited to, the following:
The map(s), which shall be included as part of the application, shall be drawn
at a scale of fifty feet to the inch (1" = 50') or one hundred feet to the inch
(1" = 100'). The following information shall be shown:
         (a)   Boundary Survey: A boundary line survey of the subject site,
which shall be prepared and certified by a registered Illinois land surveyor.
         (b)   Topography: The existing topographic character of the land with
contours shown at intervals no greater than one foot (1'). Topographic data
shall refer to the USGS North American datum - mean sea level elevation.
         (c)   Site Analysis: A detailed site analysis of the property in
question, which shall show the following information:
            (1)   Physical Factors:
               A.   Existing land uses, both on the site and immediately
adjacent.
               B.   Scenic views.
               C.   Wooded areas.
               D.   Soil problem areas based upon a soil survey of the site and
a report from the soil and water conservation service. Additional soil
information may be requested by the zoning board of appeals and/or the village
engineer and the plan commission.
               E.   Portions of the site in any floodplain and/or floodplain
fringe area.
               F.   Streams, drainage ditches, culverts and standing water.
               G.   Isolated preservable trees six inches (6") or more in
diameter at one foot (1') above ground level.
               H.   General directions of the stormwater runoff across the
property.
            (2)   Public Utilities Information: Public utilities information
that shall show the location and size of any existing sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, water lines, light poles, gas, and electric and telephone lines both on
the site and in easements and rights of way immediately adjacent to the site.
            (3)   Other Information:
               A.   Existing county and/or municipal zoning on all parts of the
site.
               B.   Municipal corporate boundaries across and adjacent to the
site.
               C.   School district boundaries across and adjacent to the site.
               D.   Utility easements across and adjacent to the site.
         (d)   Land Use Plan: A proposed land use plan, which shall be drawn on
a print of the topographic made for the site. The proposed land use plan shall
contain the following information:
            (1)   Identification And Description:
               A.   Name of the planned unit development.
               B.   Legal description of the subject site including section,
town and range.
               C.   Name, address and phone number of the property owner, trust
beneficiary and developer.
               D.   Scale, north point and date.
               E.   Permanent index number(s) of all parcels on the subject
site.
            (2)   Design Feature Information:
               A.   Right of way alignments, widths and names of all streets.
Such street names shall not duplicate the name of any street heretofore used in
the village or its environs unless such street is an extension of, or is in
line with, an already named street, in which event that name shall be used.
               B.   The location of all multi-family or single- family attached
and/or detached buildings and structures.
               C.   Off street parking and service areas.
               D.   All areas to be dedicated as common open space and all
sites to be conveyed, dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds, school
sites, public buildings, and similar public and quasi-public uses.
               E.   The pedestrian and bicycle circulation system.
         (e)   Utility Plan: A proposed utility plan shall be drawn on a print
of the proposed land use plan. The proposed utility plan shall show the
approximate location and dimensions of all sanitary sewer, storm sewer and
water lines for all proposed land uses, drainage ditches, culverts and water
retention areas, as well as any utility easements.
            (1)   The utility plan shall be accompanied by a statement from the
sanitary district attesting to the capability of existing sewer systems to
service the proposed development.
            (2)   The written statement, which shall be included as part of the
application for approval of the preliminary plan, shall contain the following
information:
               A.   A statistical tabulation of the acreage amounts of all of
the land uses proposed in the preliminary plan.
               B.   The type and number of dwelling units for any proposed
residential land uses.
               C.   The stages in which the project will be built and the
approximate dates when construction of each stage can be expected to begin and
to end.
         (f)   Other Information: Other information may be requested if the
zoning board of appeals finds that the planned unit development may create
special problems for traffic, parking, landscaping and/or economic feasibility.
Such information may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:
            (1)   An off street parking and loading plan.
            (2)   A traffic study indicating the volume of traffic to be
generated by the planned unit development during both the morning and afternoon
peak hours and during a typical day, and proposing any special engineering
design features and/or traffic regulation devices needed to ensure the proper
safety of traffic circulation to, through and around the planned unit
development.
            (3)   A tax and school impact study detailing the impact the
planned unit development will have upon all taxing bodies. In addition, the
expected number of students to be generated by any residential portion shall
also be quantified. Such study shall include an estimate of the costs
attributable to the proposed development, as well as the benefits to be
received.
            (4)   A landscaping planting plan indicating the size, height,
location, quantities and variety of plant material to be planted. Also, an
estimate as to when said landscape plan shall be implemented.
      3.   The procedure for approval of the preliminary plan shall be:
         (a)   The zoning officer shall refer the preliminary plan to the
zoning board of appeals. The zoning officer shall instruct the appropriate
village departments and consultants to collaborate with the zoning board of
appeals in reviewing the preliminary plan for the planned unit development to
determine its compliance with these regulations and other village ordinances.
Such collaboration may include meetings at which the developer shall meet with
village officials and consultants, allowing the zoning board of appeals to gain
the informal recommendations of the experts prior to the public hearing.
         (b)   The zoning officer shall notify the applicant as to the time and
place of the public hearing at which the applicant shall present the
preliminary plan. The zoning officer shall cause notice of such public hearing
to be published in a manner approved by the zoning board of appeals for all
special use permits, as required by statute. The costs of such notice(s) shall
be borne by the applicant.
         (c)   The zoning board of appeals, plan commission and the village
board may utilize the services of the professional consultants hired by the
village in arriving at recommendations or decisions. The applicant shall pay
the village the reasonable cost incurred for the services rendered by its
consultants within ten (10) days after the submission of the bill from the
village to him/her. The consultants shall bill for their services at the same
hourly rate which they normally charge municipal clients. The consultants shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the persons who provide the village with
advice in the fields of engineering, law, planning, zoning, traffic, design and
finance.
         (d)   The zoning board of appeals shall proceed as quickly as possible
in its review of the preliminary plan. No more than thirty (30) days after the
final adjournment of the public hearing, the zoning board of appeals shall:
            (1)   Approve or disapprove the preliminary plan and shall submit
its written recommendations, which may include the recommendations of the
village engineer, plan commission, superintendent of buildings and/or village
attorney, to the village board, with a copy being sent to the applicant, or
            (2)   Advise the applicant in writing if the zoning board of
appeals finds that changes, additions or corrections are required in the
preliminary plan. The applicant shall resubmit fifteen (15) copies of the
revised preliminary plan for consideration of the zoning board of appeals at a
continuation of, or at a new, public hearing. The applicant shall do so without
paying an additional filing fee. The zoning board of appeals shall submit its
recommendations in writing to the village board, which may also include the
recommendations of the village engineer, plan commission, superintendent of
buildings and village attorney, with a copy also being sent to the applicant.
         (e)   The village board shall accept or reject the preliminary plan
within forty five (45) days after its next regular meeting following the
receipt of the written recommendations of the zoning board of appeals. The
applicant and the village board may mutually agree to extend the forty five
(45) day period.
            (1)   If the preliminary plan is disapproved, the village board
may, but is not required to, state in writing the reasons for the disapproval
and such writing shall be filed with the village clerk and a copy shall be sent
to the applicant.
            (2)   If the preliminary plan is approved, the village board shall
authorize the applicant to submit a final development plan for the planned unit
development.
   (C)   Final Development Plan Procedure: Within one year following the
approval of the preliminary plan the applicant shall file with the zoning board
of appeals a final development plan containing, in final form, the information
required in the preliminary plan. The final development plan shall also include
the following:
      1.   A final land use plan, suitable for recording with the county
recorder of deeds. The purpose of the final development plan is to designate
the land subdivided into lots as well as the division of other lands not so
treated, designate lands in common open areas and building areas, and to
designate and limit the specific internal uses of each building or structure,
as well as the land in general.
      2.   An accurate legal description of the entire area under immediate
development within the planned unit development.
      3.   If subdivided lands are included in the planned unit development, a
subdivision plat of all subdivided lands in the same form and meeting all
requirements of the Illinois plat act, as amended from time to time, and
subdivision regulations for a normal subdivision plat, to the extent that
compliance with subdivision regulations of the village shall be required.
      4.   An accurate legal description of each separate unsubdivided use
area, including common open space.
      5.   Designation of location of all buildings to be constructed, and a
designation of uses for which each building is designed.
      6.   Certificates, sales and signatures required for the dedication of
land and recording the document.
      7.   Tabulations of each separate unsubdivided area, including land area
and number of dwelling units per gross acre.
      8.   Landscape plan.
      9.   Utilities, including light pole locations and drainage plans.
      10.   Final agreements, bylaws, provisions and covenants which govern the
use, maintenance and continued protection of the planned unit development, and
any of its common open areas or other common facilities.
      11.   Final development and construction schedule.
      12.   Final architectural plans.
      13.   Final engineering drawings.
   (D)   Final Development Plan Approval:
      1.   The final development plan shall be approved as follows:
         (a)   The zoning board of appeals shall review the final development
plan within thirty five (35) days of its submission in full to the village and
shall recommend approval if it is in substantial compliance with the
preliminary development plan. The zoning board of appeals shall certify to the
village board that the final development plan is in conformance with the
previously filed preliminary development plan.
         (b)   If the final plan is substantially changed from the approved
preliminary plan, the zoning board of appeals shall recommend to the village
board that a new public hearing be held in conformance with the procedures for
approval of a preliminary plan.
         (c)   After receipt of the recommendation of the zoning board of
appeals, the village board shall review the final development plan and shall,
if it is in conformity with the preliminary development plan, authorize the
special use. If the final development plan is held not to be in conformity with
the preliminary development plan, the village board shall inform the applicant
with regard to specific areas found not to be in compliance.
      2.   After the approval of the final development plan, the use of the
land and the construction, modification or alteration of any buildings or
structures within the planned unit development will be governed by the approved
final development plan rather than by any other provisions of this title. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-5: CHANGES TO PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
No changes may be made in the approved final development plan, except upon
application to the village, according to the following provisions:
   (A)   During the construction of the planned unit development, the procedure
shall be as follows:
      1.   Minor changes in the location, siting and height of buildings and
structures, in the location of streets and public accessways, and in the size
and location of open space, may be authorized by the village board as required
by engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at that time that the final
development plan was approved.
      2.   All changes in land uses, any rearrangement of lots, blocks and
building tracts, any major changes in the provisions for common open space and
all other changes in the approved final development plan must be made by the
village board under the procedures authorized by this title for an amendment to
this title.
      3.   Any changes which are approved for the final development plan must
be recorded as amendments to the recorded copy of the final plat. If changes
are allowed in a final site plan, then a new site plan reflecting such changes
shall be filed with the village with the date of the changes.
   (B)   After the completion of the construction of the planned unit
development, the procedure shall be as follows:
      1.   Any minor extension, alterations or modifications of existing
buildings or structures may be authorized by the zoning board of appeals, if
they are consistent with the purpose and intent of the final plat.
      2.   Any building or structure that is totally or substantially destroyed
may be reconstructed only in compliance with the final plat, unless an
amendment to the final plat is approved following the procedures for an
amendment to this title.
      3.   All other changes in the final development plan must be made by the
village board, under the procedure authorized by this title for an amendment of
this title. No changes may be made in the final plat unless they are required
for the continued successful functioning of the planned unit development, or
unless they are required by changes in conditions that have occurred since the
final development plan was approved or by changes in the development policy of
the village. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-6: CONSTRUCTION OF IMPROVEMENTS:
The developer shall construct and install the required improvements, and must
post with the village a bond as required by the subdivision regulations. At the
appropriate time, a maintenance bond must be posted with the village as set out
in the subdivision regulations. If the planned unit development is to be
constructed and developed in stages or phases, the bond posted shall be in an
amount based upon the confirmed estimated cost of installation of improvements
in the respective stage or phase as approved by the village engineer. (Ord.
1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-7: STREET CLASSIFICATIONS:
Street classifications, definitions and specifications, shall be in accord with
the regulations pertaining to the same as established in the subdivision
regulations, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-15-8: CONDITIONS AND GUARANTEES:
Prior to granting any special uses, the zoning board of appeals may recommend,
and the village board shall stipulate, such conditions and restrictions upon
the establishment, location, construction, maintenance and operation of the
special use as deemed necessary for the protection and requirements specified
herein, or as may be granted from time to time. In all cases in which special
uses are granted, the village board shall require such evidence and guarantees
as it may deem necessary as proof that the conditions stipulated in connection
therewith are being, and will be, complied with. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff.
10-15-2007)
11-15-9: DENIAL OF SPECIAL USE FOR PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT:
After a public hearing has been held, no substantially similar application for
a special use which has been denied wholly or in part by the village board
shall be resubmitted for a period of one year from the date of said order of
denial, except on the grounds of substantial new evidence or proof of changed
conditions found to be valid by the zoning board of appeals and the village
board. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-15-10: TERMINATION OF SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
If construction work on the proposed planned unit development has not begun
within eighteen (18) months from the date of the authorization order of the
village board, the authorization shall become null and void and all rights
thereunder shall lapse. However, the applicant can request an extension, upon
his/her written application, filed prior to the termination of the eighteen
(18) month time limit. The village board may authorize a single extension of
not more than twelve (12) months without a public notice. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-
2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
CHAPTER 16
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-16-1: Interpretation; Construction
11-16-2: Rules For Generic Use Definitions
11-16-3: Generic Use Definitions
11-16-4: General Definitions
11-16-1: INTERPRETATION; CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   (A)   The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
   (B)   The present tense includes the past and future tenses, and the future
tense includes the present.
   (C)   The word "shall" is mandatory while the word "may" is permissive.
   (D)   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   (E)   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of
this title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition
thereof, and any word appearing in parentheses, between a word and its
definition herein, shall be construed in the same sense as that word. Words
herein not defined shall be interpreted in accordance with the definitions
considered to be normal dictionary usage.
   (F)   All measured distances expressed in feet shall be to the nearest
integral foot. If a fraction is one-half foot (1/2') or more, the integral foot
next above shall be taken.
   (G)   The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this title,
shall be construed as herein defined. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007)
11-16-2: RULES FOR GENERIC USE DEFINITIONS:
   (A)   Certain terms in this chapter are defined to be inclusive of many uses
in order to eliminate overly detailed lists of uses in the zoning districts
established by this title. These terms shall be referred to in this title as
"generic" use definitions.
   (B)   A generic use definition has two (2) components: a brief listing of
examples of uses intended to be included within the scope of the definition,
and an identification, where appropriate, of certain uses that are not meant to
be included by the term.
   (C)   A use that is not specifically listed in a zoning district or does not
fall within a generic use definition as defined in this chapter, or as
interpreted by the zoning board of appeals, pursuant to section 11-2-19,
"Zoning Interpretations", of this title, is prohibited. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007)
11-16-3: GENERIC USE DEFINITIONS:
ART GALLERY/STUDIO: This use includes premises used principally for the sale,
display and exhibition of fine arts and craft products. An art studio or art
gallery may include accessory production or instruction in the production of
arts and crafts using paint, clay, fabric or other medium. An artist studio is
a less intensive use that does not involve the manufacturing of items, such as
furniture or glass blown objects, which require the use of electric tools or
chemical processes. "Art gallery/studio" shall not include art studios located
within the home of an artist that is considered a "home occupation" as defined
herein.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: This includes institutional facilities that provide
daily assistance and long term residence for disabled or elderly individuals,
and include common dining and activity facilities, convenience features
designed for the needs of residents, such as emergency call systems, grab bars
and handrails, special door hardware, cabinets, appliances, passageways, and
doorways designed to accommodate wheelchairs, and the provision of social and
medical services including meal services, transportation, housekeeping, nursing
and organized social activities. "Assisted living facility" shall not include
"community residences" or "hospital", as defined herein.
BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT: This use includes single-family residences,
occupied by owner or resident manager, which offer lodging on a temporary basis
to paying guests in a room(s) without cooking facilities, and may offer
breakfast or other meals to these guests. "Bed and breakfast establishment" is
differentiated from a "hotel/motel" in that it typically was designed
originally as a single-family residence and is open to transient guests.
CEMETERY: This use includes cemeteries for the burial of people or animals,
mausoleums and memorial parks, excluding crematoriums.
CLUB AND LODGE: This use includes buildings and facilities that are operated by
a corporation, association or membership organization for a social, educational
or recreational purpose, primarily for members and their guests, and not
primarily operated for profit, nor to render a service that is customarily
carried on as a business.
COLLEGE/UNIVERSITY: This use includes public or private colleges, universities,
junior colleges or other institutions of higher learning that primarily teach
classes that would count toward a bachelor's degree, and associated
dormitories. "College/university" shall not include "schools, specialized
instructional", as defined herein.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE, LARGE: This use includes residential facilities shared by
twenty four (24) hour resident staff and six (6) to sixteen (16) disabled
individuals, elderly individuals, minors, adjudicated wards of the court (under
the Illinois juvenile court act or the Illinois probate act), or individuals,
who are eighteen (18) to twenty four (24) years of age, are not wards of the
court and who require specialized attention and care (including, but not
limited to, life skill education, therapy or counseling) in order to achieve
personal independence, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a
long term, family like environment, where staff persons provide care, and
facilitate education and participation in community activities for the
residents in order to enable them to live as independently as possible in a
residential environment. This use shall not include institutional "assisted
living facility", as defined herein, or an alcohol or drug treatment center, a
work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, or other facilities serving
as an alternative to incarceration. This use shall comply with the occupancy
classification and use set forth in sections 308 and 310 of the 2018 IBC, and
all other applicable IBC requirements, as adopted by the Village.
COMMUNITY RESIDENCE, SMALL: This use includes residential facilities shared by
twenty four (24) hour resident staff and five (5) or less disabled individuals,
elderly individuals, minors, adjudicated wards of the court (under the Illinois
juvenile court act or the Illinois probate act) or individuals, who are
eighteen (18) to twenty four (24) years of age, are not wards of the court and
who require specialized attention and care (including, but not limited to, life
skill education, therapy or counseling) in order to achieve personal
independence, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a long term,
family like environment, where staff persons provide care, and facilitate
education and participation in community activities for the residents in order
to enable them to live as independently as possible in a residential
environment. This use shall not include institutional "assisted living
facility", as defined herein, or an alcohol or drug treatment center, a work
release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, or other facilities serving as an
alternative to incarceration. This use shall comply with the occupancy
classification and use set forth in sections 308 and 310 of the 2018 IBC, and
all other applicable IBC requirements, as adopted by the Village.
CONVENT/MONASTERY/SEMINARY: This use includes the dwelling units of a religious
order or congregation.
COUNTRY CLUB: A land area and buildings containing recreational facilities,
clubhouse and normal accessory uses, primarily open to members and their guests
for a membership fee, and which may include, but is not limited to, swimming
pools, tennis courts, golf courses, overnight accommodations for members and
guests, and dining facilities, which may be for use by members, guests and the
general public.
CULTURAL FACILITY: This use includes services open to the public including, but
not limited to, museums, cultural centers, historical societies, aquariums and
libraries, operated by a public, private or nonprofit organization. "Cultural
facility" shall not include "place of worship" or "club and lodge" as defined
herein.
CURRENCY EXCHANGE: This use is an establishment that, for compensation, engages
in the business of cashing checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other
commercial paper serving the same purpose. This classification does not include
a "financial institution", or a "retail goods establishment" or "personal
services establishment", as defined herein, where the cashing of checks or
money orders is incidental to the principal use.
DAY: As used in this title, a day is a calendar day, unless otherwise specified
as a business day within the text of the section.
DAYCARE CENTER: This use includes any child or adult care facility, whether
established for gain or otherwise, which regularly provides care for less than
twenty four (24) hours per day for more than three (3) children or adults in a
facility other than a residential building. "Daycare center" does not include
programs operated by public or private elementary and secondary schools, or
institutions of higher learning which serve children who are three (3) years of
age or older.
DAYCARE HOME: This use includes any dwelling in which a permanent occupant of
the dwelling provides care for more than three (3) children, for gain or
otherwise, for less than twenty four (24) hours per day. This use does not
include facilities that receive children from a single household.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: This use includes all retail and service facilities
which accommodate motor vehicles of patrons and from which the occupants of the
motor vehicle may make purchases or transact business.
DRIVING RANGE: A limited area on which golf players do not walk, but onto which
they drive golf balls from a central driving tee.
DWELLING, ABOVE THE GROUND FLOOR OF OFFICE OR COMMERCIAL: This use includes
dwelling units that are located in multi-story buildings, but only above the
ground floor of office or commercial uses. "Dwellings, above the ground floor
of office or commercial" may include apartments, condominiums and independent
living senior housing.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: This use includes buildings containing three (3) or
more dwelling units that are not designed as townhouses (see definition of
Dwelling, Townhouse), where each unit is provided with an individual entrance
to the outdoors or to a common hallway, with other dwelling units above and/or
below. "Dwelling, multiple-family" may include apartment buildings,
condominiums and independent living senior housing, but shall not include
"dwelling, townhouse", as defined herein.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: This use includes detached buildings containing only
one dwelling unit surrounded by yards. Manufactured homes, mobile homes, travel
trailers, housing mounted on self-propelled or drawn vehicles, tents, or other
forms of temporary or portable housing are not included in this definition.
DWELLING, TOWNHOUSE: This use includes buildings having three (3) or more
dwelling units that are arranged side by side, sharing common fire resistive
walls without openings, and each occupying an exclusive vertical space without
another dwelling unit above or below. Each dwelling unit shall have at least
one individual entrance to the outdoors. "Dwelling, townhouse" may include
apartments, condominiums and independent living senior housing, but shall not
include "dwelling, multiple-family", as defined herein.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: This use includes detached buildings containing two (2)
dwelling units surrounded by yards, and attached either vertically or
horizontally.
FARMSTAND: This use is a structure or vehicle used in the sale of agricultural
produce, in season, which is grown by the seller. More than one farm may sell
at a single stand.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION: This use includes establishments, the principal use or
purpose of which is the provision of financial services including, but not
limited to, bank facilities for tellers and walk up automated teller machines
(ATMs), credit unions, savings and loan institutions, and mortgage companies.
"Financial institution" shall not include currency exchange establishments. For
financial institutions with drive-up teller or ATM facilities, see "drive-
through facility", as defined herein.
GOLF COURSE: This use means undeveloped land that may be used for golfing, or
golfing practice, by the public or by members and guests of a private club, and
includes amenities such as landscaping, irrigation systems, paths, and golf
greens and tees.
HEAVY RETAIL AND SERVICE: This use includes retail and/or service activities
that have regular exterior service or storage areas, or partially enclosed
structures including, but not limited to, home improvement centers, equipment
rental and leasing, lumber and other building materials, garden centers and
greenhouses, landscape, construction, and lawn maintenance contractor yards,
contractor offices, bulk materials sales and storage, and recreational vehicles
and playground equipment sales and rental.
HOME OCCUPATION: This use includes an occupation carried on in a dwelling unit
by the resident thereof and up to only one additional person that is not an
occupant of the dwelling unit, provided that the use is limited in extent,
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for residential
purposes, and does not change the character thereof. "Home occupation" shall
include, but shall not be limited to, the following uses: art studio, massage
therapy, dressmaking operation, home office, and teaching. "Home occupation"
shall not include operation of any wholesale or retail business (unless
conducted by mail), manufacturing, repair shops, barbershops or beauty parlors,
stables or kennels, restaurants, or other activities that produce noxious
matter or constitute a public nuisance. Individuals operating an office out of
their residence, with no additional staff, no clientele visiting the residence
and no merchandise offered for retail sale on the premises, are not considered
a "home occupation" for the purposes of this title.
HOSPITAL: This use includes institutions providing physical or mental health
services, inpatient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care
of the sick and injured. "Hospital" shall not include "medical/dental clinic"
or "assisted living facility", as defined herein.
HOTEL/MOTEL: This use includes facilities where guestrooms or suites are
reserved to provide temporary living and sleeping accommodations for temporary
or transient guests, with no provisions in such rooms for cooking in any
individual room or suite. Such facilities may include accessory uses such as
restaurants, lounges and meeting rooms. "Hotel/motel" shall not include "bed
and breakfast establishment", as defined herein.
INDOOR AMUSEMENT: This use includes, but is not limited to, commercial or
nonprofit indoor health and exercise clubs, skating rinks, bowling alleys,
indoor sports clubs, golf domes, and indoor establishments where pool or
billiards, foosball, table tennis, shuffleboard, pinball machines, video games
or any other games of recreation or amusement are provided for public
patronage, where the insertion of a coin, slug, or token, or the payment of a
fee, is required, and where five (5) or more such tables or game machines are
present. "Indoor amusement" shall include any accessory uses, such as snack
bars, pro shops and locker rooms, which are designed and intended primarily for
the use of patrons of the principal recreational use. "Indoor amusement" shall
not include "indoor recreation", as defined herein.
INDOOR RECREATION: This use includes, but is not limited to, indoor recreation
facilities, community centers, gymnasiums, indoor tennis or other racquet
courts, indoor sports arenas, auditoriums, indoor swimming pools, or similar
uses which are enclosed in buildings and open to all community residents or
those living within certain developments or neighborhoods. "Indoor recreation"
shall include any accessory uses, such as snack bars, pro shops and locker
rooms, which are designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the
principal recreational use. "Indoor recreation" specifically excludes
commercial and nonprofit indoor facilities that are included as "indoor
amusement", as defined herein.
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT/DANCING: This use includes any establishment including, but
not limited to, a "restaurant" or "tavern/bar", or portion thereof, that is
utilized for live performers or patrons engaged in singing, performing,
karaoke, dancing or playing musical instruments. "Live entertainment/dancing"
shall not include "theaters", "indoor amusement" or "outdoor amusement", or
"indoor recreation" or "outdoor recreation", where live performances may
occasionally be held, as defined herein.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT/ASSEMBLY: The assembly, fabrication, or processing of
goods and materials using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke,
fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot
where such assembly, fabrication or processing takes place. "Light
manufacturing" generally includes processing and fabrication of finished
products predominantly from previously prepared materials and includes
processes that do not require extensive floor area or land area.
MASSAGE THERAPY CLINIC: Any establishment, other than a regularly licensed and
established hospital or dispensary, where nonmedical or nonsurgical
manipulation, exercises or devices are practiced upon the human body manually
or otherwise by any person other than a licensed physician, surgeon, dentist,
chiropractor or osteopath, with or without the use of therapeutic, electrical,
mechanical or bathing devices. "Massage therapy clinic" shall also include any
bathing establishment.
MEDICAL/DENTAL CLINIC: This use includes establishments offering the provision
of medical/dental care, which provides services beyond those typically offered
at medical or dental offices, exclusively on an outpatient basis. Such services
would include X-rays (nondental), on site testing laboratories, rehabilitation
therapy facilities, emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training,
administration, and services to outpatients. "Medical/dental clinic" is
differentiated from "hospital", as defined herein, in that they do not provide
inpatient services.
MINIWAREHOUSE: This use includes enclosed storage facilities containing
independent, fully enclosed bays that are leased to individuals exclusively for
long term storage of household goods or personal property.
MOTOR VEHICLE SALES AND LEASING: This use includes retail establishments that
sell or lease new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, recreational vehicles,
trailers or boats, or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. An
automobile dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or
lease on site. Secondary support uses may also exist upon the same site, such
as maintenance, repair and service areas, indoor parts storage areas, and
financial services areas.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR, CONVENIENCE:
   (A)   This use includes establishments where gasoline and/or fuel oil are
sold, and where oil, grease, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be
supplied and dispensed at retail, and/or where the following services may be
rendered in fully enclosed bays and sales made, and no other:
      1.   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and
distributor parts.
      2.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
      3.   Replacement or adjustments of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose,
fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the
like.
      4.   Radiator cleaning and flushing, provision of water, antifreeze and
the like.
      5.   Washing, polishing, detailing, and sale of automotive washing and
polishing materials.
      6.   Greasing and lubrication.
      7.   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines.
      8.   Servicing and repair of carburetors and fuel injectors.
      9.   Adjusting and repairing brakes.
      10.   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or
crankcase, or racing motor.
      11.   Provision of beverages, packaged foods, fast food, tobacco, lottery
tickets and similar convenience goods for gasoline supply station customers,
but only as accessory and incidental to the principal operation.
      12.   Provision of road maps and other informational material to
customers and restroom facilities.
   (B)   This use does not permit the storage of repair vehicles for more than
twenty four (24) hours on the site. This use does not include services and
activities in the definitions of "motor vehicle service and repair, minor", or
"motor vehicle service and repair, major", as defined herein. For "motor
vehicle service and repair, convenience" facilities with drive-up fast food
windows, see definition of Drive-Through Facility. This definition shall
include gasoline stations.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MAJOR: This use includes, but shall not be
limited to, establishments involved in engine rebuilding, or major
reconditioning of worn or damaged motor vehicles or trailers, towing and
collision service, including body, frame or fender straightening or repair, and
overall painting of motor vehicles. Such establishments often require the
storage of vehicles to be repaired. The storage of repair vehicles shall be
limited to thirty (30) working days.
MOTOR VEHICLE SERVICE AND REPAIR, MINOR:
   (A)   This use includes establishments where the following services may be
rendered in fully enclosed bays and sales made and no other:
      1.   Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors and
distributor parts.
      2.   Tire servicing and repair, but not recapping or regrooving.
      3.   Replacement or adjustments of mufflers and tailpipes, water hose,
fan belts, brake fluid, light bulbs, fuses, floor mats, seat covers, windshield
wipers and wiper blades, grease retainers, wheel bearings, mirrors, and the
like.
      4.   Radiator cleaning and flushing, provision of water, antifreeze and
the like.
      5.   Greasing and lubrication.
      6.   Providing and repairing fuel pumps, oil pumps and lines.
      7.   Servicing and repair of carburetors and fuel injectors.
      8.   Adjusting and repairing brakes.
      9.   Minor motor adjustments not involving removal of the head or
crankcase, or racing motor.
   (B)   This use is differentiated from "motor vehicle service and repair,
convenience" in that it permits the storage of repair vehicles for up to five
(5) workdays. This use does not include services and activities in the
definition of "motor vehicle service and repair, major", as defined herein.
MOTORCYCLE SALES: The display and sale of "motorcycles", as defined in section
11-16-4 of this chapter.
NATURE PRESERVE: An area where human activities are very limited and the
natural environment is protected from manmade changes.
OFFICE, GOVERNMENT: This use includes administrative and business uses, which
may or may not offer services to the public, and is engaged in the processing,
manipulation or application of business information or professional expertise
for village, county, state or federal government organizations. This use shall
not include "public service facility", as defined herein.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL: This use includes business uses, which may or may not
offer services to the public, and is engaged in the processing, manipulation or
application of business information or professional expertise. An office use is
not materially involved in fabricating, assembling or warehousing of physical
products for the retail or wholesale market, nor is an office engaged in the
repair of products or retail services. This use shall include, but is not
limited to, professional offices for nonprofit organizations, accounting,
investment services, insurance, contracting, architecture, engineering, legal
services and real estate services. "Office, professional" shall also include
doctor and dentist offices, excluding "medical/dental clinics" as defined
herein, and veterinary offices.
OPERATIONS FACILITY, AMBULANCE/BUS/TAXICAB: This use shall include an area and
building where emergency medical ambulances, buses, taxicabs or other livery
vehicles are stored, dispatched, and/or loading and unloading is carried on
regularly, and where minor maintenance of these vehicles is performed.
"Operations facility, ambulance/bus/taxicab" shall not include "public service
facility", as defined herein, where the vehicles of the village fire, police,
or other municipal departments or school facilities are dispatched, stored and/
or maintained.
OUTDOOR AMUSEMENT: This use includes, but is not limited to, public, nonprofit
or commercial fairgrounds, outdoor stadiums, outdoor theaters, raceways,
rodeos, music arenas, theme parks, amusement parks, miniature golf
establishments, water slides, batting cages, skateboarding courses, go-cart
courses and shooting ranges. "Outdoor amusement" shall include any accessory
uses, such as snack bars, which are designed and intended primarily for the use
of patrons of the principal recreational use. "Outdoor amusement" shall not
include "outdoor recreation uses" or recreation facilities included as a "park/
playground", as defined herein.
OUTDOOR CAFE: This use is a dining area of designated size with seats and/or
tables located outdoors of a contiguous restaurant and beer garden. This
seating may be in addition to the indoor seating area.
OUTDOOR RECREATION: This use includes, but is not limited to, active recreation
facilities including public or private golf courses, golf driving ranges,
outdoor swimming pools, tennis courts, ball fields, ball courts, skateboard
facilities, and other similar facilities, which are not enclosed in buildings
and are open to the public, or are operated on a commercial or membership basis
primarily for the use of persons who do not reside on the same lot as that on
which the recreational use is located. "Outdoor recreation" shall include any
accessory uses, such as snack bars, pro shops, and clubhouses, which are
designed and intended primarily for the use of patrons of the principal
recreational use. "Outdoor recreation" shall not include "outdoor amusement"
uses or recreation facilities included as a "park/playground", as defined
herein.
PARK/PLAYGROUND: This use includes, but is not limited to, public and private
open space, parks, botanical gardens, arboretums and forest preserve property,
which may be improved with such amenities for passive recreation such as
trails, gardens, benches and play equipment. "Park/playground" shall not
include "outdoor recreation", as defined herein.
PARKING GARAGE/STRUCTURE: This use shall include public or private structures,
or portions thereof, composed of one or more levels of floors used exclusively
for the parking of motor vehicles, whether public or private. A parking
structure may be totally below grade (as in an underground parking garage), or
either partially or totally above grade, with those levels being either open or
enclosed.
PARKING LOT, OFF STREET: This use shall include public or private open areas,
other than a street or public right of way, used for the temporary storage
(parking) of operable passenger automobiles and commercial vehicles, and
available to the public, whether for compensation, free or as an accommodation
for clients, employees or customers. This use shall also include the areas
provided for residents, employees and visitors of multiple-family dwellings,
available to the general public. This shall not include display lots for motor
vehicle sales or leasing.
PAWNSHOP: An establishment where money is loaned on the security of personal
property pledged in the keeping of the owners. Retail sales also take place of
primarily used items. This includes any establishment where used property is
purchased by the establishment and resold at retail or otherwise resold. This
also includes establishments where used property is modified, changed, or
altered, whether or not it is sold or resold.
PERSONAL SERVICES ESTABLISHMENT: This use includes establishments for the
provision of personal services directly to the consumer. This use shall
include, but shall not be limited to, barbershops, beauty parlors, laundry and
dry cleaning establishments, funeral homes/mortuaries, tanning salons,
tailoring shops, domestic pet grooming, shoe repair shops, travel agencies, and
the like.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: This use includes churches, temples, synagogues, or other
gathering places, which may or may not have schools and/or meeting facilities
as part of the complex, and accessory uses, such as parish houses, recreational
facilities or other nonprofit operations that serve members of the congregation
and/or community.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: This use is a single, unified development of a parcel
of land, or contiguous parcels of land of a size sufficient to create its own
character, controlled by a single landowner or by a group of landowners in
common agreement as to control, the character of which is compatible with
adjacent parcels and the intent of the zoning district(s) in which it is
located. This use may include mixed use development, which may depart from the
requirements of the applicable district regulations or other requirements of
this title, in return for assurances of the overall quality of the development,
including any specific features that may be of exceptional benefit to the
community as a whole.
PUBLIC SERVICE FACILITY: This use includes dispatch, storage, office,
maintenance facilities and garages for government entities including, but not
limited to, public works, post offices, police and fire departments.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT USE: This use includes facilities for scientific
laboratory research in scientific, medical or technology intensive fields. This
use shall include, but shall not be limited to, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals,
genetics, plastics, polymers, resins, coatings, fibers, fabrics, films, heat
transferring, and radiation research, but not facilities for the manufacture or
sale of products, except as incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory or
research facility. This use may include accessory retail and service uses that
primarily serve its employees including, but not limited to, daycare centers,
restaurants and dry cleaning establishments.
RESTAURANT: This use includes establishments, the primary purpose of which is
to prepare and serve a variety of food for consumption on the premises, within
the building or seated in parked motor vehicles on the premises, or for
carryout and consumption off the premises. "Restaurant" shall not include
"tavern/bar" where the primary purpose is the sale of alcoholic beverages, or
snack bars or refreshment stands that are accessory to recreational or
amusement facilities, as defined herein. For restaurants that have drive-up
windows, entertainment and/or outdoor seating, see "drive-through facility",
"live entertainment/dancing" and "outdoor cafes", as defined herein.
RETAIL GOODS ESTABLISHMENT: This use includes establishments where the primary
purpose is the sale of physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the
consumer. This use shall include, but not be limited to, stores that sell
groceries, hardware, clothing, auto parts, jewelry and shoes. "Retail goods
establishment" shall not include "heavy retail and service" establishments, as
defined herein, that are characterized by regular exterior service or storage
activities.
SCHOOL, PRIMARY OR SECONDARY: This use includes public, private or parochial
institutions primarily engaged in academic instruction for all, or part of,
grades kindergarten through twelfth, and recognized or approved by the state of
Illinois. This use may include accessory daycare centers for children over the
age of three (3). This definition of school includes school grounds.
SCHOOL, SPECIALIZED INSTRUCTIONAL: This use includes institutions engaged in
specialized instructional areas for all ages including, but not limited to,
driving, trade, vocational, art, music and dance schools.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Sexually oriented business" and associated
definitions are located in chapter 10, "Sexually Oriented Businesses", of this
title.
TATTOO PARLOR: An establishment whose principal business activity, either in
terms of operation or as held out to the public, is the practice of placing of
designs, letters, figures, symbols or other marks upon or under the skin of any
person, using ink or other substances, which result in the permanent coloration
of the skin by means of the use of needles or other instruments designed to
contact or puncture the skin.
TAVERN/BAR: This use includes business establishments engaged primarily in the
retail sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages to public patrons for
consumption on the establishment's premises and includes beer bars, parlors,
lounges, cabarets and nightclubs. "Tavern/bar" may also include accessory sale
of prepared food. For tavern/bar with entertainment, see definition of Live
Entertainment/Dancing.
THEATER: This use includes indoor establishments where motion pictures or live
performances are offered for public viewing, to which entrance money is
received for admission.
TRANSPORTATION STATION AND TERMINAL: This use includes facilities or locations
where the principal use is the handling, receiving and transferring of
passenger and/or freight train or bus traffic, and may include accessory
loading and unloading, and storing or transferring of freight and other
equipment used to accomplish the foregoing activities.
UTILITY, COMMUNITY/REGIONAL: This use includes generation and regional
facilities, such as regional switching stations, pump storage, sewer/water
treatment, and other facilities not housed inside small scale buildings. This
use does not include "utility, local", as defined herein.
UTILITY, LOCAL: This use includes pump stations, utility substations or
transmission and local distribution facilities, including telephone, cable,
fiber optic, sewer/water and utilities housed in small scale buildings. This
use shall not include "utility, community/regional", as defined herein.
WAREHOUSE/DISTRIBUTION: This use includes structures or areas, or a portion
thereof, used principally for the storage or distribution of goods and
merchandise to retailers, nonresidential users, or to other wholesalers. This
use shall not include "manufacturing, light/assembly", as defined herein.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: A parcel of land that contains wireless
communication infrastructure such as transmitters, support structures,
monopoles, equipment, accessory buildings, parking, and other uses and
installations associated with, and ancillary to, wireless communication
transmission. See definition of Wireless Communications.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS: Any personal wireless service, as defined by the
federal communications act of 1996, which includes FCC licensed commercial
wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal communications
services (PCS), special mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio
(ESMR), paging, wireless data service, and similar services that currently
exist or that may be developed in the future.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus at a fixed location
designed for wireless communications through the sending and/or receiving of
electromagnetic waves. See definition of Wireless Communications.
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER: A structure that is designed and constructed
primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more wireless communications
antennas. See definition of Wireless Communications. (Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007,
eff. 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 1775, 12-14-2011; Ord. 1792, 6-27-2012; Ord. 2137,
2-28-2024)
11-16-4: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
ABUT: To share a common lot line or zoning district boundary, without being
separated by a street or alley.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A building that is located on the same lot as, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, another building or
structure, and the use of which is clearly incidental and subordinate to that
of the other building or structure.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE OR USE: A structure or use which:
   (A)   Is subordinate to and serves a principal structure or principal use.
   (B)   Is subordinate in area, extent or purpose to the principal structure
or principal use served.
   (C)   Contributes to the comfort, convenience or necessity of occupants of
the principal structure or principal use served.
   (D)   Is located on the same zoning lot as the principal structure or
principal use served, with the single exception of such accessory off street
parking facilities as are permitted to locate elsewhere than on the same zoning
lot with the building or use served.
ADDITION OR EXPANSION: Any of the following: a) an increase in floor area of a
building; b) a modification to the roofline of a building, such as the
construction of a dormer that increases the amount of floor space devoted to
human use or occupancy; or c) the reconstruction of a building or structure
which is not accompanied by a change in the use of a lot.
ADVERTISING BENCH: Any bench or bench like structure that is used, in whole or
in part, for advertising purposes by means of a message or design painted on,
printed on, affixed to or otherwise designed as an integral part of the bench.
ALLEY: A public right of way that normally affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property.
ALTERATION: Any change in size, shape, character, occupancy or use of a
building or structure.
ANTENNA: Any exterior apparatus at a fixed location designed for telephone,
radio, data, internet or other communications through the sending and/or
receiving of electromagnetic waves, including equipment attached to a tower,
structure or building.
APARTMENT HOUSE: A building that is used, or intended to be used, as a home or
residence for more than two (2) families living in separate apartments.
ARRAYS: A set of antennas for one service or service provider that is placed on
a tower, structure or building at a given height aboveground and is spaced to
avoid internal interference.
AWNING: A structure made of cloth, metal or other materials, approved by the
superintendent of buildings, affixed to a building in such a manner that the
structure may be raised or retracted to a position against the building.
BALCONY: A platform which projects from the exterior wall of a building above
the ground floor, which is exposed to the open air, has direct access to the
interior of the building, and is not supported by posts or columns extending to
the ground.
BALLOON: An inflated nonporous object filled with heated gas or a gas lighter
than air.
BANNER: Any sign printed or displayed upon cloth or other flexible material
with or without frames.
BASEMENT: A portion of a building located partly underground, but having more
than half its clear floor to ceiling height below the average grade of the
adjoining ground.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2633.gif]
BAY WINDOW: A window which projects outward from the building, beginning at
least two feet (2') aboveground and does not rest on the building foundation or
on the ground.
BEACON: A stationary or revolving light, which flashes or projects
illumination, single- or multi-colored, in any manner that is intended to
attract or divert attention. However, this term is not intended to include any
kind of lighting device that is required or necessary under the safety
regulations described by the federal aviation administration or other similar
agencies.
BILLBOARD: A freestanding sign or wall sign that advertises a business or
product, and is not located on the premises where the business is located or
the product is the primary product available for sale.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets or by a combination of one or more
streets and public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights of way, corporate
boundary lines or watercourse.
BLOCKFACE: The properties abutting on one side of the street and lying between
the two (2) nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest
intersecting or intercepting street and railroad rights of way, public parks,
cemeteries, corporate boundary line or watercourse.
BOARDING HOUSE: A building or premises where meals are regularly served, or is
equipped to serve meals, by prearrangement for definite periods for
compensation, and not open to transients.
BUILDING: A structure entirely separated from any other structure by space or
by walls in which there are no communicating doors or windows, or similar
openings, and having a roof supported by walls or columns for the shelter,
support or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. Two (2) or more buildings
designed and intended for use as two-family dwellings, apartment houses, stores
or other like business occupancy may be considered as one building if
constructed as a single unit.
BUILDING AREA: The maximum horizontal projected area of a building and its
accessories, excluding open steps, terraces and cornices projecting not more
than twenty inches (20").
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or other structures, by a
permanent roof and by exterior walls, having only windows and normal entrance
or exit doors or by party walls.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by an open space on the same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT, ACCESSORY BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the
established average finished grade to the highest point of the roof or the
highest point of the structure. (No illustration provided.)
BUILDING HEIGHT, PRINCIPAL BUILDING: The vertical distance measured from the
average finished grade, or proposed finished grade. Chimneys, spires, steeples,
towers, elevator penthouses, tanks and similar projections other than signs
shall not be included in calculating the height.
   (A)   In the case of a flat roof, at the front of the building to the
highest point of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher.
   (B)   In the case of a mansard roof, to the deck line.
   (C)   In the case of a gable, hip or gambrel roof, to the mean point between
the eaves and the ridge. See illustration below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2635.gif]
BUILDING LINE SETBACK: A line established herein generally parallel with the
street line. Between such line and the street line, the front line of a
building shall not be built or located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which the principal use of the
lot on which it is located is conducted.
BUILDING, RESIDENTIAL: A building which is arranged, designed, used or intended
to be used for residential occupancy by one or more families or lodgers and
includes, but is not limited to, the following types: single-family detached
dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, and multi-family
dwellings.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located,
placed or affixed in the place where it is or where it is intended to be
placed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setbacks of buildings or
structures, and the location of the same with respect to one another, and
includes the following:
   (A)   Size and height of buildings.
   (B)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets or other buildings.
   (C)   Gross floor area of buildings in relation to lot area (floor area
ratio).
   (D)   All open spaces allocated to buildings.
   (E)   Amount of lot area provided per dwelling unit.
BULLETIN BOARD: Any sign with a changeable message board erected in a permanent
fashion by a charitable, educational or religious institution or public body,
which is erected upon the same property as said institution.
BUSINESS: Engaging in purchase, sale, barter or exchange of goods, wares or
merchandise; the maintenance or operation of offices or recreational or
amusement enterprises operated for profit.
CANOPY: Any structure, other than an awning, made of materials such as cloth,
metal or other materials approved by the superintendent of buildings, with a
frame either attached to a building or projecting from a building, and carried
by a frame supported by the ground or sidewalk.
CAPACITY IN PERSONS: The "capacity in persons" of an establishment or use is
the maximum number of persons that can avail themselves of the services or
goods, of such establishment, at any one time, with reasonable comfort.
CARPORT: An open sided roofed automobile shelter, usually formed by extension
of the roof from the side of a building.
COLLOCATION: Placement of wireless communication equipment from more than one
service or service provider on a single site.
CONDOMINIUM: A condominium is a concept in ownership of real estate wherein the
parcel is registered under the Illinois condominium act and local ordinances,
if any.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure that complies with
all the regulations of this title or of any amendment hereto governing bulk for
the zoning district in which such building or structure is located or is
designed or intended for a conforming use.
CONTIGUOUS: Adjoining or abutting.
CURB LEVEL: The level of the established curb in front of a building or
structure measured at the center of such front. Where no curb level has been
established, it shall be deemed to be the established level of the centerline
of the street surface in front of a building or structure, measured at the
centerline of such front.
DECK: A structure that is attached or unattached to the principal building,
which is open to the sky and provides a platform that is raised more than one
foot (1') above the ground. A deck can be made of any material.
DISPLAY SURFACE AREA: The net geometric area enclosed by the display surface of
a sign, including the outer extremities of all letters, characters and
delineations. "Display surface area" shall be measured in square feet of
surface area and may also be referred to as square feet of surface area.
"Display surface area" shall not include the structural supports of
freestanding signs. If a sign has an irregular shape that causes difficulty in
determining surface area, the area shall be determined as the area of the
smallest circle, rectangle or triangle that can be used to enclose the "display
surface area". Both faces of a double faced sign shall be considered in
determining the "display surface area". If a sign is made up of several
elements that are supported by the same structure and are intended to convey
related parts of a single message, the elements will be considered as one sign
and the total display surface area of all the elements shall be used to
calculate the display surface area of the entire sign.
DISTRICT: A portion of the village within which certain uniform regulations and
requirements, or various combinations thereof, apply under the provisions of
this title.
DRIVEWAY: Any impervious, semipervious (e.g., Grasscrete) or compacted gravel
surface providing direct ingress and egress to a parking space or garage.
DWELLING: A building, or portion thereof, but not an automobile house trailer,
designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, including single-family
dwellings, two-family dwellings, townhouse dwellings, and multi-family
dwellings, but not including "hotel/motel" or "bed and breakfast
establishment", as defined in section 11-16-3 of this chapter.
DWELLING, ATTACHED: A dwelling which is joined to another dwelling at one or
more sides by a party wall or walls.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is entirely surrounded by open space on
the same lot.
DWELLING UNIT: A dwelling unit consists of a group of rooms constituting all or
part of a dwelling, which are arranged, designed, used or intended for use
exclusively as living quarters for one "family", as defined herein, and which
include permanently installed bathroom and kitchen facilities.
EASEMENT: The right to use or benefit from the land of another, for a
restricted purpose, without compensating the owner.
ERECT: To build, construct, attach, hang, place, suspend or affix. "Erect"
shall also include the painting of wall signs.
ESTABLISHMENT, BUSINESS: A place of business carrying on operations, the
ownership and management of which are separate and distinct from those of any
other place of business located on the same zoning lot, and where access to
such business establishment is separate and distinct.
FALL ZONE: The area on the ground, within a prescribed radius from the base of
a wireless communication tower, within which there is potential hazard from
falling debris or collapsing material.
FAMILY: One or more individuals related by blood, marriage or adoption, or not
to exceed five (5) persons not so related, living, sleeping, cooking and eating
on the premises as a single housekeeping unit.
FENCE: Any manmade structure that is constructed for the purpose of, or has the
effect of, enclosing or screening the area it is constructed upon.
FIRE PIT: A hole dug into the ground for the purpose of containing a fire lined
with, or without, rocks, bricks or other type of material.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): For the purpose of determining
the floor area ratio, the "floor area" of a building is the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building measured from the
exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating
two (2) buildings. The "floor area" of a building shall include any floor area
when more than one-half (1/2) of the area height is above the established curb
level or above the finished lot grade level where curb level has not been
established, elevator shafts and stairwells at each floor, floor space used for
mechanical equipment (except equipment, open or enclosed, located on the roof),
penthouses, attic space having head room of seven feet ten inches (7'10") or
more, interior balconies and mezzanines and enclosed porches, and floor area
devoted to accessory uses, including any space devoted to off street parking or
loading within parking garages/structures. Surface parking shall not be
included in "floor area". The "floor area" of structures devoted to bulk
storage of materials including, but not limited to, grain elevators and
petroleum storage tanks, shall be determined on the basis of height in feet (10
feet in height shall equal 1 floor).
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Loading Requirements):
"Floor area" when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off street parking
spaces and loading berths for any use shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, or portion thereof,
devoted to such use, including accessory storage areas located within selling
or working space such as counters, racks or closets, and any basement floor
area devoted to retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods,
or to business or professional offices. "Floor area" for the purposes of
measurement for off street parking spaces shall not include floor area devoted
primarily to storage purposes (except as otherwise noted herein), floor area to
be devoted to off street parking or loading facilities, including aisles, ramps
and maneuvering space, or basement floor area, other than area devoted to
retailing activities, to the production or processing of goods, or to business
or professional offices.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained through dividing the gross floor
area of a building or buildings by the lot area on which such building or
buildings are located.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination. It is equivalent to the illumination at
all points that are one foot (1') distant from uniform source of one
candlepower.
FREQUENCY: Signifies the number of oscillations per second in a sound wave and
is an index of the pitch of the resulting sound.
FRONT LINE, BUILDING: The line of the main wall nearest to and facing the
street, including such wall of sun parlors or porches, open or enclosed, and
excluding only open steps and terraces, and walls or fences not more than three
and one-half feet (31/2') in height.
FRONTAGE: That dimension of property fronting on one side of a street between
the two (2) nearest intersecting streets, measured along the line of the
street, or if dead ended, then that dimension of property abutting on one side
between an intersecting street and the dead end of the street.
FRONTAGE, ZONING LOT: That dimension of property of such zoning lot fronting on
a street and measured between side lot lines.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: A garage with capacity for not more than three (3) motor
vehicles in which no business or industry connected directly or indirectly with
motor vehicles is carried on. Maximum floor area shall not exceed eight hundred
sixty four (864) square feet and the height of the peak of the roof shall not
exceed fourteen feet (14').
GARAGE, PUBLIC: A garage, other than a private garage (see definition of
Garage, Private), used for housing or care of more than three (3) automobiles,
or where such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired or kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.
GRADE: The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building or structure.
HEIGHT: The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of a structure.
See definition of Building Height.
HOTEL: A building in which board and lodging are provided and offered to the
public for compensation, and open to transients.
HOUSEHOLD RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT: Recreation equipment, or a structure
customarily and typically found on a residential lot, that is incidental to and
associated with a dwelling unit located on the same lot. This includes play
equipment, swimming pools, spas, tennis courts, basketball backboards/hoops,
and skateboard half pipes, but does not include lawn furniture and ornaments,
barbecues, or satellite dishes.
INCOMPATIBLE USE: A use that is incapable of direct association with certain
other uses because it is contradictory, incongruous or discordant.
INFLATABLE ADVERTISING DEVICES: A portable advertising device that is supported
primarily by compressed air or other gases. Such devices may be sealed from
escaping or may be maintained in an inflated condition by means of a fan or
blower, which is designed to maintain air pressure inside the device greater
than the atmospheric air pressure outside the device.
LOGO: A business trademark or symbol.
LOT: A parcel of land under single ownership, whether described by metes and
bounds or as a platted lot or lots.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2637.gif]
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and corner
lot lines.
LOT AREA, GROSS: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and
rear lot lines, but not including any area occupied by the waters of a duly
recorded lake or river.
LOT, CORNER: A lot located at the intersection of two (2) streets or a lot
bounded on two (2) sides by a curving street, any two (2) chords of which form
an angle of one hundred twenty degrees (120o) or less, as measured on the lot
side.
LOT COVERAGE: A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion of
a site that is covered by principal and accessory buildings.
LOT DEPTH: The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and the rear
lot line of a lot, measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot or a through lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The boundary of a lot that is along an existing or dedicated
public street, or where no public street exists, is along a public way, where
such public way is not a dedicated street, the right of way of such public way
shall be deemed to be sixty six feet (66'), unless otherwise provided.
LOT LINE, REAR: That boundary of a lot, which is most distant from and is, or
is most nearly, parallel to the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot that is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: An area of land designation as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded or registered with the county recorder of deeds.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot where the street side lot line is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having frontage on two (2) streets at opposite ends of the
lot.
LOT WIDTH: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured
at the building setback line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2639.gif]
LOT, ZONING: A single tract of land located within a single block which, at the
time of filing for a building permit, is designated by its owner or developer
as a tract to be used, developed or built upon as a unit, under single
ownership or control. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with a lot of
record.
MANSARD ROOF: A double sloped pitched roof rising steeply from the eaves and
having a summit of flatter slope on both sides of the ridge.
MARQUEE: A permanent rooflike structure constructed of durable material
extending from part of the wall of a building but not supported by the ground.
MEDICAL CANNABIS DISPENSING ORGANIZATION: A facility operated by an
organization or business that is registered by the department of financial and
professional regulation to acquire medical cannabis from a registered
cultivation center for the purposes of dispensing cannabis, paraphernalia, or
related supplies and educational materials to registered qualifying patients.
MEMORIAL PLAQUE: A plaque designating names of buildings and/or date of
erection, and other items such as architect, contractor or others involved in
the building's creation cut into or attached to a building surface.
MEZZANINE: An intermediate or fractional story between the floor and ceiling of
a main story, used for a purpose accessory to the principal use. A mezzanine is
usually just above the ground or main floor and extends over only part of the
main floor.
MOBILE HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which in the
traveling mode is eight feet (8') or more in width or forty feet (40') or more
in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) square feet
or more, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with or without a permanent foundation, when connected to the required
utilities; and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical
systems contained therein.
MONOPOLE TOWER: The type of self-supporting tower consisting of a single pole
constructed of steel.
MOTOR VEHICLE: Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for transportation
of persons or goods along public streets or alleys, or other public ways.
MOTORCYCLE: A usually two (2) wheeled self-propelled vehicle having one or two
(2) saddles or seats, and which may have a sidecar attached. For purposes of
this title, motorbikes, motor scooters, mopeds, and similar vehicles are
classified as motorcycles.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name, address or profession of the person or
persons occupying the lot or a part of the building.
NONCONFORMING LOT: A lot of record that does not meet the lot area or lot width
requirements of this title for the zoning district in which it is located.
NONCONFORMING USE, BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: An existing use, building or
structure or part or appurtenance thereof not in conformance with this title,
building code or other ordinances of the village.
OPACITY: Degree of obscuration of light.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE: A self-contained, manufactured noncombustible cooking unit
provided with a tightfitting screen or lid and supported off the ground by
noncombustible legs.
OWNER: A titleholder of record, or if title is held in trust, the beneficiary
of the trust.
PARKING SPACE: An area not less than nine feet by twenty feet (9' x 20'),
exclusive of drives or aisles, connected with, or accessible to, a street or
alley.
PARTY WALL: A wall, which is common to, but divides, contiguous buildings. Such
a wall contains no openings and extends from its footing below finished ground
grade to the height of the exterior surface of the roof.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2641.gif]
PATIO: An impervious surface no higher than one foot (1') above the ground,
which is designed and intended for recreational use by people, rather than as a
parking space.
PERMANENT RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: An identification sign used to indicate
the entrance to a subdivision or unified residential area.
PERMITTEE: A person receiving an erection permit pursuant to the provisions of
this title.
PERSON: An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association or
other legal entity.
PERSON WITH A DISABILITY: Any individual whose disability:
   (A)   Is attributable to mental, intellectual or physical impairments or a
combination of mental, intellectual or physical impairments.
   (B)   Is likely to continue for a significant amount of time or
indefinitely.
   (C)   Results in functional limitations in three (3) or more of the
following areas or major life activities:
      1.   Self-care.
      2.   Receptive or expressive language.
      3.   Learning.
      4.   Mobility.
      5.   Self-direction.
      6.   Capacity for independent living.
      7.   Economic self-sufficiency.
   (D)   Reflects the person's need for a combination and sequence of special
interdisciplinary or generic care, treatment or other services which are of a
life long or extended duration.
PLACE OF WORSHIP: Any church, synagogue, mosque, temple or building used
primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
PORCH: A covered platform that projects from the exterior wall of a building,
has direct access to the street level of the building, may be supported by
posts, and has no roof supporting walls on three (3) sides.
PROPERTY LINES: The lines bounding a zoning lot, as defined herein.
PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property that is owned, rented or leased by any governmental
unit, such as the village, park district, school district, county, state or any
subdivisions thereof. This shall include all streets, parkways, sidewalks,
alleys, buildings, parking lots, landscaped areas, parks, schools and any
municipal signs, traffic control devices, trees, utility poles, shelters or
streetlights located thereon.
PUBLIC WAY: Any sidewalk, street, alley, highway or other public thoroughfare.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land with tracks and auxiliary facilities for
track operation, but not including freight depots or stations, loading
platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops, or car yards.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation or the conduct of
business or industry, except sewage.
RIGHT OF OWNERSHIP: See definition of Owner.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA: A device commonly parabolic in shape, mounted at a
fixed point for the purpose of capturing television signals transmitted via
satellite communications facilities and serving the same or similar function as
the common television antenna.
SEARCH RING: An area of land that is best suited for a tower location and
transmissions.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between the front line of the building
or structure and the front property line.
SHOPPING CENTER: Two (2) or more retail stores and/or service establishments or
one retail store and one service establishment, sharing customer parking areas,
regardless of whether said stores and/or establishments occupy separate
structures or are under separate ownership.
SIGHT DISTANCE TRIANGLE: See definition of Vision Clearance Area.
SIGN: Means and includes every device, frame, letter, figure, character, mark,
plane, point, design, picture, stroke, stripe, trademark, reading matter and
supporting structure, which is used, or intended to be used, to attract
attention or convey information when the same is placed outdoors in view of the
general public. In addition, any of the above, which is not placed outdoors,
shall be considered a sign within the meaning of this title, when placed near
the inside surface of a window in such a way as to be in view of the general
public and used, or intended to be used, to attract or convey information to
motorists. For the purpose of determining the number of signs, a sign shall be
considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements
organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where a sign is a double faced
sign, both faces together will constitute one sign. Where matter is displayed
in a random manner, without organized relationship to elements, or where there
is a reasonable doubt as to the relationships of elements, each element shall
be considered to be a single sign. Inflatable advertising devices shall be
considered as signs when the purpose of the device is to attract attention to a
particular business, whether or not the device has a commercial message printed
on it or affixed to it in any manner.
SIGN, A-FRAME: An advertising device ordinarily in the shape of an "A", or some
variation thereof, located on the ground, not permanently attached thereto,
easily movable and usually two (2) sided.
SIGN, ABANDONED: Any sign that is located on property that becomes vacant and
unoccupied for a period of one month, or any sign that pertains to a time,
event or purpose that no longer applies, shall be deemed to have been
abandoned. Permanent signs applicable to a business temporarily suspended
because of a change of ownership or management of such business shall not be
deemed abandoned unless the property remains vacant for a period of three (3)
months.
SIGN, AWNING: A sign that is mounted or painted on, or attached to, an awning.
No such sign shall project vertically above or horizontally beyond the physical
dimensions of such awning.
SIGN, CANOPY: A sign that is painted on, printed on or attached to a canopy.
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL: A sign that directs the reader to the location of a private
residence, public or educational institution, historical structure or area, or
public park or building.
SIGN, DIRECTORY: A sign that serves as common or collective classification for
a group of persons or businesses operating on the same zoning lot (e.g.,
shopping center, office complex, etc.). Such sign may name the persons or
businesses included, but carry no other advertising matter.
SIGN FACE: That part of the sign that is, or can be, used to identify,
advertise, communicate information, or for visual representation, which
attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. The term "sign face"
includes any background or surrounding material, panel, trim or ornamentation,
color, and direct or self-illumination that differentiates the sign from the
building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon or against which it is
placed. The term "sign face" does not include any portion of the support
structure for the sign, provided that no message, symbol or any of the
previously described elements of a sign face is placed on or designated as part
of the support structure.
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign on which artificial or reflected light is
not maintained stationary and constant in intensity and color, flashes, moves,
scintillates, blinks, flickers or uses intermittent electrical pulsations while
in use.
SIGN, FREESTANDING: A sign that is attached to, or part of, a completely self-
supporting structure. The supporting structure shall be set firmly in or below
the ground surface, and shall not be attached to any building or structure,
whether portable or stationary. A freestanding sign may be a pole or monument
sign.
SIGN, GOVERNMENT: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained for
any official governmental purpose.
SIGN GRAPHICS: Any lettering, numerals, figures, designs, symbols, or other
drawings or images used to create a sign.
SIGN HEIGHT: The distance from the mean elevation of the adjacent finished
grade to the highest point of a sign, as measured from the bottom of finished
grade at the base of the sign.
SIGN, HORIZONTAL PROJECTING: A projecting sign that is greater in width than
height.
SIGN, IDENTIFICATION: A sign giving the name, trademark, or other readily
recognized symbol or address, or any combination thereof, of a building,
business, development or establishment on the premises where it is located.
SIGN, ILLUMINATED: Any sign that has characters, letters, figures, designs or
outline illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as a part of the sign
proper, or by electric lights or luminous tubes so arranged that the light is
reflected from the sign to the eyes of the viewer.
SIGN, MEMORIAL: A sign, tablet or plaque memorializing a person, event,
structure or site.
SIGN, MOBILE: Any sign designed to be transported or movable including, but not
limited to:
   (A)   Signs with wheels or with wheels removed.
   (B)   Signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels.
   (C)   Signs designed to be transported by trailer, wheels or boat.
   (D)   Signs converted to, or constructed as, an A-frame sign.
   (E)   Signs painted, mounted, or affixed on a motor vehicle or boat for
advertising purposes, parked on or off public right of way or shore, and
visible from the public right of way or shore, except signs identifying the
related business when the motor vehicle or boat is being used in the day to day
operations of that business.
   (F)   Mobile signs may be designated as electrical or nonelectrical.
SIGN, MONUMENT: Any sign, other than a pole sign, placed upon or supported by
the ground independently of any other structure. Monument signs are typically
mounted on a masonry base.
SIGN, MUNICIPAL: A sign erected and maintained pursuant to, and in discharge
of, any municipal functions or required by law.
SIGN, NONCONFORMING: A sign existing at the effective date hereof which could
not be built under the terms of this title.
SIGN, POLE: A sign erected and maintained on one or two (2) freestanding mast
(s) or pole(s) and not attached to any building. "Pole sign" does not include
monument signs, as defined herein.
SIGN, POLITICAL: A sign advocating action on a public issue or recommending a
candidate for public office.
SIGN, PROJECTING: Any sign that is attached to a building or other structure
and extends beyond the line of the building or structure, or beyond the surface
of that portion of the building or structure to which it is attached.
SIGN, PUBLIC SERVICE: A sign or device displaying only the time, temperature,
stock market quotations or civic messages.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE: A temporary sign placed upon property for the purpose of
advertising to the public the sale, lease, rental or open house of said
property.
SIGN, ROOF: Any sign wholly erected, constructed or maintained upon or above
the roof structure or parapet of any building with the principal support
attached to the roof structure.
SIGN STRUCTURE OR SUPPORT: Any structure that supports, or is capable of
supporting, a sign, including decorative cover.
SIGN, TEMPORARY: Any sign, banner, pennant or other advertising display
constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wall board or other
light materials approved by the village board and intended to be displayed for
a limited amount of time.
SIGN, VERTICAL PROJECTING: A projecting sign that is greater in height than in
width.
SIGN, WALL: Any sign that shall be affixed parallel to the wall, painted or
printed on the wall of any building in such a manner as to read parallel to the
wall on which it is mounted. For the purposes of this title, any sign display
that is affixed flat against the sloping surface of a mansard roof shall be
considered a wall sign. Any sign that is affixed to the face of a marquee shall
be considered a wall sign.
SIGN, WINDOW: A sign attached to, placed upon or printed on the interior or
exterior of a window or door of a building intended for viewing from the
exterior of such a building.
STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of a floor and
the surface of the floor next above, or if there is no floor above, the space
between the floor and the ceiling or roof above it. A basement shall be counted
as a story, for the purposes of this title, when more than one-half (1/2) of
such basement height is above the established curb level, or finished lot grade
level at the front of the building where curb level has not been established.
STORY, HALF: That portion of a building under a gable, hip, or mansard.
STREET: A thoroughfare over thirty feet (30') in width between property lines,
used for public foot and vehicle traffic, other than an alley. A street may
consist of two (2) or more lanes of pavement for through vehicular traffic, a
parking lane on one or both sides, parkways, or grass plots outside parking or
traffic lanes, and public sidewalks for foot traffic.
STREET, ARTERIAL: A street designated as an arterial street in the
comprehensive plan.
STREET, COLLECTOR: A street designated as a collector in the comprehensive
plan.
STREET LEVEL: The story of a building that has its floor at the closest level
to the street, with direct pedestrian access to that story from the outside.
STREET LINE: The dividing line between a street and a lot. The front street
line of a corner lot is the shortest street line.
STREET, LOCAL: A street that is not an arterial or a collector street.
STREET WALL: The wall of a building nearest to and facing on a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change, other than incidental repairs, which would
prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams, girders or foundations.
STRUCTURE: Any improvement upon land, the use of which requires a permanent or
temporary location on the ground or attachment to something having a permanent
or temporary location on the ground. This includes, but is not limited to,
buildings, signs, fences, decks, etc.
SWIMMING POOL: A receptacle for water and/or an artificial pool of water having
a depth at any point of more than two feet (2'), intended for the purposes of
immersion therein of human beings, and includes all appurtenant equipment.
TEMPORARY: Existing for a period of not more than six (6) months.
TEMPORARY CONTRACTOR'S AND REAL ESTATE SALES OFFICE: This use includes
watchman's trailers, construction equipment sheds, contractor or real estate
sales trailers, and similar uses incidental to a construction project and the
sales of homes within a newly constructed development.
TENT: Any structure or enclosure, the roof of which and/or one-half (1/2) or
more of the sides, are constructed of silk, cotton, canvas, fabric or a similar
light material.
TERRACE: An open area with a paved platform and a flat roof or rooflike
structure, and adjacent on at least one side to a building, but not adjacent to
any entrance to a building.
TOWER: A structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose
of supporting one or more antennas, including monopole towers or any new tower
structures approved by the village of Midlothian. The term encompasses radio
transmission towers or communication services towers, alternative tower
structures, and similar structures.
UNIFIED CONTROL: The combination of two (2) or more tracts of land wherein each
owner has agreed that his tract of land shall be developed as part of a planned
unit development and shall be subject to the control of this title applicable
to the planned unit development.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land or building thereon is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and
shall include any manner of performance of such activity.
USE, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Structure Or Use.
USE, PERMITTED: A use which may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and performance standards (if any) of such district.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
USE, SPECIAL: A use, either public or private, which, because of its unique
characteristics, cannot be properly classified as a permitted use in a
particular district(s). In each case, after due consideration of the impact of
such use upon neighboring land and of the public need for the particular use at
the particular location, such "special use" may or may not be granted.
VISION CLEARANCE AREA: The "vision clearance area" at the intersection of two
(2) streets, which shall be defined as a triangular area measured twenty five
feet (25') on the front lot line and fifty feet (50') on the corner side lot
line of a corner lot, and shall not be obstructed by any sign, wall, fence,
hedge, shrubbery or other object which exceeds four feet (4') in height. In the
event that the grade of a lot is higher than the street grade, the height of
the wall, fence, hedge or shrubbery shall be reduced so that the visional
clearance is not obstructed four feet (4') over the grade of the street.
YARD: An open space, on the same zoning lot with a building or structure,
unoccupied and unobstructed from its lowest level to the sky, except as
otherwise permitted in this title. A "yard" extends along a lot line and to a
depth or width specified in the yard requirements for the zoning district in
which such zoning lot is located.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A side yard on a corner lot which faces a public street. In
differentiating the corner side yard from the front yard on corner lots, the
corner side yard shall be the yard with the greater width.
YARD, FRONT: An open unoccupied space between the front line of the building
and the street line. In differentiating the front yard from the corner side
yard on corner lots, the front yard shall be the yard with the narrowest width.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard that is located immediately adjacent to
another zoning lot or to an alley separating such side yard from another zoning
lot.
YARD, REAR: An open space between the rear line of the building and the rear
line of the lot, for the full width of the lot and unoccupied except for
authorized accessory buildings.
YARD, SIDE: An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building between
the building and the side line of the lot, and extending from the street line
to the rear line of the building, except on a corner lot, the side yard on the
street side shall extend from the front street line to the rear lot line.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/5cdb7ff521caceff1819d58e48dd4c72aae77395/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2643.gif]
(Ord. 1650, 10-10-2007, eff. 10-15-2007; amd. Ord. 1870, 5-14-2014)
TITLE 12
SUBDIVISIONS
Subdivision Regulations   1
Flooding And Stormwater   2
General And Administrative Procedures   2A
Site Development Requirements   2B
Floodplain Development Requirements   2C
CHAPTER 1
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
SECTION:
12-1-1: Purpose, Authority, Jurisdiction And Title
12-1-2: Definitions
12-1-2A: Minor Pin Consolidations And Pin Divisions
12-1-3: Commencement Of Construction
12-1-4: Informal Consideration
12-1-5: Preliminary Plat
12-1-6: Submission Of Final Plat
12-1-7: General Requirements
12-1-8: Documents
12-1-9: Appeals
12-1-10: Conditions Of Sale Or Lease
12-1-11: Conditions Of Recording
12-1-12: Amendments
12-1-13: Status Of Subdivisions In Process
12-1-14: Vacation Of Plats
12-1-15: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-1-16: Separability
12-1-17: Effective Date
12-1-1: PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, JURISDICTION AND TITLE:
   (A)   Purpose: In order to promote the orderly development of the village
and contiguous territories, in order to provide reasonable requirements for
public streets, community facilities and other public grounds; in order to
provide for the health, safety, comfort and conveniences of the residents of
the village and contiguous territories; in order that developers of land may
have a procedural guide, the following regulations establishing reasonable
standards of design and procedure for subdivisions and for resubdivision of
unimproved land and of areas subject to redevelopment within the village and
contiguous unincorporated territories are hereby adopted as part of the
official plan of the village.
   (B)   Authority: Authority for the administration of these regulations shall
be vested in the president and board of trustees.
   (C)   Jurisdiction: These regulations shall be applicable to all
subdivisions and resubdivisions of unimproved and/or improved land and areas
subject to redevelopment within the corporate limits of the village and
contiguous unincorporated territories not more than one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the corporate limits and not included in any other municipality.
   (D)   Title: The regulations contained in this chapter shall be referred to
officially as the SUBDIVISION AND REDEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS OF THE VILLAGE and
the term "regulations" shall mean and shall have the force and effect of
ordinance provisions of the village. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-2A:   Minor Pin Consolidations And Pin Divisions12-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of these regulations, certain words and phrases used herein are
defined as follows:
ALLEY: A public right of way which normally affords a secondary means of access
to abutting property. Frontage on an alley shall not be construed as satisfying
the requirements related to frontage on a dedicated street.
BOND: Any form of security including a cash deposit, surety bond, collateral,
property or instrument of credit in an amount and form satisfactory to the
village board and village attorney.
BUFFER STRIP: A narrow area planted with trees, evergreens, shrubs, fence or
any combination thereof which will provide effective screening.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: The line indicating the minimum horizontal distance
between the property line and building at the front or rear or side of the lot.
CROSSWALKWAY: A public right of way ten feet (10') or more in width between
property lines, which provides pedestrian access to adjacent properties.
CUL-DE-SAC: A short street having one end open to traffic and being terminated
at the other end by a vehicular turnaround.
EASEMENT: A grant by the owner of the use of a strip of land by others for a
specific purpose or purposes.
FINAL PLAT: The final map or drawing on which the subdivision plan is submitted
to the village board for approval and which, if approved, will be submitted to
the county clerk for recording.
GRADE: The slope of a road, street, or public way, specified in percentage
terms.
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC: Public improvements shall mean any sanitary sewer, storm
sewer, drainage ditch, water main, roadway, parkway strip, sidewalk, planting
strip, crosswalkway, off street parking areas, street trees, streetlights, or
other facility for which the village may ultimately assume the responsibility
for maintenance and operation, or is constructed for general public use or
benefit.
LOT LINES: The property lines bounding the lot.
   Front Lot Line: The front property line of a zoning lot, or that line which
separates said lot from the street right of way.
   Rear Lot Line: That lot line which is opposite and most distant from the
front line of the lot.
   Side Lot Line: The lot lines other than front or rear lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: Refers to the mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured at right angles to the side lot lines. Where the side lot lines are
not parallel, the lot width shall be considered as the average of the width
between such side lot lines measured at the building setback line.
LOTS: A parcel of land in a subdivision separated from other parcels or
portions by virtue of a plat of subdivision recorded with the Cook County
recorder's office and identifiable by reference to said plat of subdivision and
not dependent for such identification by metes and bounds. Such a tract, plat
or portion of a subdivision is intended as a unit for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of transfer of ownership or for building development.
MAJOR STREET: A street of great continuity sometimes called an arterial street
or highway which serves or is intended to serve as a principal trafficway for
fast or heavy traffic, and which taken together comprise the basic structure of
the street system of the village and surrounding area.
MAJOR STREET PLAN: A part of the official plan showing the location and
dimensions of principal thoroughfares.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET: A street running parallel to and adjacent to or in the
immediate vicinity of a major street or highway and which has as its purpose
the relief of the major street or highway from the local service of abutting
properties.
MINOR PIN CONSOLIDATION: A lot consolidation which creates no more than three
(3) PINs and involves no variations or departures from underlying zoning
district standards. If any minor pin consolidation should involve a variation
or departure from underlying zoning district standards, a separate application
and permit shall be required for such variation or departure.
MINOR PIN DIVISION: A subdivision which creates no more than three (3) PINs and
involves no variations or departures from underlying zoning district standards.
If any minor pin division should involve a variation or departure from
underlying zoning district standards, a separate application and permit shall
be required for such variation or departure.
MINOR STREET: A street or limited continuity which serves or is intended to
serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: The comprehensive plan or any portion thereof made
and adopted by the village in accordance with the laws of the state and the
provisions of this code indicating the general or specific locations
recommended for streets, parks, public buildings, zoning districts and all
other public improvements.
PARKWAY STRIP: A strip of land between the roadway and the sidewalk or sidewalk
site.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A tract of land developed as a unit, which includes
two (2) or more principal buildings and which is at least three (3) acres in
area. All applicable provisions of the subdivision regulations ordinance shall
apply to a planned unit development.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: The preliminary map or drawing on which the proposed layout
of a subdivision is submitted to the plan commission for consideration and
tentative approval.
RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land occupied or intended to be occupied by a street,
crosswalk, railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas pipeline,
water main, sanitary or storm sewer main, shade trees, or for another special
use. The usage of the term "right of way" for land platting purposes shall mean
that every right of way hereafter established and shown on a final plat is to
be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right of way
and not included within the dimensions or areas of such lots or parcels. Right
of way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm
drains, shade trees, or any other use involving maintenance by a public agency
shall be dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on which such right
of way is established.
ROADS OR ROADWAY: The paved area existing on the street right of way and not
the street right of way width.
SECONDARY STREET: A street of considerable continuity sometimes called a
collector street which serves or is intended to serve as a secondary trafficway
and as a feeder between minor streets in a neighborhood and one or more major
streets.
SIDE YARD: An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a building and
located between the building and the side line of the lot and extending from
the street line to the rear yard.
SIDEWALK: The portion of a street or crosswalkway, paved or otherwise surfaced
intended for pedestrian use only.
STREET: The width of the street right of way or easement, whether public or
private, and shall not be considered as the width of paving or other
improvement on the street right of way width.
SUBDIVIDER: Any person, group or corporation acting as a unit or any agent
thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a
"subdivision" as defined herein.
SUBDIVISION: The division of any tract or parcel of land into two (2) or more
lots or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of transfer of ownership or for building development or for planned unit
development (PUD), or if a new street is involved, any division of such parcel,
provided, it shall not apply if said subdivision falls within one of the
exceptions contained in the plat act 1 . The term includes resubdivision, and
where appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdividing or
to the land subdivided. Application for permit to construct two (2) or more
dwellings on a parcel or tract of land or to construct one or more additional
dwellings on a parcel or tract of land where one or more dwellings already
exist shall be construed as a building development envisioning future transfer
of ownership and shall be regarded as "subdivision". For purposes of
administration of these regulations a parcel or tract of land shall be deemed
to have the boundaries and dimensions given in the current maps of record of
the county of Cook.
UNIT AREA FOR DEVELOPMENT: An area which has been recognized by the plan
commission to be a neighborhood distinctive in character, generally serviced by
an elementary school and a neighborhood park, generally bounded by major
thoroughfares or natural boundaries and usually residential in character. (Ord.
1136, 6-24-1987)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS, as revised.
12-1-2A: MINOR PIN CONSOLIDATIONS AND PIN DIVISIONS:
As an alternative to the subdivision requirements of this title 12, if in the
determination of the village a pin consolidation or pin division is a minor pin
consolidation or pin division, the following shall apply.
(A)   An applicant for a minor pin division or consolidation may, at the
applicant's own risk, apply for such division or consolidation pursuant to this
section 12-1-2A. Applicants for a minor pin division or pin consolidation shall
provide a plat of division or plat of consolidation for review, prepared by a
state of Illinois licensed professional land surveyor, that accurately depicts
the existing and proposed lot configurations; the legal description(s) of the
resulting division or consolidation; the name and address of the applicant; a
brief statement describing the name of the division or consolidation and the
number of lots proposed; and the locations of any existing structures.
(B)   In addition, the applicant shall submit to the village a pin
consolidation or pin division application form as provided by the village, and
a pin division/consolidation form as provided by Cook County. These forms shall
be completed by the applicant and approved by the village.
(C)   Along with the survey and application forms, the applicant shall also pay
to the village a non-refundable deposit as determined by the village.
(D)   Once the application and any additional materials are approved by the
village, a hearing shall be held before the village plan commission pursuant to
village code sections 2-1-5 (Plan Commission Powers), and
12-1-2A and
11-2-9 (Public Hearings and Public Notices). At this hearing, the plan
commission shall afford all persons interested an opportunity to be heard on
the proposed division or consolidation. The public hearing may be adjourned and
reconvened from time to time.
(E)   Lands subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically
unsuitable should not be divided or consolidated for any uses that may increase
danger to health, life or property, or aggravate erosion or flood hazard.
(F)   In determining whether to grant a division or consolidation, the village
shall consider the following:
   1.   Compliance with the Illinois plat act;
   2.   Proposed use of the property in relation to surrounding properties, and
the village's comprehensive plan, zoning map, and building and zoning codes;
   3.   Access to utilities, drainage, and motor vehicles, including easements
and rights-of-way;
   4.   Parking, traffic flow and street congestion;
   5.   Any other condition of the resulting division/consolidation which may
be of concern to the health, safety, and welfare of the village and its
residents.
Following public hearing on the application, the plan commission shall make
recommendations to the village board whether to approve or deny the application
pursuant to village code section 2-1-5 (Powers of Commission). The plan
commission shall make a final report within thirty (30) days after the final
adjournment of the public hearing, and submit the proposed ordinance for the
entire village to the board of trustees, to be enacted with or without change,
or to be referred back to the commission for further consideration. (Ord. 2170,
5-14-2025)
12-1-3: COMMENCEMENT OF CONSTRUCTION:
No grading, building or construction of any kind relating to development of
land within the definition of "subdivision" shall be started except in
accordance with these regulations. Construction of improvements shall be in
accordance with subsection 12-1-7(G) of this chapter. Construction of buildings
and dwellings shall be started only after issuance of building permits and no
building permit shall be issued prior to recording of the final plat. (Ord.
1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-4: INFORMAL CONSIDERATION:
While the subdivision plan is still in sketch form, the subdivider may consult
with the plan commission to determine conformity to the official comprehensive
plan, including the major street plan, the zoning title, and compliance with
these regulations and with other village laws not in conflict with these
regulations. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-5: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Prior to the completion of the final survey of streets and lots of any
subdivision and before any map of the subdivision is made in form suitable for
recording, a preliminary plat, prepared in accordance with the regulations set
forth herein, shall be submitted to the plan commission for its review and
recommendations. In the event a proposed subdivision is one acre or less in
area, the subdivider shall have the right to dispense with preparation of the
preliminary plat and to proceed directly with submission of the final plat. In
such case, the fee of subsection (F) of this section shall be payable upon
submission of the final plat.
   (A)   Submission Of Preliminary Plat: An application in writing in sextuplet
(6 copies) for the conditional approval of the subdivision, together with ten
(10) prints of the preliminary plat shall be filed with the plan commission at
least ten (10) days prior to the regular monthly meeting of the commission to
receive action at such meeting. The plan commission may forward copies of the
application with prints to the engineer, the park board and the school boards.
The plan commission shall determine whether the preliminary plat is in proper
form and shall not receive or consider the application as filed until all
documents are in accordance with the requirements set forth herein.
The application is to be accompanied by a statement from the clerk, collector,
ex officio, that the filing fee has been paid as specified in subsection (F) of
this section.
   (B)   Consideration Of Preliminary Plat: The plan commission will study the
preliminary plat in connection with the official comprehensive plan including
the major street plan, the zoning title and the topography of the area, and
will take into consideration the general requirements of the community, the
particular requirements of the neighborhood, and the best use of the land to be
subdivided. Particular attention will be given to specific requirements for
parks, playgrounds, school sites, major streets, the adequacy of street
connections and the suitability of the land for development. The preliminary
plat may also be subject to check by the engineer, the park board and school
boards.
   (C)   Action On Preliminary Plat: The plan commission will communicate its
conditional approval or its disapproval, in writing to the subdivider within
sixty (60) days of the time at which application for conditional approval is
made, giving, in cases of conditional approval:
      1.   The specific changes which will be required in the preliminary plat.
      2.   The character and extent of the required public improvements.
      3.   The nature and extent of the percentage surety which it will require
to guarantee completion of the improvements.
   (D)   Conditional Approval Of Preliminary Layout: Conditional approval by
the plan commission of the preliminary layout does not constitute acceptance of
the plat of the proposed subdivision, acceptance of proposed improvements or
final agreement as to improvement specifications or cost. It is to be
considered only as approval of general layout design.
   (E)   Effective Period Of Conditional Approval: Conditional approval of the
preliminary plat shall be effective for a maximum period of twelve (12) months
except that submission within this period of a final plat applying to a portion
of the area covered by the preliminary plat shall extend the effective period
of conditional approval to a maximum of twenty four (24) months from the date
of submission of the preliminary plat. If a final plat has not been submitted
to the plan commission within these time limits, the preliminary plat shall
again be submitted to the plan commission for conditional approval.
   (F)   Fees:
      1.   Conditions: In order to cover the costs of examining the plat,
advertising and holding public hearings, legal fees, copying fees, tax search
fees, recording fees and other expenses incidental to the approval of the
subdivision and recording of same, the subdivider shall pay a fee at the time
of application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat. There will be
no refund of any portion of the fee if the subdivider fails to apply for final
approval of the subdivision. If, because of the failure of the subdivider to
submit a final plat within twelve (12) months after receiving conditional
approval of a preliminary plat, it is necessary to resubmit a preliminary plat
for conditional approval, the subdivider shall be required to pay the fee
currently in effect at the time of resubmission. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
      2.   Amount: The fees for submission of a subdivision shall be five
hundred dollars ($500.00), plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per dwelling
unit, existing and proposed. If the subdivision is not approved by the village
board, no refund will be given. (Ord. 1540, 6-12-2002)
      3.   Place Of Payment: Fees shall be paid to the clerk, collector, ex
officio, at the village hall.
      4.   Use: All fees collected for the submission and approval of
subdivisions shall be credited to the general fund of the village.
      5.   Separate Charge: All fees established by this section are in
addition to any sums paid to cover costs of preparation of improvement plan and
field inspection of construction as required under the provisions of section
12-1-7 of this chapter. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-6: SUBMISSION OF FINAL PLAT:
After approval of the preliminary layout by the plan commission and fulfillment
of the required conditions, the subdivider shall apply in writing to the
chairman of the plan commission for approval of a final plat. The final plat
shall conform substantially to the preliminary layout as given conditional
approval. The application shall be in duplicate and shall be accompanied by the
original inked plat on material approved by Cook County records office and ten
(10) prints. Specifications for the plat and for other documents to accompany
the application are given in section 12-1-8 of this chapter. The final plat
will not be considered as submitted unless it is in agreement with
specification and accompanied by the required documents.
   (A)   Hearing: The chairman of the plan commission will notify the
subdivider or his representative of the time and place at which he will be
heard publicly on behalf of his application.
   (B)   Action On Final Plat: The plan commission will communicate in writing
to the subdivider its disapproval or recommendation for approval of the final
plat, together with the reasons therefor within sixty (60) days after the date
on which application for such approval is made. If the plan commission approved
the final plat, such approval will be entered upon the tracings by signature of
the chairman. The tracings shall then be transmitted to the village board by
the plan commission with recommendation for its approval. Upon approval by
village board action the tracings shall be signed by the president. Approval by
the village board may be by resolution setting forth all conditions upon which
approval is predicated. The original tracing shall be recorded with the Cook
County recorder of deeds after all signatures and seals are affixed.
Appropriate notifications shall be given the plan commission and the subdivider
advising village board approval or disapproval and advising document numbers
after recording. If the plat is disapproved, the tracings are to be returned to
the plan commission with statement of reasons. A copy of the reasons for
disapproval may be filed in the office of the village clerk and the applicant
may be notified of this action in writing.
   (C)   Approval Not Acceptance Of Improvements: Approval of the final plat
shall not be deemed to constitute or effect any acceptance by the village of
any improvement shown on the plat.
   (D)   Effectiveness Of Final Approval: Approval of the final plat by the
plan commission and the board shall be null and void if the plat is not
acceptable for recording in the office of the recorder of deeds of Cook County.
   (E)   Documents: Attendant documents accompanying the final plat are to be
forwarded to the board with the tracings and are to be filed by the clerk.
(Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-7: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   General Principles Of Acceptability:
      1.   Conformance To Official Comprehensive Plan: The subdivision shall
conform to the official comprehensive plan or the portions thereof then
existing, and shall not encroach upon areas designated in the official
comprehensive plan for future public facilities.
      2.   Provision For Future Subdivision: If a tract is subdivided into
larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged to
allow the opening of future streets and logical further subdivision.
      3.   Reserve Strips Prohibited: There shall be no reservation of strips
of land that prevent or limit access to land dedicated or intended to be
dedicated to public use.
      4.   Buffer Strips: Where a residential subdivision adjoins a railroad
right of way, an industrial area, a business area, a major street or other land
use which would have a depreciating effect on the residential use of the
property, a buffer strip ten feet (10') in width, to form a screen, may be
required by the village.
      5.   Building Sites: Every lot must contain a suitable building site.
      6.   Trees: Valuable large trees shall be preserved whenever possible.
Where planting strips are provided with trees, trees or shrubs within a forty
foot (40') radius from intersecting property lines at a street intersection
shall not have branches closer than eight feet (8') to the ground over
sidewalks and fifteen feet (15') over roadways. The subdivider shall provide
two (2) trees per lot, spaced uniformly in the right of way, of uniform size no
less than two and one-half inches (21/2") in diameter, and of species approved
by the superintendent of public works.
These trees shall not be planted directly over water mains, sanitary sewer
lines, or underground gas or electric lines. The village also recommends that
the following trees not be allowed for planting in parkways: elms, willows,
poplars, box elders, soft maples, ornamental trees (crab trees, flowering
shrubs, fruit trees), and upright evergreens.
      7.   Neighborhood Plan: If a suggested plan for the neighborhood or area
in which the tract to be subdivided is located has been made by the village,
the street layout of the subdivision shall be in general conformance thereto.
      8.   Variations: Variations from the design and dimensional standards and
improvement requirements of these regulations may be made by the village in
cases where, owing to exceptional conditions, there are extreme difficulties or
hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of these regulations.
Resubdivision of a single lot of a platted block of an old subdivision shall be
considered as an exceptional condition meriting departure from the strict
letter of these regulations. No variation shall be made that will be
detrimental to the public welfare or that will affect adversely the official
comprehensive plan.
   (B)   Streets; Layout And Design:
      1.   Major Streets: Whenever a subdivision embraces a major street, as
shown on the major street plan, such major street shall be platted in the
location and of the width indicated on the major street plan.
      2.   Secondary Streets: Secondary streets shall be included when it is
apparent that sufficient traffic will flow from the minor streets within the
subdivision and that such traffic will need to be channeled to control the
number of access points to the major street. There is a requirement of a sixty
six foot (66') right of way.
      3.   Street Layout: The street layout shall be devised for the most
advantageous development of the entire neighborhood area. Where necessary to
the neighborhood pattern, existing principal streets in adjoining subdivisions
shall be continued and shall be at least as wide as the existing streets and in
alignment with them. The street layout shall provide for the future extension
of the principal streets into unsubdivided lands adjoining.
      4.   Minor Streets: Minor streets shall be so laid out so that their use
by through traffic will be discouraged. There is also a sixty six foot (66')
right of way requirement.
      5.   Intersections: There shall be a minimum number of intersections of
minor streets with major streets.
      6.   Marginal Access Streets: Where a subdivision has frontage on a major
street, as shown on the major street plan, or on a super highway or other high
volume trafficway and where it is not feasible to have the lots back to such
high volume streets, provision shall be made for marginal access streets. These
marginal access streets shall be approximately parallel to and on each side of
the major street right of way and separated from such right of way by a strip
of land at least forty feet (40') wide. Separation strips may be provided with
screen planting, but such planting shall be so placed that it does not obstruct
vision at intersections.
      7.   Streets For Uses Adjacent To Railroads Or Major Streets: Where a
subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right of way or major street, the
village may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such
right of way or major street, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of
the intervening land. The distances shall also be determined with due regard
for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations.
      8.   Streets At Business Centers: In front of areas zoned or designed for
commercial use, the street width and the roadway width shall be increased on
the side on which the property for commercial use is located by a merging lane
at least fifteen feet (15') wide. This is to ensure the free flow of traffic
without interference by vehicles entering or leaving parking areas. This is not
a parking space requirement and shall in no way affect or diminish requirements
by the zoning title or otherwise for off street parking facilities; neither
shall fulfillment of this requirement and its acceptance by the village be
deemed approval or endorsement of any change in zoning necessary for such
commercial use.
      9.   Alleys: Paved rear alleys not less than twenty feet (20') wide will
be required in all business and industrial districts of subdivisions, except
where special conditions make alleys impracticable; in such cases adequate off
street loading space, suitably surfaced, shall be provided. Dead end alleys
shall be avoided, or, if provided, shall include a turnaround. In general,
alleys will not be approved for residential districts of a subdivision, except
where topographic or other conditions may necessitate their use.
      10.   Half Streets: Half streets shall be prohibited, except where
essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision in conformity with
the other requirements of these regulations; and where the village president
and the board of trustees finds it will be practicable to require the
dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided.
Wherever a half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, the other half
of the street shall be placed within such tract. No strip or area shall be
reserved along any portion of a street, or alley which will prevent adjacent
property owners access thereto except by consent of the village board.
      11.   Street Grades: Street grades shall conform in general to the
terrain and shall be not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%) nor more than
five percent (5%). Street grades shall be such as to provide natural surface
drainage of stormwater regardless of the presence or absence of storm sewers.
The intent is to avoid depressions or inverts that will flood in flash storms
for which storm sewers are inadequate.
      12.   Cul-De-Sacs: Cul-de-sacs shall not exceed five hundred feet (500')
in length including turnaround and shall have a turnaround not less than one
hundred twenty five feet (125') in diameter of right of way and pavement
diameter of one hundred feet (100') back of curb to back of curb at the closed
end.
      13.   Right Of Way Widths: The minimum right of way widths for streets,
alleys and crosswalkways shall be as provided in title 1, chapter 15 of this
code.
      14.   Roadway Widths: Roadway widths shall be as provided for in title 1,
chapter 15 of this code.
      15.   Curvature Of Streets: The minimum radius of curvature of streets on
the centerline shall be:
 
Major street     600 feet
Secondary street 300 feet
Minor street     100 feet
Cul-de-sac       100 feet
 
      16.   Reversed Curves: Between reversed curves on major and secondary
streets there shall be a tangent at least one hundred feet (100') long.
      17.   Intersections: Street intersections shall be at right angles or
nearly so. Where, because of topographic or other reasons an intersection
cannot be at right angles, such intersection shall be so designed as to ensure
safety. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty
five feet (125') shall be prohibited.
      18.   Curb Radii: Curb radii shall not be less than twenty feet (20').
Where an angle of intersection less than sixty degrees (60°) is permitted, curb
radii shall be increased as necessary for safety.
      19.   Street Names: No street names may be used which will duplicate or
be confused with the names of existing streets in the Midlothian postal
district. Existing street names must be projected wherever possible. Street
names shall be subject to the approval of the village board.
      20.   Access To State Highways: If the tract of land proposed to be
subdivided or any part thereof lies adjacent to a highway over which the
department of transportation of the state of Illinois has jurisdiction with
respect to maintenance and upkeep thereof, and an entrance or entrances are
desired from such highway to lots, streets, roadways, or alleys in such
proposed subdivision, the subdivider shall submit prior to subdivision approval
to the village a written permit from the said department of transportation,
granting his permission to obtain and construct such an entrance or entrances.
   (C)   Blocks:
      1.   Lengths Of Blocks: Blocks shall not exceed one thousand five hundred
feet (1,500') in length; blocks longer than eight hundred feet (800') in length
may be required to have crosswalkways. Crosswalk easements not less than ten
feet (10') in width shall be provided where deemed necessary by the plan
commission at the approximate centers of the blocks. The use of additional
crosswalkways in any instance to provide safe and convenient access to schools,
parks, or other similar destinations may be recommended by the plan commission.
      2.   Blocks For Industrial Or Commercial Use: Blocks intended for
industrial or commercial use shall be designed specifically for such purpose,
with adequate space set aside for off street parking and loading.
      3.   Blocks On Major Streets: It is preferred that blocks adjacent to
major streets be so arranged that the long dimension of the block be parallel
to the major street and that lots do not front on or have access to the major
street. Where this arrangement is not feasible, marginal access streets may be
required.
   (D)   Lots:
      1.   Minimum Width And Area: Lots for residential use shall be at least
sixty feet (60') wide at the building setback line and shall be at least eight
thousand one hundred (8,100) square feet in area. Septic systems are not
allowed if sewers are reasonably accessible. Residential lots, served by septic
systems shall be a minimum of one hundred feet (100') wide at the building line
and shall have a minimum area and depth as determined by specifications for
seepage systems recommended by the county department of public health; provided
further; that no such lot shall have an area less than twenty thousand (20,000)
square feet.
         (a)   Lots for residential use in a subdivision of two (2) acres or
less may be at least fifty feet (50') wide at the building setback line and
shall be at least six thousand two hundred fifty (6,250) square feet in area
when after review of the plan commission the village board feels that a new
subdivision is in an area composed of lots of compatible lot size and the
village board approves said subdivision.
         (b)   A subdivision of two (2) acres or less will not be approved for
fifty foot (50') lots if the owner and/or subdivider has made the subdivision
two (2) acres or less by dividing, selling or subdividing a larger parcel of
land he has a beneficial interest in or which he owns or has under contract.
      2.   Maximum Depth: The maximum depth of any lot, exclusive of unusable
land shall be three and one-half (31/2) times the width of the lot.
      3.   Lot To Abut On Street: Every lot shall abut on a dedicated and
improved street for at least twenty five feet (25').
      4.   Building Setback Lines: Minimum setback lines from property lines in
residential zone shall conform with the zoning regulations.
      5.   Corner Lots: Corner lots in residential zones shall conform to the
corner side yard and front yard setbacks in the applicable zoning district.
      6.   Property Lines At Corners: Property lines at street intersection
corners shall be arcs having a radii of at least ten feet (10') or shall be
chords of such arcs.
      7.   Side Line Of Lots: Side lines of lots shall be approximately at
right angles or radial to the street line.
      8.   Shape Of Lots: The shape of lots and their orientation shall be
appropriate to the location of the proposed subdivision and to the type of
development contemplated.
      9.   Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage lots, other than corner lots,
will be permitted only under unusual circumstances.
   (E)   Public Places:
      1.   Parks And Playgrounds: Not less than seven percent (7%) of the area
of every subdivision, exclusive of streets, alleys and unusable land shall be
set aside for public recreational, school or other public purposes, other than
of streets and alleys, unless the village shall find that the proposed
subdivision is adequately served by such facilities. In small subdivisions,
such reservation of land shall be so located as to permit combining it with
similar reservations in adjoining tracts. Reservations of land for park and
recreational use shall be located to conform as nearly as possible, with the
parks section of the official plan. Whenever a final plat of subdivision, or
part thereof, has been approved by the corporate authorities as complying with
the official map and there is designated therein a school site, park site, or
other public land, the corporate authorities having jurisdiction of such use,
be it school board, park board or other authority, such authority shall acquire
the land so designated by purchase or commence proceedings to acquire such land
by condemnation within one year from the date of approval of such plat; and if
it does not do so within such period of one year, the land so designated may
then be used by the owners thereof in any other manner consistent with this
chapter including the official map and the zoning title.
      2.   Natural And Cultural Features: Outstanding natural and cultural
features, such as scenic spots and watercourses shall be preserved insofar as
possible.
      3.   Easements:
         (a)   Regulations: All aboveground utilities shall be placed on rear
or side property lines. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, an
appropriate easement shall be provided for the watercourse in either an open
cut or in an underground conduit, depending upon the density of development.
Where water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, gas mains, telephone lines,
power lines or other utilities are located on or adjacent to property lines,
adequate easements together with right of ingress or egress thereto and
therefrom shall be provided and platted. Easements shall not be less than ten
feet (10') in width and shall be centered upon the centerline of the utility.
Where more than one utility is to occupy the easement, the easement shall be of
such width as to extend five feet (5') at each side beyond the centerlines of
the outermost utilities. Additional width shall be provided where necessary to
accommodate utility pole bracing. The village may require evidence of approval
by the public utility company of easement width. Where side lot easements occur
adjacent to a driveway, there shall not be less than ten feet (10') clearance
between the easement line and the extreme projection of the building structure.
(Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
         (b)   Drainage Easements: Drainage easements are deemed to be for the
mutual benefit of the lands connected or protected by said drainage easement
and shall constitute a perpetual easement on such lands and shall not be
filled, extracted, breached or impaired in any way without the written consent
of the owners of such lands benefited. Their consent must provide that they
have read and agree with the engineering report referred to below. Lands
benefited shall be determined by a qualified engineering report paid for by the
landowner who wishes to do any work in an easement area. The engineering report
must show why the drainage easement is not needed or to what extent it can be
reduced. It must show what property is currently affected by the drainage
easement and what property would be affected by any change in the drainage
easement. A detailed plan must be provided for any work required in the
drainage easement area. The village engineer will review the report and plan at
the landowner's expense and must give his approval before a permit will be
issued by the village or before any work can be done or change made to the
easement area.
         (c)   Utility Easements: Utility easements shall have no structure or
building (except a division fence) placed upon it unless the owner of the land
obtains written permission from all the utilities who have a right to use said
easement. The written permission must describe the land, the easement, their
right to use the easement and what type of an encroachment structure or
building they would allow and where it would be allowed on the easement area.
         (d)   Proof Of Compliance: Any improvement or structure requiring a
village permit will require that the applicant provide satisfactory proof of
compliance with this subsection (E)3 before any application or a variation will
be considered. (Ord. 1441, 6-24-1998)
   (F)   Monuments And Markers:
      1.   Monuments shall be of concrete with a diameter of not less than six
inches (6") and thirty six inches (36") long, cast in place, with a copper
dowel three-eighths inch (3/8") in diameter, at least two and one-half inches
(21/2") in length imbedded so that the top of the dowel shall be not more than
one-fourth inch (1/4") above the surface and at the center of the monument.
      2.   Monuments shall be set so that the top is level with the established
grade adjoining it and placed so that the marked point on the metal center
shall coincide exactly with the intersection of street property lines, the
intersection of all angles in the boundary line and at the beginning and ending
of all curves along streets on the inside street lines.
      3.   Lot corners not marked by concrete monuments as required herein,
shall be marked by galvanized or wrought iron pipe, or iron or steel bars at
least three feet (3') in length and not less than five-eighths inch (5/8") in
diameter, the top of the pipe or bar to be set level with the established grade
of the ground adjoining it.
   (G)   Improvements:
      1.   Working Drawings And Specifications Required: Before considering the
approval of the final plat for any subdivision, the village will require that
complete working drawings and specifications be submitted for those
improvements requested at the time of conditional approval of the preliminary
layout. Improvements required may include one or more of the items listed in
subsection (G)5 of this section.
      2.   Source Of Drawings And Specifications: The subdivider shall have the
option of having working drawings and specifications for improvements prepared
by a registered professional engineer, retained by the subdivider or of having
such drawings and specifications prepared by the village.
Under either option, all working drawings, specifications and cost estimates
shall be checked by the engineer or by a consulting firm duly retained by the
village. The subdivider shall reimburse the village for preparation and for
checking of working drawings, specifications and cost estimates in accordance
with subsection (G)16 of this section. Working drawings and specifications
shall be in strict accordance with village standards and requirements and shall
be subject to approval by the village engineer.
      3.   Permission Required: Specific permission of the board shall be
secured before commencement of construction of any improvement. Approval of the
final plat by the board shall constitute permission to proceed with
construction, provided the plat is accepted for recording by the county
recorder. If the subdivider elects, as provided in subsection (G)14 of this
section, to construct an improvement prior to approval of the final plat, the
board may extend permission to proceed upon recommendation of the plan
commission together with certification by the engineer that working drawings
and specifications have been prepared and that engineering fees have been paid
and that suitable inspection bonds have been posted.
      4.   Other Permission: The subdivider shall also secure any permission
required by law of the state and county officials and permission extended by
the village shall not relieve the subdivider of responsibility to secure state
and county approval.
      5.   Types Of Improvements: The village shall have the power to require
one or more of the following improvements depending upon the nature and scope
of the subdivision. Particular attention shall be given to means for
disposition of stormwater and to the desirability of curb and gutter or other
provision to prevent breakdown of pavement edges. The design, layout and
carrying capacities of stormwater, sanitary sewer, and water facilities shall
recognize the future requirements of adjacent undeveloped areas.
         (a)   Street and alley grading and surfacing.
         (b)   Grading and surfacing of off street parking space.
         (c)   Curb and gutter.
         (d)   Sidewalks.
         (e)   Crosswalks.
         (f)   Sanitary sewage facilities.
         (g)   Water mains and hydrant.
         (h)   Stormwater drainage facilities.
         (i)   Street signs.
         (j)   Streetlights.
         (k)   Driveways.
         (l)   Street trees.
         (m)   Seeding or sodding.
         (n)   Compacted fill.
         (o)   Topsoil where appropriate.
         (p)   Retention ponds.
      6.   Village Standards: All improvements shall be in accordance with
village standards and requirements and regulations in effect at the time of
submission of the final plat. Maintenance of retention ponds shall be the
responsibility of the owner and subdivider and they must provide proof of a
plan to provide proper maintenance. They may not deed the property to others
unless the grantee has a plan of maintenance approved by the village.
      7.   Qualification Of Contractors: The developer shall make available to
the engineer and superintendent of public works a list of all contractors and
subcontractors who are to participate in construction of public improvements.
Such contractors and subcontractors shall be subject to the licensing
provisions of this code and shall be subject to disqualification by reason of
faulty performance upon past construction work done.
      8.   Inspection Required: All improvements shall be subject to inspection
by a duly authorized and qualified village inspector both during the course of
construction and after construction is complete. The inspector shall have
authority over materials of construction, methods of construction and
workmanship to ensure compliance with working drawings and specifications. The
contractor shall provide for reasonable tests and proof of quality of materials
as requested by the inspector, and upon due cause shall include weather
conditions, questionable materials of construction, workmanship or nonadherence
to specifications and drawings.
      9.   Inspection Reports: The inspector may be required to prepare and to
submit to the superintendent of public works each day a report stating progress
of work and giving his findings as to quality and quantity of materials used
and quality of methods and workmanship. He shall in particular call attention
to any circumstances that entail departures from working drawings and
specifications such as unforeseen difficulties of drainage, groundwater, poor
subsoil, unstable fill material, unconventional or faulty practices of
contractors or other circumstances. Whenever, in his opinion, such departures
are likely to cause either a lower ultimate standard of performance or a higher
construction cost than could reasonably be anticipated, he shall immediately
notify the engineer. When an improvement has been completed he shall prepare a
summary report.
      10.   Subdivider Responsible: Approval by the inspector or absence of
inspection shall in no way relieve the subdivider of full responsibility for
adherence by his contractors to specifications and working drawings nor for
high standards of materials, methods and workmanship.
      11.   Approval Not Acceptance: Approval by the inspector shall not be
deemed acceptance of the improvement by the village. Acceptance shall be only
by action of the board and acceptance shall be contingent upon a favorable
inspection report.
      12.   Notification: It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider or
his contractor to notify the engineer and superintendent of public works when
work is to be started and to request assignment of an inspector. The initial
notification that a particular improvement is to be started shall be in writing
and shall reach the engineer and superintendent of public works seven (7) days
in advance of the date that inspection is to begin. The notice shall be
accompanied by an inspection bond in accordance with subsection (G)16 of this
section.
      13.   Responsibility For Maintenance: As further assurance of serviceable
construction and to provide for repair of damage resulting from subsequent
construction operations of the subdivider or his contractors, the subdivider
shall be responsible for all maintenance of an improvement for a period of not
less than fifteen (15) months following completion of construction of that
improvement; providing, in addition, that the subdivider shall be responsible
for all maintenance of roadways, curbs and gutters, sidewalks, parkway strips
and extension boxes and hydrants of water facilities until all construction
work has been completed upon other improvements, and fill adjacent to the
improvements under consideration. The guarantee of completion and maintenance
shall recognize the possibility of maintenance costs and the terms of the
guarantee shall provide for reimbursement to the village for any maintenance
expenses incurred by the village in performing maintenance work after failure
of the subdivider to perform such work upon due notice. An improvement shall
not be accepted by the village sooner than fifteen (15) months after completion
of construction nor before all construction work has been completed upon
adjacent improvements, and fill until all maintenance work is complete.
      14.   Guarantee Of Completion And Maintenance: The board shall not
consider approval of the final plat unless and until the subdivider has
guaranteed the completion of all required improvements within a reasonable
period and in compliance with working drawings and specifications and has
guaranteed to maintain the improvements until they are accepted by the board.
This guarantee shall be by one or a combination of one or more of three (3)
methods. Only one method shall be applied to one specific improvement.
         (a)   The subdivider may post a performance bond prepared in a form
approved by the attorney and underwritten by a surety company listed as
approved by the village. The amount of the bond shall be not less than one
hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the final estimate of cost of the
improvement as estimated by the engineer under subsection (G)16 of this
section. There shall be no reduction in the amount of that portion of the bond
applying to a particular improvement unless and until that improvement is
complete and accepted or approved by the board. The subgrade, base course and
surface course of a street, alley, or parking area shall be considered as a
single improvement from the standpoint of acceptance. A subdivider may post a
letter of credit from a bank approved by the village. Said letter of credit
must be in a form approved by the village attorney. The letter of credit would
be accepted upon the same terms as set out above for a performance bond.
         (b)   The subdivider may deposit a cash bond with the village in
accordance with a specific escrow agreement approved by the attorney and board
and in an amount not less than one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the
final estimate of cost of the improvements as estimated by the engineer under
subsection (G)16 of this section. The deposit shall be held in a special
account by the village and the agreement may provide for partial payouts as
work progresses in amounts recommended by the engineer and approved by the
board as corresponding to the original estimate of unit costs. Partial payouts
shall be contingent upon favorable inspection reports and the sum of partial
payouts for a single improvement shall not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the
original deposit for the improvement until and unless the improvement is
complete and accepted or approved by the village. The subgrade, base course and
surface course of a street, alley or parking area shall be considered a single
improvement from the standpoint of acceptance.
         (c)   Upon specific permission of the board, as recommended by the
engineer, the subdivider may elect to complete one or more improvements prior
to approval of the final plat. Where the subdivider elects to guarantee
completion of an improvement by this method, approval of the final plat shall
be contingent upon certification by the superintendent of public works and
engineer that the improvement has been completed in accordance with drawings
and specifications, that the inspection reports are favorable, and that
guarantee has been provided to cover costs of maintenance of the improvement in
accordance with subsection (G)13 of this section.
      15.   Acceptance: Acceptance of an improvement for the village shall be
only by resolution of the board upon recommendation of the engineer. Acceptance
shall be contingent upon:
         (a)   The fulfillment of the requirements of subsection (G)13 of this
section.
         (b)   An opinion by the attorney that satisfactory and proper
conveyances have been made by the subdivider to the village or to the
appropriate school or park districts.
         (c)   The improvement being complete and in good repair in accordance
with village standards and requirements.
         (d)   Inspection reports indicating compliance with working drawings
and specifications.
         (e)   A single improvement shall not be accepted in part; it shall be
complete throughout the subdivision as indicated in the final plat and working
drawings. The subgrade, base course and surface course of a street, alley or
parking area shall be considered as a single improvement.
         (f)   Acceptance of an improvement shall constitute release of the
applicable portion of the performance bond or of the applicable portion of the
balance of cash deposit.
      16.   Fees: To defray the engineering and inspection expenses incurred by
the village in preparation or checking of preliminary and final cost estimates,
working drawings, specifications, in checking the final plat (prepared by
others), and in executing inspection responsibilities, the subdivider shall be
required to reimburse the village as follows. These are separate and distinct
charges from the fee paid at the time of submission of the preliminary layout.
         (a)   If the subdivider elects to have working drawings and
specifications prepared by the village, he shall make a request for preparation
of a preliminary estimate of construction costs for improvements. This request
shall be in writing to the clerk and shall be accompanied by a certified check
in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to be receipted for the clerk.
This bond is to guarantee the expenses of preparation of the preliminary
estimate by the engineer.
         (b)   When notified of the amount of the preliminary estimate of
construction costs the subdivider shall make a further written request to the
clerk an engineering fee equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the engineer's
quoted charge to the village as based upon the practices recommended in the
"Schedule Of Recommended Fees For Engineering Services", latest edition and
revisions, as published by the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers.
         (c)   Upon payment of the engineering fee, the one hundred dollar
($100.00) bond shall be refunded. The one hundred dollar ($100.00) bond shall
be forfeited if the engineer's fee is not paid within twelve (12) months after
notification of the amount of the preliminary estimate of construction costs
and a new bond shall be posted with a new request for preliminary estimate.
There shall be no refund of the engineering fees if the project is abandoned or
if approval of the final plat is denied. Any revision of working drawings, for
whatever reason, shall be subject to an additional engineering fee, paid in
advance, in an amount quoted by the engineer.
         (d)   If the subdivider elects to have working drawings,
specifications and cost estimates for improvements prepared by an engineer
retained by himself, he shall apply in writing to the clerk making a request
that such drawings, specifications and estimates be checked by the engineer.
The application shall be accompanied by two (2) sets of construction prints,
specifications and estimates. The clerk shall inform the subdivider of the
amount of the charge for this service and the charge shall be based upon the
"Schedule Of Recommended Fees For Engineering Services", latest edition and
revisions, as published by the Illinois Society of Professional Engineers.
Checking shall proceed after the subdivider has paid over this fee to the
clerk. Additional fees shall be paid for rechecking of drawings, specifications
and estimates arising from revisions made by or required of the subdivider.
There shall be no refund of engineering fees if the project is abandoned for
any reason whatsoever.
         (e)   The engineering fee is intended to include preparation or
checking of preliminary and final cost estimates, working drawings,
specifications and staking, but it is not intended to include inspection.
         (f)   Before final approval of any plans for grading or construction
of improvements the subdivider, owner or contractor seeking approval of
improvements shall post with the clerk a cash inspection bond in an amount
agreed upon among the engineer, the superintendent of public works, and
subdivider or contractor as being sufficient to provide for review and
inspection charges at the current per diem rates. From this bond shall be
deducted each day the inspection expense incurred by the village at the rates
set forth below. Any excess of the bond over total inspection charges will be
refunded to the depositor and any overdraft on the bond shall be provided for
immediately by the subdivider or contractor to ensure continuity of inspection
and to prevent stoppage of construction by the superintendent of public works.
         (g)   It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider, owner, or
contractor to notify the engineer seven (7) days in advance as to dates that
construction work will commence and be completed for purposes of determining
the number of days of inspection charge. In event of dispute, only notification
in writing shall be considered as proof of notice.
         (h)   Per diem inspection rates for review and inspection shall be
equal to one hundred percent (100%) of the engineer's quoted charge to the
board as based upon the "Schedule Of Recommended Fees For Engineering
Services", latest edition and revisions, as published by the Illinois Society
of Professional Engineers. If inspection is performed by an inspector on the
village payroll the charge shall be two hundred percent (200%) of the regular
salary paid to the inspector computed to an hourly basis. There shall be not
less than a four (4) hour charge for time spent in any one day. For time spent
outside of the regular working hours of the inspector, the hourly charge shall
be three hundred percent (300%) of the regular salary paid to the inspector
computed to an hourly basis.
   (H)   Protection And Repair Of Existing Improvements: The subdivider, his
contractors and suppliers shall be jointly and severally responsible that
existing improvements and the property of the village are not damaged or
rendered less useful or unsightly by the operations of the subdivider, his
contractors or suppliers. This provision is intended to include damage or
nuisance with respect to the land, improvements or landscaping of the village;
damage to existing streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, parkways by passage
thereover of equipment or trucks or by excavation for the any purpose; the
spillage or tracking of earth, sand or rock onto existing streets, sidewalks,
curbs and gutters or parkways; the washing by stormwater of earth or sand onto
streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or parkways or into catch basins; damage
to water mains, sanitary sewers, culverts or storm sewers. To reduce or
localize the possibility of damage to streets to be used for access to the
subdivision by equipment and trucks and the subdivider shall be responsible for
enforcement of this instruction upon his contractors and their suppliers. The
subdivider shall make provisions to prevent washing of earth or sand onto
sidewalks, streets, curb and gutter and into catch basins by stormwater. Where
deemed advisable, the board shall have the power to require, either prior to
commencement of construction or after construction is in process, that the
subdivider post a surety to guarantee repair of damages or abatement of
nuisance. Where need for surety becomes apparent after construction is in
process, the board shall have the power to order construction discontinued
until surety becomes apparent after construction is in process. The board shall
have the power to order construction discontinued until surety has been posted.
Expenses incurred by the village in repairing damages, cleaning streets, catch
basins and sewers shall be deducted from the surety.
   (I)   Other Regulations Prevail: None of the provisions of these regulations
pertaining to permission, surety, fees, acceptance and approval shall be
constructed as exempting subdividers, general contractors, sidewalk
contractors, cement contractors, building contractors, plumbing contractors or
plumbers, sewer contractors, drain layers, electrical contractors, electricians
or any other contractor or craftsman from any other provision or regulation of
this code with respect to licenses, fees, surety, inspection or other control.
(Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-8: DOCUMENTS:
   (A)   Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat tracings and prints shall have
dimensions that are multiples of eight and one-half inches (81/2") along one
side and multiples of eleven inches (11") along the adjacent side. Tracings
shall be submitted rolled in a mailing tube, and prints shall be submitted
folded eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (81/2" x 11"). The drawing
shall be to a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet (1" = 100'). The
preliminary plat shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name of the subdivision.
      2.   Legal description of location.
      3.   Scale of the layout or plat.
      4.   Date.
      5.   Statement of whether the north point is true or magnetic, and
whether bearings shown on the plat are true or magnetic.
      6.   Boundary lines of the subdivision with length and bearing of lines.
      7.   Relationship of the subdivision to section and half section lines
and to any hearings to nearest official monuments.
      8.   The location, widths and names of streets or other public ways,
easements, railroad and utility right of way; both within the subdivision and
those adjacent to or leading into the subdivision.
      9.   Proposed methods of providing for stormwater, sanitary sewage and
water.
      10.   Location of land intended to be dedicated to public use or reserved
in the deeds for the use of all property owners in the subdivision.
      11.   Numbers and dimensions of lots and blocks.
      12.   Minimum front, side and rear yard setback lines.
      13.   Location of watercourses and other important features. Indicate
flood levels of watercourses.
      14.   Contours, with one foot (1') intervals, referred to sea level
datum.
      15.   Name and address of owner and subdivider and name of designer of
preliminary layout.
      16.   The names of subdivisions immediately adjacent and the names of
owners of record of adjacent unsubdivided tracts.
      17.   Existing permanent buildings or structures within or adjacent to
the tract.
      18.   Where the preliminary plat covers only part of the subdivider's
entire holding, a sketch of the prospective street system of the unsubmitted
part shall be furnished, and the street system of the submitted part will be
considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street system
of the part not submitted.
      19.   If the informal consideration indicates that the subdivision is a
portion of a unit area for development of the official plan, the preliminary
layout shall include a small scale study of the unit area.
   (B)   Final Plat: The final plat shall conform to the dimensional and scale
standards of the preliminary plat and shall contain all the information of
subsections (A)1 through (A)8 and (A)10 through (A)13 of this section of the
preliminary plat requirements of this section, and in addition, shall contain
the following information as listed in subsections (B)1 through and (B)6 of
this section. The certification required in subsections (B)7, (B)8, and (B)9 of
this section may be required from time to time. Accurate location and reference
of all monuments which shall be in conformance with subsection 12-1-7(F) of
this chapter.
      1.   Certification by a registered land surveyor to the effect that the
plat represents a survey made by him and that the monuments shown thereon
actually exist as located and that all dimensional and other details, such as
curve data, are correct. (Form (D)1 of this section.)
      2.   Notarized certification by the owner of the land and any lien holder
or other persons having an interest therein of the adoption of the plat and the
dedication of streets and other public areas. (Form (D)2 of this section.)
      3.   Certification by signature of proper officials of the county that
there are no tax delinquencies. (County clerk form.)
      4.   Certification by signature of the village clerk or treasurer that
there are no special assessment delinquencies. (Form (D)4 of this section.)
      5.   Space for approval of the plan commission by date and signature of
the chairman of the commission. (Form (D)5 of this section.)
      6.   Space for approval of the board by date and signature of the
president. (Form (D)6 of this section.)
      7.   Certification by signature of the attorney that satisfactory
conveyances to the village have been provided applying to rights of way for
streets, alleys and easements, and for land for parks, playgrounds and other
public use. (Form (D)7 of this section.)
      8.   Approval by signature of the clerk and engineer indicating that the
plat has been checked, that all working drawings and specifications for
improvements have been prepared in conformance with village standards and
requirements and that engineering fees have been paid. (Form (D)8 of this
section.)
      9.   Certification by signatures of the clerk and attorney that
satisfactory provisions have been made for guarantee of performance for
construction of required improvements. On items where construction has already
been completed, there shall be certification by the superintendent of public
works and engineer that construction has been completed and inspected and found
to be in accordance with village standards and requirements and that surety has
been posted to provide for repair of damage done while the subdivision is being
completed. (Form (D)9 of this section.)
      10.   Subsections (B)1 through (B)9 of this section may be executed in
order of listing and may be in the forms set forth in subsection (D) of this
section. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
      11.   The plat must indicate if the resubdivision or subdivision is
located within a special flood hazard area as identified by the federal
emergency management agency. (Ord. 1164, 10-26-1988)
      12.   Topographical and profile studies shall be submitted with the
subdivision plat and shall have on their face the signed statement of a
registered professional engineer and the owner of the land or his duly
authorized attorney, to the effect that to the best of their knowledge and
belief the drainage of surface waters will not be changed by the construction
of such subdivision or any part thereof, or that, if such surface water
drainage will be changed, reasonable provision has been made for collection and
diversion of such surface waters into public areas, or drains which the
subdivider has a right to use, and that such surface waters will be planned for
in accordance with generally accepted engineering practices so as to reduce the
likelihood of damage to the adjoining property because of the construction of
the subdivision. These topographical and profile studies shall not be recorded,
but shall be retained by the village as permanent public documents.
      13.   If the property being subdivided has any liens against it, the
holders of the liens must consent to subdivision and release their interest in
the land dedicated by the plat.
   (C)   Attendant Items: The final plat shall be accompanied by documents
including the following:
      1.   Two (2) copies of working drawings and specifications for
improvements.
      2.   Two (2) copies of restrictions to be incorporated into deeds or
covenants to be recorded with the plat.
   (D)   Forms For Certification:
      1.   Survey Certification:
         State of Illinois   )
                     ) SE
         County of    )
         I,       , do hereby certify that I have surveyed the property
described in the above caption and that I have subdivided the same into blocks
and lots as shown in the hereon drawn plat. This plat correctly represents said
survey and subdivision in every detail. Monuments shown are in place as
located.
         All lot corners are marked with         . Dimensions are in feet and
decimal parts thereof, corrected to sixty two degrees Fahrenheit (62°F.)
temperature.
         Dated this            day of                      A.D.
                     
         Illinois Registered Land Surveyor No.   
               (SEAL)
      2.   Certificate Of Ownership:
         State of Illinois   )
                     ) SE
         County of   )
         We              and              , his wife, do hereby certify that we
are the owners of the property described in the above caption and that as such
owners we have caused the said above described property to be surveyed and
subdivided as shown on the hereon drawn plat, as our own free and voluntary act
and deed, and we convey and release our interest in any land which may be
dedicated to the Village.
                               (Seal)
                               (Seal)
          State of Illinois   )
                     ) SE
         County of   )
         I       , a Notary Public in and for said County and State, do hereby
certify that              and             , his wife, personally known to me to
be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the above certificate
appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they signed the
above certificate as their own free and voluntary act and deed for the uses and
purposes therein set forth. Given under my hand and notarial seal this         
day of              A.D., 20        .
                               (Seal)
         (Additional certification if property under trusteeship)
         The undersigned as trustee under the provisions of a deed or deeds in
trust duly recorded and delivered to said trustee in pursuance of a trust
agreement dated              and known as trust No.          as owner caused
this subdivision and plat thereon to be made.
                              
                        By:      
                        Attest:      
          State of Illinois   )
                     ) SE
         County of   )
               , a Notary Public in and for the said County and State, do
hereby certify that of the              and of said              who are
personally known to me to be the same person whose names are subscribed to the
foregoing instrument as such              respectively appeared before me this
day in person and acknowledged that they signed and delivered the said
instrument as their free and voluntary act as the free and voluntary act of the
said trustee for the uses and purpose therein set forth and the said
             did so there and then and there acknowledge that he as custodian
of the Corporate Seal of said trustee did affix the said seal of the said
trustee to said instrument as his free and voluntary act and as the free and
voluntary act of said trustee for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
         Given under my hand and notarial seal this          day of
             A.D., 20        .
                              
                           Notary Public
      3.   County Clerk Certification: County clerk will provide text with
stamp. Allow space four inches by four inches (4" x 4").
      4.   Clerk Or Treasurer Certification:
         I hereby certify that there are no delinquent special assessments or
unpaid current special assessments on the above described property.
                     
         Date
                              
                           Clerk or Treasurer
            (Seal)
      5.   Plan Commission Approval:
         Approval by the              in accordance with subdivision
regulations at a meeting held on the          day of              A.D.,
20        .
         By                   
                  Chairman            Date
      6.   Board Of Trustees Approval:
         Approval by action of the              of the             of
            in accordance with subdivision regulations at a meeting held on the
         day of               A.D., 20      .
                  By:       
                           President
                        Attest:       
                           Clerk
      7.   Conveyance Certification:
         I hereby certify that proper and satisfactory covenants of good title
to the              have been executed and filed with the              Clerk
applying to right-of-way for streets, alleys, and easements and applying to
lands for parks, playgrounds and for their public use.
                              
                  Date          Attorney
      8.   Engineering Approval:
         This plat has been checked for conformance to              standards
and requirements and working drawings and specifications for (list
improvements) have been prepared in conformance with              standards and
requirements and all engineering fees due the              have been paid.
                              
                  Clerk          Engineer
                              
                  Date          Date
      9.   Guarantee Of Improvements:
         This is to certify that provisions have been made in accordance with
the subdivision requirements for the guarantee of performance in the
construction of the following improvements (list improvements).
                              
                  Clerk          Engineer
                              
                  Date          Date
         This is to certify that the following improvements are complete and
that inspection reports show them to be in accordance with             
standards and requirements and that surety has been posted to guarantee repair
of any damage that may be inflicted upon the improvements listed in the course
of completion of the subdivision (list improvements).
                              
                  Clerk          Attorney
                              
                  Date          Date
(Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-9: APPEALS:
   (A)   Procedure For Appeal: The recommendations of the plan commission to
the village board are advisory only and are not binding on the village board.
Therefore, the decision of the plan commission cannot be appealed.
   (B)   Transcript Of Proceedings: Any party aggrieved by the decision of the
village board may, within thirty (30) days of written notice, ask the village
board for a rehearing on their decision. Said request must be in writing and
must state specific reasons why the village board should allow the rehearing.
The decision to grant or deny a request for a rehearing shall be up to the
village board. If a rehearing is granted by the village board, they shall set
an appropriate fee and notify the petitioner of the fee for the rehearing. Upon
payment of said fee by the petitioner, the village board shall set a hearing
date. The hearing shall be public and notice of said hearing shall be given by
the village. This notice shall be by publication, by mail, or by posting in the
village hall.
   (C)   Rehearing: At any rehearing, the village board shall obtain all
exhibits from the plan commission and shall allow the petitioner to present any
evidence which is reasonably relevant to the issues. Anyone present at the
public hearing may express their views on the subject matter of the hearing.
The decision of the village board shall be made after the rehearing and shall
be given to the petitioner in writing. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-10: CONDITIONS OF SALE OR LEASE:
After the adoption of these rules and regulations it shall be unlawful to sell
or offer for sale or to lease for any time exceeding five (5) years any lot or
block within the village or contiguous unincorporated territory not more than
one and one- half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate limits thereof and not
included in any other municipality, unless a plat has:
   (A)   Been recorded with the office of the appropriate county recorder prior
to the adoption of these regulations.
   (B)   Been approved by the plan commission and been recorded in compliance
with these regulations. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-11: CONDITIONS OF RECORDING:
No recorder shall record any map, plat or subdivision of land situated in the
village, nor within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the corporate limits
thereof and not included in any other municipality, unless such map, plat or
subdivision is entitled to record by reason of official approval by the plan
commission as required by these regulations and unless the subdivision shown
thereon provides for streets, alleys and public grounds in conformity with the
applicable requirements of these regulations and all other parts of the
official plan of the village.
The subdivider shall submit an original and six (6) copies of the final plat to
the Cook County recorder of deeds. Such plats shall be at least eight and one-
half inches by fourteen inches (81/2" x 14") but not more than thirty inches by
thirty six inches (30" x 36"). Subdivider shall furnish the village clerk with
a copy of the recorded final plat. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-12: AMENDMENTS:
   (A)   Agent And Purpose: The plan commission may, from time to time, adopt
and amend rules and instructions for the administration of these subdivision
regulations, to the end that approval of plats will be expedited, or where such
amendments are deemed necessary.
   (B)   Public Hearings: These subdivision regulations can be changed or
amended by the village board after a public hearing, due notice of which shall
have been given in a newspaper of general circulation in the village at least
fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days before the date of such
hearing. The village board may waive the public hearing requirement. (Ord.
1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-13: STATUS OF SUBDIVISIONS IN PROCESS:
   (A)   Any proposed subdivision that has not received conditional approval of
the preliminary plat shall be subject to all of the requirements of these
regulations.
   (B)   Any proposed subdivision that has received conditional approval of the
preliminary plat within the twelve (12) months preceding adoption of these
regulations, but which has not received approval of the final plat shall be
subject to all of the requirements of these regulations.
   (C)   Any subdivision that has received approval of the final plat but which
is still in process of completion with respect to improvements or construction
of service connections shall be subject to either the old ordinance or the new
ordinance as determined by the village board. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-14: VACATION OF PLATS:
   (A)   Process: Any plat may be vacated by the owner of the premises at any
time before the sale of any lot therein, by a written instrument to which a
copy of the plat is attached, declaring it to be vacated. If there are public
service facilities in the highways, streets, alleys and other public ways and
in easements shown on the plat, the instrument shall reserve to the public body
or utility owning such facilities, the property, rights of way, and easements
necessary for continuing public service by means of those facilities and for
the maintenance, renewal and reconstruction of the same. The instrument shall
be approved by the village board in the same manner as plats of subdivisions.
The instrument shall also be submitted for approval to the highway commissioner
and to the county superintendent of highways and to the district engineer of
the department of transportation of this state and to the public utility or
utilities involved if the plat affects them. The board, highway commissioner,
county superintendent of highways or district engineer of the department of
transportation of this state, as the case may be, may reject any instrument
that abridges or destroys any public rights in any of its streets and alleys.
The instrument shall be executed, acknowledged or proved and recorded or filed
in the same manner as plats of subdivisions. Once recorded or filed the
instrument operates to destroy the effect of the recording of the plat vacated
and to divest all public rights in the streets, alleys and public grounds and
all dedications laid out or described in the plat and to render effective any
reservation set forth in the instrument. When lots have been sold, the plat may
be vacated in the manner provided in this section by all owners of lots in the
plat joining in the execution of the writing.
   (B)   Vacation Of Part Of Plat: Any part of a plat may be vacated in the
manner provided in the preceding section, and subject to the conditions therein
prescribed. Provided, such vacation shall not abridge or destroy any of the
rights or privileges of other proprietors in such plat; and, provided further,
that nothing contained in this section shall authorize the closing or
obstructing of any public highway laid out according to law. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-
1987)
12-1-15: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces the previous chapter 1 of this title.
However, this chapter does not repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
subdivision easements, roadway dedications or deed restrictions of any
subdivisions previously approved and recorded. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-16: SEPARABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-1987)
12-1-17: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage and
approval and publication in pamphlet form as required by law. (Ord. 1136, 6-24-
1987)
CHAPTER 2
FLOODING AND STORMWATER
ARTICLE A. GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES
SECTION:
12-2A-1: Authority And Purpose
12-2A-2: Organization
12-2A-3: Definitions
12-2A-4: Permit Procedures
12-2A-5: Permit Materials
12-2A-6: General Provisions
12-2A-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   (A)   Authority: This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers
granted to the village by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/
11-30-2, 5/11-30-8, and 5/11-31-2.
   (B)   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to:
      1.   Protect buildings and other property from damage due to flooding.
      2.   Protect the life, health and safety of the residents of the village.
      3.   Minimize disruption of commerce and governmental services and the
impairment of the tax base caused by flooding.
      4.   Prevent new development from increasing the flood or drainage hazard
to others.
      5.   Prevent future public expenditures for repairs and recovery
activities following a flood and for drainage improvements and flood protection
projects.
      6.   Preserve and enhance the quality of surface water.
      7.   Preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water
quality, and preserve aquatic/riparian habitat.
      8.   Reduce the sedimentation in the watercourses of the village.
      9.   Meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18g, the
rivers, lakes and streams act.
      10.   Meet the requirements of 44 CFR section 60.3.
      11.   Make federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the village by fulfilling the requirements of the national flood insurance
program. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
12-2A-2: ORGANIZATION:
To protect people and property from flooding, development of land must be
managed both in the watershed (where the water comes from) and in the
floodplain (where it accumulates). Therefore, this chapter has three (3)
articles.
   (A)   General And Administrative Procedures: This article includes the
definitions, permit procedures and similar administrative matters that apply to
all development projects
   (B)   Site Development Requirements: Article B of this chapter contains the
land development requirements that manage the runoff of stormwater that leaves
the development site. It includes criteria for the amount of water that can
leave a site and measures that must be taken to improve the quality of the
water.
   (C)   Floodplain Development Requirements: Article C of this chapter
contains requirements for developments that will be located in the floodplain.
It includes criteria to protect the new development, to minimize the impact of
the development on flooding to other properties, and to protect the flood
conveyance channel.
   (D)   Overlapping Requirements:
      1.   Floodplains are part of the watershed. All floodplain developments
must also meet the site development requirements of article B of this chapter,
where applicable.
      2.   The definitions in section 12-2A-3 of this article and the
administrative procedures in sections 12-2A-4, 12-2A-5, and 12-2A-6 of this
article apply to both articles B and C of this chapter.
   (E)   Development: This chapter regulates all "development" as defined in
section 12-2A-3, "Definitions", of this article.
      1.   The regulatory criteria are different for three (3) different sizes
of development: level 1, level 2 and level 3, which are also defined in section
12-2A-3 of this article.
      2.   When the term "development" is used alone, it includes all three (3)
levels. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
12-2A-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The "base flood" is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section 12-12C-1 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The height in relation to the North American
Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988(or other datum, where specified of the crest of
the Base Flood. Application of the BFE at any location is as defined in Section
12-2C of this chapter.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP): A measure used to control the adverse impacts
of a stormwater discharge on water quality downstream. BMPs include structural
devices (e.g., grassed swales, filter strips and detention basins) designed to
remove pollutants and reduce runoff volumes and nonstructural measures such as
public information on proper disposal and use of pesticides and herbicides.
BUFFER: An area of natural vegetation adjacent to channels, wetlands, lakes,
ponds or other surface waters to be left open for the purpose of eliminating or
minimizing adverse impacts to such areas.
BUILDING: A building that is principally aboveground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, mobile home or a prefabricated building. This term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days, unless fully licensed and ready for highway
use.
BYPASS FLOW: An approach that routes tributary drainage area runoff around and
not through a stormwater control structure.
CLOMR: Conditional letter of map revision.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, culvert, gully, ravine, wash,
or natural or open manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and banks or
shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either perennially
or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulically equivalent
volume of storage within the SFHA used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or buildings are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off site floodwater elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION: A letter providing FEMA's comment on a
proposed project that would, upon construction, affect the hydrologic or
hydraulic characteristics of a flooding source and thus result in the
modification of the existing floodway, the effective BFEs, or the SFHA.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY:
   (A)   The Floodways designated on the countywide FIRM of Cook County
prepared by FEMA panel numbers 17031C0638J, 17031C0639J, 17031C0726J and
17031C0727J of the countywide FIRM for Cook County dated August 19, 2008 and
panel numbers 17031C0619K and 17031C0707K of the countywide FIRM for Cook
County dated November 1, 2019. When two Floodway maps exist for a waterway, the
more recent effective Floodway limit shall prevail.
   (B)   The Designated Floodway boundary should be scaled off the FIRM map and
located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps on any site.
Where interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the
Designated Floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the
interpretation.
DETENTION BASIN: A manmade structure for the temporary storage of stormwater
runoff with controlled release during and immediately following a storm.
DEVELOPMENT:
   (A)   "Development" means any manmade change to real estate, including:
      1.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building or
any addition to a building;
      2.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days. Parking a travel trailer or
recreational vehicle on site for less than one hundred eighty (180) days is not
considered "development", provided it is fully licensed, not connected to any
utilities, and ready for highway use;
      3.   Drilling, mining, installing utilities, construction of roads,
bridges, or similar projects;
      4.   Demolition of a building or redevelopment of a site;
      5.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction;
      6.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts; channel modification; filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving,
or other nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface; storage of
materials; deposit of solid or liquid waste;
      7.   Subdivision of land, annexation agreements, and finalization of a
plat, replat, planned unit development or manufactured home park; and
      8.   Any other human development project that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal.
   (B)   "Development" does not include:
      1.   Maintenance of or resurfacing of roads when there is no increase in
the ground or road surface elevation;
      2.   Gardening, plowing, and similar agricultural practices that do not
involve filling, grading, or construction of levees;
      3.   Erection of a storage shed, accessory building, fence and playground
equipment, that:
         (a)   Has a footprint of less than fifty (50) square feet,
         (b)   Is not located in a floodway or within ten feet (10') of a
property line, and
         (c)   Is properly anchored to withstand surface water flows.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify the
elevation to which a building has been elevated.
EMERGENCY OVERFLOW: The structure in a detention or retention basin designed to
protect the basin in the event of a malfunction of the primary outlet or a
storm event greater than the basin design storm.
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed. The term shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.
EXCEPTIONAL FUNCTIONAL VALUE WETLAND: Any wetland that either: a) meets the
Illinois natural area inventory's definition for determining exceptional
functional value; or b) is located in an Illinois natural area inventory site.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the Village's initial floodplain
management regulations.
FEMA: The federal emergency management agency, the agency responsible for
administering the national flood insurance program.
FIRM OR FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP: A map prepared by the federal emergency
management agency that delineates the special flood hazard area of the village.
The FIRM includes flood insurance rate zones and may or may not include
floodways.
FPE OR FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION: The elevation above sea level (NGVD) to
which new buildings must be protected from flood damage.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of riverine floodplains outside of the designated
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of Flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by floodwaters from
any source.
FLOODPLAIN OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): For purpose of this chapter,
these two terms are synonymous and shall means any land area susceptible to
being inundated by water from any source. Floodplain also includes those areas
of known flooding as identified by the community. The Floodplains are those
lands within the jurisdiction of the village and unincorporated Cook County
that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the village or that may be
annexed into the village that are subject to inundation by the base flood. The
floodplains are generally identified as such on panel numbers 17031C0638J,
17031C0639J, 17031C0726J and 17031C0727J of the countywide FIRM for Cook County
dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0619K and 17031C0707K of the
countywide FIRM for Cook County dated November 1, 2019.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural adjustments to a
building which reduces or eliminates flood damage to that building, its
contents and supporting utilities. "Dry floodproofing" techniques prevent
floodwaters from entering a building.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by FEMA that is used to certify
that a building has been designed and constructed to be structurally dry
floodproofed.
HISTORIC BUILDING: Any building that is:
   (A)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined
by the secretary of the interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the national register;
   (B)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as
a registered historic district;
   (C)   Individually listed on the state inventory of historic places by the
Illinois historic preservation agency;
   (D)   Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that has
been certified by the Illinois historic preservation agency.
IDNR/OWR: The Illinois department of natural resources, office of water
resources, the agency responsible for administering 615 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/18g, the rivers, lakes and streams act.
LEVEL 1 DEVELOPMENT: A development project that meets any of the following
criteria:
   (A)   Is a single-family residential development on ten (10) acres or more;
   (B)   Is a multi-family or nonresidential development on three (3) acres or
more; or
   (C)   Disturbs more than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of land area.
LEVEL 2 DEVELOPMENT: A development project which does not qualify as a level 1
development but meets any of the following criteria:
   (A)   Has one or more new dwelling units;
   (B)   Has more than one existing dwelling unit;
   (C)   Has more than one platted lot;
   (D)   Will be used for other than residential, agricultural or public
purpose; or
   (E)   Disturbs more than ten thousand (10,000) square feet of land area or
adds an additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of new impervious area.
LEVEL 3 DEVELOPMENT: A development project that does not meet the criteria for
the definition of level 2 development.
LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: An engineer registered in the state of
Illinois, under the professional engineer practice act of 1989, 225 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 325/1 through 325/49.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A building, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational
vehicle".
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed to safely
convey the ten (10) year runoff event or less. It includes street gutters,
storm sewers, small open channels and swales.
NAVD NORTH AMERICAN VERTICAL DATUM OF 1988: The vertical control datum
established in 1991 by the minimum-constraint adjustment of the Canadian-
Mexican-United States leveling observations.
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels, means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by humans.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New construction means buildings for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a Floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such buildings.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of the Village's initial floodplain management regulations.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK: The point on the bank or shore at which the presence
and movement of surface water are continuous so as to leave a distinctive mark,
such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation or other such recognized characteristics.
OVERLAND FLOW PATH: An area of land which conveys stormwater for all events up
to and including the base flood event. The overland flow path can be determined
using topographic information and shall take into account all on site and off
site tributary areas.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATER: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the state of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is:
   (A)   Built on a single chassis;
   (B)   Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection;
   (C)   Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty
vehicle; and
   (D)   Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as
temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
RETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of
stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration
or pumping.
RIVERINE: Related to a river, creek, intermittent stream, ditch, or any other
identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from
lakes, ponding areas, or areas of sheet flow.
SFHA OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA: See Floodplain.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DEFINITION: Damage of any origin sustained by a building
whereby the cumulative percentage of damage during a ten (10)-year period
equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the building
before the damage occurred regardless of actual repair work performed.
Volunteer labor and materials must be included in this determination.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT:
   (A)   Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or improvement of a
building taking place in which the cumulative percentage of improvements equals
or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building before the start of
construction of the improvement or repair or increases the floor area by more
than twenty percent (20%).
   (B)   Substantial Improvement is considered to occur when the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the
building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building. This term includes buildings which have incurred
repetitive loss or substantial damage, regardless of the actual work done.
   (C)   The term does not, however, include either:
      1.   Any project for improvement of a building to comply with existing
state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
      2.   Any alteration of a Historic Structure listed on the National
Register of Historic Places or the Illinois Register of Historic Places,
provided that the alteration will not preclude the Building's continued
designation as a Historic Structure.
WATERS OF THE UNITED STATES: Those waters under the authority of the corps of
engineers under the clean water act and defined in 33 CFR part 328, as amended.
This includes most lakes, rivers, streams, ponds and wetlands.
WATERSHED: The land area above a given point on a channel that contributes
stormwater to that point.
WETLAND: A subset of the waters of the United States. A "wetland" is land that
is inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and
duration sufficient to support, under normal conditions, a prevalence of
vegetation adapted for life in saturated soil conditions (known as hydrophytic
vegetation). A "wetland" is identified based upon three (3) attributes: a)
hydrology, b) soils, and c) vegetation as mandated by the federal wetland
determination methodology.
WETLAND IMPACT: Any development activity within the boundary of a delineated
wetland. Final determination of wetland impact is performed by the U.S.
environmental protection agency and the U.S. corps of engineers based on 33 CFR
part 230, 33 CFR part 238 and 33 CFR parts 320 through 330, as amended. (Ord.
1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-16-2019)
12-2A-4: PERMIT PROCEDURES:
   (A)   Site Development Permit Required:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation or governmental agency shall commence
any development regulated by this chapter on any lot or parcel of land without
first obtaining a site development permit from the superintendent of buildings
and/or village engineer.
      2.   A permit shall be issued if the proposed development meets the
requirements of this chapter.
      3.   No development site shall be occupied, no certificate of occupancy
shall be issued, and no subdivision or other development shall be accepted by
the village board of trustees unless and until all provisions of this chapter
are met, including the issuance of a final letter of map revision, where
appropriate.
   (B)   Grandfathering:
      1.   Development projects that have been approved or permitted prior to
October 11, 2000, are exempt from this chapter, provided the stormwater
management facilities and flood protection measures are installed, functioning
and in compliance with all applicable stormwater and floodplain regulations in
effect at the time of approval or permit.
      2.   If a previously developed site is redeveloped or modified so that
the amount of impervious surface or the amount of stormwater runoff will
increase, then the redevelopment or modification project shall comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
      3.   Improvements, modifications, additions and repairs to an existing
building in the special flood hazard area shall meet the requirements of this
chapter.
   (C)   Contiguous Property:
      1.   In order to preclude inappropriate phasing of developments to
circumvent the intent of this chapter, when a proposed development activity
will occur on a lot or parcel of land that has contiguous lots or parcels of
lands owned by the same property owner, then the criteria as defined in this
section will be applied to the total land area compiled from aggregate
ownership parcels.
      2.   The determination of level 1, 2 or 3 development will be based on
the total area of all of the contiguous parcels under the same ownership.
   (D)   Other Permits:
      1.   The permit applicant shall be responsible for:
         (a)   Obtaining all other federal, state, and local permits, approvals
or permit not required letters that may be required for this type of activity;
and
         (b)   Providing copies of the permits, approvals and letters to
superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer.
      2.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall not
issue a site development permit unless all other federal, state, and local
permits have been obtained.
      3.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer is
responsible for obtaining and maintaining copies of all other required federal,
state, and local permits.
   (E)   Conditional Approval:
      1.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer may issue a
letter of conditional approval of:
         (a)   The regulatory floodplain and regulatory floodway delineation,
overland flow path, wetland delineation, runoff volume reduction hierarchy,
and/or detention and bypass computations for a development; and/or
         (b)   Parts of the development project that comply with local
requirements. A letter of conditional approval shall not be issued for those
parts of the project that are awaiting state or federal approval.
      2.   A conditional approval to alter the floodway delineation shall not
be granted until a CLOMR has been issued by FEMA.
      3.   A conditional approval will be based on conformance with the
performance standards, and the submittal of the appropriate application
requirements.
      4.   The letter of conditional approval will state the conditions placed
on the permit applicant. Variation from these conditions is considered a
violation of the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   Before the issuance of a letter of conditional approval, the permit
applicant shall sign a statement that he or she understands that:
         (a)   The project has not been granted a final site development
permit;
         (b)   The final site development permit may require changes to the
plans; and
         (c)   The applicant proceeds at his or her own risk pending issuance
of the final permit.
   (F)   Timing Of Work:
      1.   Stormwater management facilities shall be functional before building
permits are issued.
      2.   Foundation only permits may be issued for nonresidential
developments prior to completion of the stormwater systems.
      3.   Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall be functional
before general construction begins.
      4.   Where development of a site is to proceed in phases, the timing
requirements shall apply to each phase.
   (G)   Fees: An application for a site development permit shall be
accompanied by the appropriate fee:
      1.   For a level 1 development: Current hourly rate of the village
engineer plus ten percent (10%) administrative costs.
      2.   For a level 2 development: Current hourly rate of the village
engineer plus ten percent (10%) administrative costs.
      3.   For a level 3 development: Current hourly rate of the village
engineer plus ten percent (10%) administrative costs.
      4.   Additional fee for projects located in the special flood hazard
area: Current hourly rate of the village engineer plus ten percent (10%)
administrative costs.
      5.   Fee in lieu of providing an on site stormwater management facility
in accordance with section
12-2B-1(J) of this chapter: Current hourly rate of the village engineer plus
ten percent (10%) administrative costs.
   (H)   Application Review:
      1.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall
approve, deny or identify what needs to be changed in an application within
sixty (60) days.
      2.   If an application is incomplete or otherwise needs to be revised,
the amended permit applications shall be reviewed within sixty (60) days of
receipt.
   (I)   Permit Termination: A permit shall be terminated for any of the
following causes:
      1.   Noncompliance with any condition of the permit;
      2.   The permittee's failure to disclose fully all relevant facts in the
application process or the permittee's misrepresentation of any relevant facts
at any time; or
      3.   If the authorized work is not commenced within one hundred eighty
(180) days after issuance of the permit, or, if the authorized work is
suspended or abandoned, for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the
time of commencing the work, unless an extension has been granted in writing by
the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer. The extension should
be requested of the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer, in
writing, no sooner than ninety (90) days prior to the termination of the
permit. Time extensions shall be granted only if the original permit is
compliant with this chapter and the FIRM and FIS in effect at the time the
extension is granted. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-16-2019)
12-2A-5: PERMIT MATERIALS:
   (A)   All Development: Application for a development permit shall be made on
a form provided by the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer. All
applications for a site development permit shall include the following:
      1.   Name and address of applicant.
      2.   Address and legal description of the property.
      3.   Site location of the property, drawn to scale, showing:
         (a)   If the project is in the SFHA; and
         (b)   If the project is in an incorporated or unincorporated area.
      4.   Description of the proposed activity.
      5.   Statement of purpose of the proposed activity.
      6.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
      7.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant.
      8.   Plans of the proposed activity, drawn to scale, showing:
         (a)   Graphic or numerical scale;
         (b)   North arrow;
         (c)   Property lines and dimensions;
         (d)   Location and dimensions of easements;
         (e)   Location and names of roads in the vicinity;
         (f)   Location and names of waterways in the vicinity; and
         (g)   Location and dimensions of all buildings.
      9.   Acknowledgment by the applicant that representatives of any federal,
state or local unit of government with regulatory authority over the project
are authorized to enter upon the property to inspect the development.
      10.   Signature of the applicant or the applicant's agent:
         (a)   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         (b)   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         (c)   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him (her) as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit
shall be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust
by name and address and defining the respective interests therein.
   (B)   Level 2 Development Application Materials: In addition to the
materials required under subsection (A) of this section, an application for a
level 2 development project shall also include:
      1.   A topographic survey of the property at one foot (1') contour
intervals keyed to the national geodetic NAVD North American Vertical Datum of
1988, adjusted. The survey shall show:
         (a)   Existing terrain;
         (b)   Proposed conditions; and
         (c)   Adjacent areas necessary to determine off site impacts to the
proposed drainage plan.
         (d)   If the development project does not involve regrading the site,
then the elevations of the top of foundation, the corners of the lot and
representative spots on the lot lines and within the lot may be submitted in
lieu of a topographic survey.
      2.   A narrative describing the existing and proposed stormwater
management system, including all discharge points, collection, conveyance and
stormwater storage facilities.
      3.   A drainage system map including, but not limited to, the following:
         (a)   Subwatershed boundaries and the property's location within the
larger watershed;
         (b)   Location of all existing drainage features, such as streams,
lakes, wetlands and field tiles;
         (c)   Proposed drainage system including, but not limited to, storm
sewers, overland flow paths, detention facilities and roads;
         (d)   Proposed postdevelopment terrain at one foot (1') contour
intervals;
         (e)   Soil classifications; and
         (f)   Proposed buffer areas.
      4.   Copy of all stormwater calculations, sealed by a licensed
professional engineer including, but not limited to, detention basin sizing,
storm sewer sizing and overland flow path design.
      5.   Copy of the proposed plat or deed restrictions for all stormwater
management features.
      6.   Copy of the draft operation and maintenance procedures for all
stormwater management features.
      7.   Copy of any wetland submittal to the U.S. army corps of engineers, a
letter from the corps stating a permit is not required, or a letter from a
qualified person stating no corps of engineers permits are required.
      8.   Subdivisions, annexation agreements, plats, replats, manufactured
home parks and PUDs shall include a signed statement by a licensed professional
engineer that accounts for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the plat act 1 .
      9.   Copy of the erosion and sediment control plan 2 .
   (C)   Level 1 Development Application Materials: In addition to the
materials required under subsections (A) and (B) of this section for level 2
development applications, an application for a level 1 development project
shall also include:
      1.   Calculations and a plan defining the flood levels and flow areas
through the development for the runoff from the 100-year storm;
      2.   Cross section data for open channel flow paths and designated
overland flow paths;
      3.   Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage
system;
      4.   A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's
provisions for handling events greater than the 100-year runoff.
   (D)   Level 3 Development Application Materials: An application for a level
3 development project shall include a plan of the parcel showing predevelopment
and postdevelopment surface drainage flows.
   (E)   Floodplain Development Application Materials: In addition to the site
development application materials of subsections (A), (B) and (C) of this
section, a permit application for a development project in the SFHA shall
include:
      1.   A copy of the designated floodway map, showing:
         (a)   The location of the project and property lines in relation to
the floodplain and floodway boundaries;
         (b)   Any proposed change in the designated floodway location.
      2.   For all proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted
plans.
      3.   Additional base flood elevation and floodway calculations and data
that may be needed as identified in other sections of this chapter.
   (F)   Plats: Plats or plans for new subdivisions, mobile home parks and
planned unit developments (PUDs) shall include:
      1.   A signed statement by a licensed professional engineer that the plat
or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in accordance
with 765 Illinois Compiled Statutes 205/2.
      2.   The delineation of all SFHAs which appear on the plat, signed and
sealed by an Illinois registered land surveyor as per the requirements of
section 3-5029 of the counties code 3 .
   (G)   Records:
      1.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall
maintain all permit and inspection records, including copies of elevation and
floodproofing certificates. Such records shall be made readily available for a
period of up to three (3) years after the project is completed.
      2.   All stormwater management facilities shall be located and described
within a deed or a plat restriction.
      3.   All stormwater management facilities shall be located within
easements or rights of way that explicitly provide for public access for
maintenance of such facilities.
      4.   Perpetual operation and maintenance responsibility and emergency
access shall be designated on the plat or deed. Stormwater management
facilities that service a single parcel (or 2 parcels) of property may be
excused from this requirement upon approval of the superintendent of buildings
and/or village engineer. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-16-2019)
 
Notes
1 1. 765 ILCS 205/2.
2 2. See section 12-2B-4 of this chapter.
3 1. 55 ILCS 5/3-5029.
12-2A-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   (A)   Duties Of Enforcement Official(s): The superintendent of buildings
and/or village engineer be responsible for the general administration and
enforcement of this chapter which shall include the following:
      1.   Ensure that any and all required federal, state and local permits
are received prior to the issuance of a watershed development permit.
      2.   Ensure that all development activities, including new construction
and substantial improvements, within the SFHAs of the jurisdiction of the
village meet the requirements of this chapter.
      3.   Inspect all development projects before, during and after
construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
      4.   Require and obtain copies of all necessary federal, state and local
permits and ensure that development projects are constructed in accordance with
those permits.
      5.   Maintain permit files including elevation and floodproofing
certificates.
      6.   Maintain for public inspection and furnish upon request base flood
data, SFHA and designated floodway maps, copies of federal or state permit
documents, variance documentation, conditional letter of map revision, letter
of map revision, letter of map amendment and elevation or floodproofing
certificates for all buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
      7.   Cooperate with state and federal floodplain management agencies to
improve base flood or 100-year frequency flood and floodway data and to improve
the administration of this chapter.
      8.   Submit reports as required for the national flood insurance program.
      9.   Notify FEMA of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
      10.   Submit data to IDNR and FEMA to support proposed revisions to the
regulatory maps.
      11.   Ensure that development projects authorized by state and federal
authorities are constructed in accordance with the related state and federal
permits.
      12.   Check all new development sites to determine whether they are in a
floodplain using criteria listed in Section
12-2C-1 (B), Base Flood Elevation.
      13.   For all dams, contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is
required. If a permit is required, a permit application must be made to IDNR/
OWR prior to the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
      14.   If the site is in a floodplain, determine whether the site is in a
floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not
been conducted and which drains more than one (1) square mile and;
         (a)   If the site is within a flood fringe, the superintendent of
buildings and/or village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements
of Section
12-2C-2 be met.
         (b)   If the site is within a floodway, the superintendent of
buildings and/or village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements
of Section
12-2C-3 be met. The permit shall be referred to a P.E. under the employ or
contract of the village for review.
         (c)   If the site is located within a floodplain for which no detailed
study has been completed and approved, the superintendent of buildings and/or
village engineer shall require that the minimum requirements of Section
12-2C-4 be met. The permit shall be referred to a P.E. under the employ or
contract of the village for review.
      15.   Establish, procedures for administering and documenting
determinations, as outlined below, of substantial improvement and substantial
damage made pursuant to Section
12-2C-2 and;
         (a)   Determine the market value or require the applicant to obtain an
appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent appraiser, of
the building before the start of construction of the proposed work. In the case
of repair, the market value of the building shall be the market value before
the damage occurred and before any repairs are made.
         (b)   Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to repair
a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs of
improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building.
         (c)   Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage.
         (d)   Notify the applicant if it is determined that the work
constitutes substantial improvement or repair of substantial damage and that
compliance with the flood resistant construction requirements of the Village
and this chapter is required.
   (B)   Disclaimer Of Liability:
      1.   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available
information derived from engineering and scientific methods of study.
      2.   Larger floods may occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade
or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that development, either inside
or outside of the SFHA, will be free from flooding or damage.
      3.   This chapter does not create liability on the part of the village or
any officer or employee thereof for any flood damage that results from reliance
on this chapter or any administrative decision made lawfully thereunder.
   (C)   Penalty:
      1.   Failure to comply with the requirements of a permit or conditions of
a variance resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
      2.   Upon due investigation, the superintendent of buildings and/or
village engineer may determine that a violation of the minimum standards of
this chapter exist. The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer
shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
      3.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
         (a)   The village may make application to the circuit court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance.
         (b)   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more
than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each offense.
         (c)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
         (d)   The village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
      4.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall inform
the owner that any such violation is considered a willful act to increase flood
damages and, therefore, may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy
to be suspended.
      5.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer is
authorized to issue an order requiring the suspension of the subject
development. The stop work order shall be in writing, shall indicate the reason
for the issuance, and shall order the action, if necessary, to resolve the
circumstances requiring the stop work order. The stop work order constitutes a
suspension of the permit.
      6.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the plan commission. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee and shall state: a) the grounds for complaint
or reasons for suspension or revocation; and b) the time and place of the
hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to
present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, the plan
commission shall determine whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
      7.   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such other
lawful action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected
therewith shall accrue to the person or persons responsible.
   (D)   Variances: Whenever the standards of this chapter place undue hardship
on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to the plan
commission for a variance.
      1.   The plan commission shall review the applicant's request for a
variance and shall submit its recommendation to the board of trustees.
      2.   No variance shall be granted from the requirements of this chapter
unless the applicant demonstrates that:
         (a)   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
         (b)   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
         (c)   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat, or creation
of a nuisance;
         (d)   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities, or other public
facilities;
         (e)   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not represent a
general problem; and
         (f)   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential
character of the area involved including existing stream uses.
      3.   No variance shall be granted to the floodplain development
requirements of this chapter unless the applicant demonstrates that:
         (a)   The development project cannot be located outside the SFHA;
         (b)   All floodway construction requirements, if any, will still be
met; and
         (c)   All requirements of other permitting agencies will still be met.
      4.   The plan commission shall notify an applicant in writing that a
variance from the requirements of section 12-2C-2 of this chapter that would
lessen the degree of protection to a building will:
         (a)   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to
amounts as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars
($100.00) of insurance coverage;
         (b)   Increase the risks to life and property; and
         (c)   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks
and that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
      5.   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic
site, building or structure, may be granted using criteria more permissive than
the above requirements, subject to the conditions that:
         (a)   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the building or structure; and
         (b)   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the building or
structure being removed as a certified historic building or structure.
      6.   A variance to the prohibition of critical facilities in the SFHA, in
section 12-2C-2 of this chapter, may be issued, provided:
         (a)   The applicant demonstrates that the facility cannot be located
in a flood free location;
         (b)   The facility shall be protected from flood damage to the 500-
year flood elevation; and
         (c)   The facility shall be provided with at least one all weather
access road that connects the facility to areas outside the SFHA. The surface
of the access road shall be at or above the base flood elevation.
   (E)   Abrogation And Greater Restrictions:
      1.   This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any
existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions.
      2.   Where this chapter and other ordinances, easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent
restrictions shall prevail.
      3.   This chapter is intended to repeal the original ordinance or
resolution which was adopted to meet the national flood insurance program
regulations, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the village
passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program.
   (F)   Separability: The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be
deemed separable and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not
affect the validity of the remainder. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038,
10-16-2019)
ARTICLE B. SITE DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-2B-1: General Requirements
12-2B-2: Stormwater Storage
12-2B-3: Stormwater Conveyance
12-2B-4: Erosion And Sediment Control
12-2B-5: Stream And Wetland Protection
12-2B-1: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS:
   (A)   General Requirement: No development shall adversely affect the flow of
surface waters to or from neighboring properties.
   (B)   Existing Systems:
      1.   Stormwater systems shall properly incorporate and be compatible with
existing subsurface and surface drainage systems including agricultural
systems.
      2.   All existing drain tiles shall be incorporated into the new storm
sewer system.
   (C)   Drainage Easements:
      1.   No obstructions shall be placed in any drainage easement that may
block or divert the flow of surface drainage.
      2.   All fences built in or across a drainage easement shall be either:
         (a)   Open to allow the flow of surface water; or
         (b)   Have the bottom of the fence at least six inches (6") above
grade to allow the unobstructed flow of surface water.
   (D)   Stormwater Depths:
      1.   The maximum depth of stormwater or floodwaters on new streets,
parking lots, and other paved areas shall be eight inches (8") measured at the
gutter.
      2.   The maximum depth of stormwater in other areas that are not
designated drainageways or water bodies shall be one foot (1').
   (E)   Diversions: Transfers of waters between watersheds shall be prohibited
except when such transfers will not violate the provisions of this chapter.
   (F)   Best Management Practices: Developments shall incorporate all best
management practices as may be required pursuant to the United States clean
water act, as amended.
   (G)   Runoff Volume Reduction Hierarchy:
      1.   An applicant shall choose a strategy to meet the release rate
requirements that minimizes the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the
development and improves water quality.
      2.   The applicant shall use appropriate best management practices and
the following hierarchy in preparing a drainage plan:
         (a)   Preservation of natural resource features of the development
site (e.g., floodplains, wetlands, prairies and woodlands);
         (b)   Preservation of the existing natural streams, channels and
drainageways;
         (c)   Minimizing impervious surfaces created at the site (e.g.,
narrowing road width, minimizing driveway length and width, clustering homes
and shared driveways);
         (d)   Design of open vegetated channels to convey stormwater runoff;
         (e)   Preservation of the natural infiltration and storage
characteristics of the site (e.g., interspersing grass filter strips in areas
with impervious cover and installing on-lot bioretention facilities);
         (f)   Implementation of structural measures that provide water quality
and quantity control, such as constructing wet bottom versus dry bottom basins;
         (g)   Implementation of structural measures that provide only quantity
control and conveyance.
   (H)   Design Rainfall:
      1.   Unless a continuous simulation approach to drainage system hydrology
is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on “Illinois State Water
Survey's Bulletin 75,” as amended from time to time.
      2.   The first quartile point rainfall events shall be used for the
design and analysis of conveyance systems with a duration of less than twelve
(12) hours.
      3.   The third quartile point rainfall distributions shall be used for
the design and analysis of detention basins and conveyance systems with a
duration greater than twelve (12) and less than or equal to twenty four (24)
hours.
      4.   The fourth quartile distribution shall be used in the design and
analysis of systems with durations greater than twenty four (24) hours.
      5.   The SCS type II distribution may be used as an alternative.
   (I)   Design Methods:
      1.   Major conveyance systems for tributary areas up to ten (10) acres
may be designed using the rational method. All minor conveyance systems may be
designed using the rational method.
      2.   Event hydrograph methods shall be used to calculate design runoff
volumes for stormwater storage basins and major conveyance systems with greater
than ten (10) acres of drainage area.
      3.   The following hydrologic design procedures are considered acceptable
for generation of hydrographs: corps of engineers HEC-1, TR-20, TR-55 subject
to rainfall distribution modifications, and continuous simulation models.
      4.   Event methods must use antecedent moisture condition 2.
      5.   The hydrologic model used shall assume that the watershed is either
fully urbanized or fully developed according to current zoning ordinances that
have jurisdiction over the area. The model may assume that detention will be
construction for new development as required by current ordinances that have
jurisdiction over the area.
   (J)   Fee In Lieu: Where a regional drainage plan has been adopted and is
being implemented, the applicant may pay a fee in lieu of meeting the
requirements of this article.
      1.   The fee shall be as set in subsection
12-2A-4(G) of this chapter.
      2.   Fees so paid shall be dedicated to implementing the drainage plan
and shall not be used for other purposes.
      3.   Payment of the fee does not relieve the development from meeting all
pertinent floodplain development requirements of article C of this chapter.
(Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2080, 8-11-2021)
12-2B-2: STORMWATER STORAGE:
   (A)   Release Rates:
      1.   No level 1 or 2 development shall allow the stormwater runoff to
leave the development site at a rate greater than the peak runoff from the site
under the conditions that exist when the permit is applied for.
      2.   The drainage system for a property shall be designed to control the
peak rate of discharge from the property for the 2-year, twenty four (24) hour
and 100-year, twenty four (24) hour events.
      3.   The peak discharge for events less than or equal to the 2-year event
shall not be greater than 0.04 cfs per acre of property drained. The peak 100-
year discharge shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per acre of property drained.
      4.   Upon approval of the superintendent of buildings and/or village
engineer, storage volume calculations for level 2 developments may be based on
the development's percentage of impervious area, using the calculations in
"Detention Volume Versus Impervious Area" (South Suburban Mayors and Managers
Association, May 2000).
   (B)   Emergency Overflow:
      1.   All stormwater infiltration, retention and detention facilities
shall be provided with an emergency overflow structure capable of passing the
100-year peak flow inflow rate without damage to buildings or property.
      2.   The overflow shall be established at the 100-year high water
elevation.
      3.   The remainder of the basin shall have at least one foot (1') of
freeboard.
   (C)   Outlet Design:
      1.   Single pipe outlets shall have a minimum inside diameter of twelve
inches (12").
      2.   If design release rates call for a smaller outlet, a design that
minimizes the possibility of clogging, such as a perforated riser, shall be
used.
      3.   The minimum outlet restrictor size shall be four inches (4") in
diameter provided there is adequate downstream capacity.
      4.   All outlets shall be "gravity only" unless otherwise approved by the
superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer.
      5.   Backwater on the outlet structure from the downstream drainage
system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet.
   (D)   Dam Construction: If the construction of a storage basin involves the
construction, modification or removal of a dam or in-stream impoundment
structure, as defined in 17 Illinois administrative code part 3702 (rules for
construction of dams), the applicant shall obtain an Illinois division of water
resources dam safety permit or letter stating no permit is required prior to
the start of work.
   (E)   Off Site Flow: Stormwater infiltration, retention and detention
facilities required to meet a development's discharge requirements shall be
designed to bypass off site tributary flow from streams and channels unless
approved by the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer.
   (F)   Depressional Storage:
      1.   The function of existing on site depressional storage shall be
preserved independently of required detention.
      2.   When depressional storage is removed, it must be compensated for by
an on site runoff storage facility at a one to one ratio (1:1). This
requirement is in addition to the site runoff storage requirements of this
chapter.
   (G)   Storage Basins: Detention and retention basins shall be designed with
the following guidelines:
      1.   Provisions for all basins:
         (a)   The facility shall incorporate either open water or wetland
features to improve water quality.
         (b)   The facility shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants.
         (c)   To the extent feasible, the distance between detention inlets
and outlets shall be maximized. Where possible, they should be at opposite ends
of the basin.
         (d)   The dry portions of the facility may be made available for
recreational use.
      2.   Provisions for areas with open water:
         (a)   The water shall be at least three feet (3') deep, excluding near
shore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided, at least
twenty five percent (25%) of the bottom area shall be ten feet (10') deep to
prevent winter freeze out.
         (b)   The side slopes shall be no steeper than five to one (5:1)
(horizontal to vertical).
         (c)   The permanent pool volume at normal depth shall be equal to the
runoff volume from its watershed for the two (2) year storm. If this cannot be
achieved, the bottom shall be underdrained or wetland plantings shall be used.
         (d)   Shoreline protection shall be provided to prevent erosion.
Native vegetation is the preferred landscaping material.
         (e)   Facilities shall be available, if possible, to allow the pond
level to be lowered by gravity flow for cleaning purposes and shoreline
maintenance.
         (f)   Aeration facilities may be required to prevent pond stagnation.
Agreements for the perpetual operation and maintenance of aeration facilities
shall be prepared to the satisfaction of the superintendent of buildings and/or
village engineer.
      3.   Provisions where wetland features are used:
         (a)   The design criteria, vegetation selection, performance criteria,
and maintenance and monitoring guidelines in "Naturalized Stormwater Management
Facilities" (South Suburban Mayors and Managers Association, May 2000) shall be
followed.
         (b)   Sediment basins should be provided at all major inlets to the
facility. The volume of the basins should be at least five hundred (500) cubic
feet per acre of impervious surface in the drainage area. Side slopes below one
foot (1') of depth should be no steeper than three to one (3:1) (horizontal to
vertical) and basin depth should be at least three feet (3') and designed to
allow access for sediment removal equipment.
         (c)   There should be no low flow bypass between the inlet and outlet.
Paved low flow channels shall not be used.
      4.   Provisions for shoreline zones:
         (a)   The "shoreline zone" is that area between one foot (1') above
normal pool stage and one foot (1') below normal pool stage.
         (b)   The side slope in the shoreline zone shall not be steeper than
ten to one (10:1) (horizontal to vertical).
         (c)   Appropriate soil conditions shall be provided in the shoreline
zone.
            (1)   Compaction of both subsoil and topsoil shall be minimized
(i.e., to less than 275 psi).
            (2)   Where subsoil compaction cannot be avoided, it should be
disked to a depth of six (6) to eight inches (8") with a chisel plow before
spreading topsoil.
            (3)   A suitable uncompacted topsoil, at a minimum thickness of one
foot (1'), shall be spread to provide a suitable growing medium for aquatic
plants. Coarse soils with minimal clay content and a high organic content are
recommended.
         (d)   Water tolerant, preferably native, vegetation shall be used to
landscape the shoreline zone.
            (1)   The selected plants and planting methods shall conform to the
soils, hydrology, and water quality conditions present in such facilities, with
plants being tolerant of highly variable hydrologic conditions and degraded
water quality (e.g., high turbidity and salinity content).
            (2)   Plant selection should conform to the guidance in the "Native
Plant Guide For Streams And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern Illinois"
(NRCS, et al., 2008).
      5.   Provisions for areas (other than shoreline zones) that are intended
to remain dry:
         (a)   The minimum bottom slope for turf shall be two percent (2%). If
this cannot be achieved, the bottom shall be underdrained or wetland plantings
shall be used.
         (b)   The side slopes shall be no steeper than four to one (4:1)
(horizontal to vertical) for all turf areas.
   (H)   Streets, Parking And Underground Storage:
      1.   No storage basin shall be constructed within a distance of ten feet
(10') plus one and one-half (11/2) times the depth of any basin to the right of
way of any public roadway without written permission from superintendent of
buildings and/or village engineer.
      2.   The owner of a parcel being developed adjacent to a state or county
road right of way shall notify the proper highway authority in writing of the
proposed development. The owner shall request that the proper highway authority
provide, at the cost of the highway authority or as otherwise provided by law,
the amount of additional capacity in any stormwater detention facility to be
constructed in the development for the future availability of the highway
authority for meeting stormwater detention requirements of any future public
construction on the highway.
      3.   The maximum depth of stormwater storage for paved areas designated
for public parking is eight inches (8").
      4.   Underground storage of stormwater shall be avoided. If used,
adequate storm sewer inlets must be provided to pass the 100-year flow into the
underground storage.
   (I)   Storage In Floodplains:
      1.   Stormwater retention and detention facilities shall not be
constructed in the SFHA unless approved by superintendent of buildings and/or
village engineer.
      2.   If a storage facility is constructed in the SFHA, the volume of
detention storage required to meet the standards of this section shall be in
addition to the floodplain compensatory storage required for the development.
   (J)   On Stream Detention:
      1.   "On stream" detention means an in stream impoundment or other
detention basin that includes construction of a dam or other barrier in an
existing channel.
      2.   All on stream detention shall provide a detention volume safety
factor equal to one plus 0.05 times the ratio of off site tributary drainage
area to on site tributary drainage area. The maximum detention volume safety
factor shall be 1.5.
      3.   The applicant for a permit to construct an on stream detention
facility shall provide the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer
with either an IDNR dam safety permit or a letter from IDNR stating that a dam
safety permit is not required.
      4.   On stream detention shall not be allowed if:
         (a)   The off site to on site tributary drainage area ratio is greater
than ten to one (10:1), except for developments providing a watershed benefit;
or
         (b)   The tributary drainage area is greater than six hundred forty
(640) acres, except for detention that provides a watershed benefit.
      5.   The release rate shall be the total of the following:
         (a)   0.04 cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary
drainage area (on site and off site) at the elevation created by impoundment of
the on site 2-year storm volume plus the detention volume safety factor; and
         (b)   0.15 cubic feet per second per acre of the total tributary
drainage area (on site and off site) at the elevation created by impoundment of
the on site 100-year storm volume plus the detention volume safety factor; and
         (c)   The required compensatory storage.
         (d)   The release rate and on site detention volume shall be
calculated using the twenty four (24) hour storm event. This release rate
calculation shall be used unless other site conditions warrant further analysis
and modification from this standard or unless watershed specific release rates
have been adopted.
      6.   On stream detention shall provide water quality treatment. One of
the following two (2) methods shall be used:
         (a)   A wet detention facility shall be constructed with a minimum
permanent pool volume equal to the calculated sediment volume accumulated over
a one year period for the entire upstream watershed and an average normal water
depth of at least four feet (4'). The facility shall also have a live storage
volume that meets the standard storage requirements of this section.
         (b)   A separate off line sediment basin shall be used with a volume
appropriate for the tributary drainage area to the sediment basin.
      7.   Impoundment of the stream as part of on stream detention shall not
prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which require access to
upstream areas as part of their life cycle, and shall not cause or contribute
to the degradation of water quality or stream aquatic habitat. These fish
species may be present or potentially present.
      8.   Compensatory storage requirements shall be satisfied and shall be in
addition to detention volume requirements.
      9.   No on stream detention shall be allowed in areas designated as an
exceptional functional value wetland. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
12-2B-3: STORMWATER CONVEYANCE:
   (A)   Capacity:
      1.   Minor stormwater conveyance systems shall be sized to convey the 10-
year runoff.
      2.   Major conveyance systems shall be sized to carry the 100-year
runoff.
   (B)   Storm Sewers And Swales:
      1.   The 10-year design storm shall be used as a minimum for storm sewers
and minor swales.
         (a)   Storm sewers shall contain the 10-year storm within the pipes
and manholes.
         (b)   Roadside ditches and swales shall contain the 10-year storm
without water encroaching on the pavement.
      2.   Storm sewer design shall be based on full flow conditions;
otherwise, hydraulic grade calculations shall be performed that show that the
rims are not inundated at the design storm.
      3.   Storm sewers and swales shall not connect to sanitary sewers.
   (C)   Existing Systems:
      1.   Field tile systems disturbed during construction must be reconnected
by those responsible for their disturbance unless an approved drainage plan
includes provisions for the disturbed system. All abandoned field tiles shall
be removed in their entirety.
      2.   Storm sewers and swales may connect to existing drain tiles or storm
sewers only if the applicant submits a maintenance agreement, recorded
easements and a report that indicates the existing system has adequate
hydraulic capacity and structural integrity. The recorded easement and
maintenance agreement must extend from the connection to the discharge point in
an open channel.
   (D)   Easements:
      1.   All storm sewers and swales shall be located in a public road right
of way or maintenance easement.
      2.   The following easement widths shall be used to provide sufficient
maintenance access:
 
Pipe Diameter          Easement Width
11 to 18 inches        10 feet
18 to 36 inches        12 feet
36 to 60 inches        15 feet
Greater than 60 inches 10 feet plus the diameter of the pipe
 
      3.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall
require additional easement widths if the storm sewer depth is greater than
average.
      4.   All drainage easements shall be accessible to vehicular equipment;
however, vehicles do not have to be able to drive down the entire length of the
easement.
   (E)   Erosion Protection:
      1.   All stormwater conveyance systems shall be designed and constructed
to withstand the expected velocity of flow from all events up to the base flood
without erosion.
      2.   Stabilization adequate to prevent erosion shall be provided at the
inlets and outlets for all pipe and channel transitions.
   (F)   Sewer Design:
      1.   The minimum storm sewer shall be ten inches (10") for the first pipe
and twelve inches (12") for subsequent reaches unless approved by the
superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer.
      2.   The minimum design velocity for a storm sewer shall be 2.5 fps. The
maximum design velocity for a storm sewer shall be 8.0 fps.
      3.   All flared end sections for twelve inch (12") or larger storm sewers
shall have grates to stop people, animals or large debris from entering. The
grates shall have openings no larger than three inches (3") horizontal to eight
inches (8") vertical.
   (G)   Streams And Channels: Where an existing stream or channel is proposed
as part of the conveyance system for the development's increased runoff, the
following requirements shall apply:
      1.   The project shall meet all requirements in sections 12-2B-4 and 12-
2B-5 of this article, and section 12-2C-3 of this chapter on channel and bank
protection.
      2.   Clearing of channel vegetation shall be limited to that which is
necessary. A revegetation plan is required using the "Native Plant Guide For
Streams And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern Illinois", NRCS, et al., as a
minimum standard.
      3.   A minimum maintenance easement of twelve feet (12') from the top of
bank is required along one side of all channels draining twenty (20) or more
acres.
   (H)   Overland Flow Paths:
      1.   The development must have an overland flow path that will pass the
100-year flood flow without damage to buildings or property.
      2.   If the upstream drainage area is less than twenty (20) acres, the
storm sewer pipe and inlet systems sized for the base flood can be constructed
in lieu of providing an overland flow path.
      3.   The critical duration 100-year flood flow shall be used to design
the overland flow path limits and it shall include all on site and off site
tributary areas.
      4.   Overland flow paths shall be protected from fencing, landscaping or
storage shed placement, which could impair its function. This protection shall
be established through an easement, deed or plat restriction as required in
subsection 12-2A-5(G) of this chapter.
      5.   All principal buildings on parcels containing or adjoining an
overland flow path or other high water level designation shall have a lowest
adjacent grade elevation:
         (a)   0.5 feet above the overflow elevation for tributary areas of
twenty (20) acres or less.
         (b)   One foot (1') above the overflow elevation for tributary areas
greater than twenty (20) acres. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
12-2B-4: EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL:
   (A)   General Principles:
      1.   The requirements of this section shall only affect level 1 and 2
developments.
      2.   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the
site so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes,
where high cut and fills may be required, should be avoided and natural
contours should be followed as closely as possible.
      3.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected. Clearing of
natural ground cover and/or trees within a buffer area as defined in section
12-2B-5 of this article should be left undisturbed wherever possible.
      4.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed at any one
time.
      5.   Prior to site clearing and grading, sediment basins or traps, filter
barriers, diversions and other appropriate control measures shall be installed.
      6.   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and
functional as soon as practical during development. Native vegetation is
preferred for developments near, or adjacent to, high quality natural areas,
wetlands and streams.
      7.   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses shall be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
      8.   All waste generated as a result of site development shall be
properly disposed of and shall be prevented from being carried off the site by
either wind or water.
   (B)   On Site Control Measures: The on site control measures shall be
designed based on the size of the disturbed areas as follows:
      1.   For disturbed areas draining less than one acre, filter barriers
(including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures) shall be
constructed to control all off site runoff as specified in referenced
handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet
(25') may be used as an alternative where runoff in sheet flow is expected.
      2.   For disturbed areas draining more than one acre but less than five
(5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed
at the downslope point of the disturbed area in conjunction with other filter
barriers.
      3.   For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment
basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point
of the disturbed area in conjunction with other filter barriers.
      4.   Sediment basin and trap design shall provide for both detention
storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be for equal volumes
of "wet" detention storage and "dry" detention storage. Each shall be sized for
the 2-year, twenty four (24) hour runoff from the site. The release rate shall
be that rate required to achieve a minimum detention time of ten (10) hours.
The outlet structure shall be placed such that it only drains the dry detention
storage.
      5.   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated sediment
load generated from the site over the duration of the construction period with
a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in one year. A
sediment removal schedule is required for construction periods exceeding one
year.
   (C)   Stormwater Conveyance Channels: Stormwater conveyance channels,
ditches, swales, and diversions shall convey a 10-year frequency storm without
erosion. All channels shall be stabilized within forty eight (48) hours,
consistent with the following standards:
      1.   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch or erosion blankets shall be placed along the channel sides with sod or
erosion blanket applied to the bottom.
      2.   For grades of four (4) to eight percent (8%), sod shall be used.
      3.   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), use rock or riprap, or
reduce the grade using drop structures.
   (D)   Channel Protection:
      1.   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25') in width
shall be preserved and/or reestablished, where possible, along existing
channels.
      2.   Land disturbance activities in stream channels and construction
vehicle use of channels shall be minimized.
      3.   Temporary stream crossings shall be constructed, where necessary, to
minimize erosion. Temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive
materials such as riprap or gravel.
      4.   The temporary stream crossing shall be completely removed and the
stream restored to its preconstruction condition within forty eight (48) hours
after completion of construction, incorporating appropriate native vegetation.
Also see section 12-2C-3, "Requirements In Floodways", of this chapter.
   (E)   Additional Requirements:
      1.   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps
or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications.
      2.   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.
      3.   Each site shall have graveled entrance roads, access drives and
parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment from being
tracked onto public roadways. Any sediment reaching a public or private road
shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not flushing) before the end
of each workday and transported to a controlled sediment disposal area.
   (F)   References Adopted:
      1.   Specifications for erosion control measures shall be in accordance
with the most recent edition of the "Illinois Urban Manual".
      2.   Sediment and erosion control planning shall be in accordance with
"Procedures And Standards For Urban Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control In
Illinois" (July 1988, as revised in 1993 and thereafter) by the urban committee
of the association of Illinois soil and water conservation districts (the
"Green Book") chapters 1 through 5.
      3.   Where the requirements of subsections (B) through (E) of this
section, the "Illinois Urban Manual" or the "Green Book" conflict, the more
restrictive requirement shall prevail.
   (G)   Plan Requirements: An erosion and sediment control plan shall include
the following:
      1.   Proposed sequencing schedule, including dates, for:
         (a)   Stripping;
         (b)   Installation of temporary on site control measures and perimeter
controls;
         (c)   Clearing and grading;
         (d)   Construction;
         (e)   Installation of storm drainage and paving; and
         (f)   Final grading, removal of temporary measures and landscaping.
      2.   Location, standard details and design specifics of sediment basins
and traps. The design specifics should include outlet details and the drainage
area to each measure.
      3.   Location and description of all control measures, including seeding
mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of seedbed preparation, expected
seeding dates, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and permanent
vegetative control measures and types of nonvegetative stabilization measures.
      4.   Description of dust and traffic control measures and location and
specifications for construction entrances.
      5.   Locations of stockpiles and description of stabilization measures.
      6.   Volumes, locations and methods of stabilization for off site fill or
borrow.
      7.   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including a
maintenance schedule.
      8.   Description of permanent stabilization measures.
      9.   Identification (name, address and telephone) of the person(s) or
entity responsible for maintenance during and after construction.
   (H)   Extended Construction Shutdown Period: Disturbed areas shall be
stabilized with temporary or permanent measures within seven (7) calendar days
following the end of active disturbance or redisturbance. The condition of the
construction site for the winter shut down period shall address proper sediment
and erosion control early in the fall growing season. Stabilization measures
include seeding, mulching, sodding or erosion control blankets.
   (I)   Final Site Stabilization: All temporary control measures shall be
disposed of within thirty (30) days after permanent soil stabilization measures
have been installed. Trapped sediment and other disturbed soils resulting from
the temporary measures shall be permanently stabilized to prevent further
erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
12-2B-5: STREAM AND WETLAND PROTECTION:
   (A)   Buffer Areas Required: Buffer areas shall be required along all
streams, lakes, waterways, channels and wetlands, except for the following:
      1.   Roadside ditches;
      2.   Existing excavated stormwater storage facilities;
      3.   Borrow pits and quarries;
      4.   Leveed waterways; and
      5.   Improvements to existing public roads and utilities.
   (B)   Buffer Area Dimensions:
      1.   Linear buffers shall be designated along both sides of all streams
and natural channels. A minimum buffer of thirty feet (30') on each side of the
channel shall be provided.
      2.   Water body buffers shall encompass all lakes, wetlands and other
nonlinear bodies of water. A minimum buffer of thirty feet (30') on each side
of the channel shall be provided.
      3.   Exceptional functional value wetlands shall have a minimum buffer of
one hundred feet (100').
      4.   In areas having state or federal threatened and endangered species
present or for Illinois natural area inventory sites, buffer widths may be
modified to meet the terms and conditions specified during consultation with
the Illinois department of natural resources or United States fish and wildlife
service, pursuant to state and federal laws and regulations.
      5.   The buffer area for all waters of the United States shall extend
from the ordinary high water mark. The buffer area for wetlands shall extend
from the edge of the delineated wetland. A property may contain a buffer area
that originates from the waters of the United States on another property.
      6.   Buffer averaging may be allowed by the superintendent of buildings
and/or village engineer, provided the buffer width is at least half of the
buffer width required by this chapter or the minimum width required by a corps
of engineers permit, whichever is wider.
   (C)   Buffer Requirements:
      1.   Features of the stormwater management system may be within the
buffer area of a development.
      2.   Access through buffer areas shall be provided, when necessary, for
maintenance purposes.
      3.   Preservation of buffer areas shall be provided by deed or plat
restriction.
   (D)   Allowed Uses In Buffer Areas:
      1.   All buffer areas shall be maintained free from development except
for the following uses:
         (a)   Passive recreation, including pedestrian, bicycle or equestrian
trails.
         (b)   Construction and maintenance of utilities and stormwater
facilities.
      2.   Structures and impervious surfaces related to recreational
facilities, such as trails and paths, may occupy a maximum of twenty percent
(20%) of the buffer surface area, provided the runoff from such facilities is
diverted away from the waters of the United States or such runoff is directed
to enter the buffer area as unconcentrated flow. Boat docks, boathouses and
piers shall be allowed and count as a structure when calculating percent of
impervious area.
      3.   Buffer areas hydrologically disturbed by allowing construction or as
part of a revegetation plan shall be revegetated using the "Native Plant Guide
For Streams And Stormwater Facilities In Northeastern Illinois" (NRCS, et al.)
as a minimum standard.
   (E)   Channel Protection:
      1.   If the proposed activity involves a channel modification, the permit
applicant shall demonstrate that:
         (a)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Channel modification is acceptable if the purpose is to
restore natural conditions and improve water quality and fish and wildlife
habitat.
         (b)   Water quality, habitat, and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values.
      2.   A channel modification shall be designed and constructed in a way
which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural conditions of the body
of water affected, consistent with the following criteria:
         (a)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall match
as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross section,
slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously modified,
restoration of more natural physical conditions should be incorporated into
channel modification design.
         (b)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at both
the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they will
prevent erosion.
         (c)   One sided construction of a channel shall be used when feasible.
Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one side of
the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization effects
of the vegetation.
         (d)   Clearing of stabilizing vegetation shall be limited to that
which is essential for construction of the channel.
         (e)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no steeper
than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable. Native
vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, soil bioengineering techniques, natural
rock or riprap are preferred approaches. Artificial materials such as concrete,
gabions, or construction rubble should be avoided unless there are no
practicable alternatives.
         (f)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall be
seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
         (g)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom diversity
such as deep pools, riffles, and other similar features, such features shall be
provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate.
         (h)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end of the
modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
         (i)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and all
items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
         (j)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the channel
enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless necessitated
by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is justified as
part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
         (k)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control project,
there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage outside the
floodway as a result of the modification.
         (l)   The provisions of subsections 12-2B-4(D) of this article and 12-
2C-3(E) of this chapter shall also be met.
   (F)   Dumping:
      1.   No person, firm, corporation or governmental agency shall dispose of
or dump grass clippings, brush, fill, trash, debris, or other material that may
obstruct the flow or storage of water in any channel, swale, culvert, storm
sewer, wetland, storage basin or other natural or manmade watercourse or water
body.
      2.   No person, firm, corporation or governmental agency shall dispose of
or dump any petroleum products, chemicals, noxious liquids, animal waste or
other materials that will pollute the water in any channel, swale, culvert,
storm sewer, wetland, storage basin or other natural or manmade watercourse or
water body. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
ARTICLE C. FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
12-2C-1: Regulatory Floodplain Data
12-2C-2: Requirements In All Special Flood Hazard Areas
12-2C-3: Requirements In Floodways
12-2C-4: Areas Without Regulatory Floodplain Data
12-2C-5: Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
12-2C-1: REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN DATA:
   (A)   Special Flood Hazard Area:
      1.   All development within the special flood hazard area is subject to
this chapter.
      2.   August 19, 2008, Cook County countywide flood insurance rate map as
zone A, A1-30, AE, AO, and/or AH" and replace with “FIRM panel numbers
17031C0638J, 17031C0639J, 17031C0726J and 17031C0727J of the countywide FIRM
for Cook County dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0619K and 17031C
0707K of the countywide FIRM for Cook County dated November 1, 2019.”
   (B)   Base Flood Elevation:
      1.   The base flood elevation for the SFHAs of Natalie Creek, Midlothian
Creek and Tributary C of the Cal Sag Channel shall be as delineated on the 100-
year flood profiles in the Cook County countywide flood insurance study
prepared by FEMA and dated November 1, 2019, and such amendments to such study
as may be prepared from time to time.
      2.   The base flood elevation for each SFHA delineated as a zone AH or
zone AO shall be that elevation (or depth) delineated on the FIRM panel numbers
17031C0638J, 17031C0639J, 17031C0726J and 17031C0727J of the countywide FIRM
for Cook County dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0619K and
17031C0707K of the countywide FIRM for Cook County dated November 1, 2019.
      3.   The base flood elevation for all other SFHAs and regulated areas
shall be as defined in subsection
12-2C-4(B) of this article.
   (C)   SFHAs Defined By Elevation: Upon receipt of a development permit
application, the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall
compare the elevation of the site to the base flood elevation. Any development
located on land that can be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation
and which has not been filled since the date of the site's first flood
insurance rate map as required by this chapter, is not in the SFHA and,
therefore, not subject to the requirements of this chapter.
   (D)   Flood Protection Elevation (FPE): The flood protection elevation, or
"FPE", shall be the elevation of the base flood plus one foot (1') at any given
location in the SFHA.
   (E)   Designated Floodway:
      1.   The floodway includes the channel and that portion of the riverine
floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by IDNR/OWR, which
is needed to store and convey the existing base flood discharge with no more
than a one- tenth foot (0.1') increase in stage due to the loss of flood
conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities.
      2.   The floodways are designated for panel numbers 17031C0638J,
17031C0639J, 17031C0726J and 17031C 0727J of the countywide FIRM for Cook
County dated August 19, 2008 and panel numbers 17031C0619K and 17031C0707K of
the countywide FIRM for Cook County dated November 1, 2019.
   (F)   Challenges To Regulatory Floodplain Data: When a party disagrees with
the regulatory floodplain data proscribed by this chapter, he/she may finance
the detailed engineering study needed to replace existing data with better data
and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-
16-2019)
12-2C-2: REQUIREMENTS IN ALL SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS:
   (A)   Jurisdiction: All development projects in all types of special flood
hazard areas shall comply with this section. Development proposed in floodways
and in SFHAs without regulatory floodplain data shall also comply with the
additional requirements of sections 12-2C-3 and 12-2C-4 of this article.
   (B)   Public Health Protection:
      1.   No development in the SFHA shall create a threat to public health or
safety.
      2.   No development in the SFHA shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the FPE.
      3.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, and sanitary sewer
lines may be permitted providing all manholes or other aboveground openings
located below the FPE are watertight.
      4.   Septic systems and other on site waste disposal systems are
prohibited in the SFHA.
   (C)   Filling And Grading: Whenever a development project proposes to fill
or grade vacant land in order to remove a portion of it from the SFHA or to
change the floodway boundary:
      1.   The top of the resulting filled or graded area shall be at or above
the FPE.
      2.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall not
issue a development permit until the applicant has received a conditional
letter of map revision from FEMA.
      3.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall not
issue a permit for any new buildings until the applicant has received a letter
of map revision from FEMA.
   (D)   Compensatory Storage:
      1.   Whenever any portion of a floodplain is authorized for use, the
volume of space which will be occupied by the authorized fill or building below
the base flood elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a
hydraulically equivalent volume of excavation taken from below the base flood
elevation.
      2.   The excavation volume shall be at least equal to 1.25 times the
volume of storage lost due to the fill or building.
      3.   In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be
made opposite or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied.
      4.   All floodplain storage lost below the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-year flood elevation at least
a one to one (1:1) ratio. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-
year flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood
elevation at least a one to one (1:1) ratio.
      5.   If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of
the proposed construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent.
      6.   All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly
to the watercourse.
      7.   This compensatory storage requirement does not apply to small
temporary structures (such as aboveground swimming pools) where such projects
are located on small lots with existing buildings where the site does not have
sufficient space to provide compensating storage.
   (E)   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   All new buildings and improvements and repairs to buildings located
within the SFHA shall be protected from flood damage below the FPE.
      2.   This building protection requirement applies to the following
situations:
         (a)   Construction or placement of a new building.
         (b)   Remodeling or other activity that will result in a substantially
improved building.
         (c)   An addition that will result in a substantially improved
building or that will increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%).
         (d)   An existing building that has been substantially damaged.
         (e)   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a manufactured
home on an existing site, including returning a manufactured home to the same
site it lawfully occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage.
         (f)   Installing a recreational vehicle or travel trailer on a site
for more than one hundred eighty (180) days.
         (g)   Construction of new buildings and substantial improvements in
the 500-year floodplain.
      3.   This building protection requirement may be met by the methods
specified in subsections (F) through (I) of this section. Only nonresidential
buildings may use the methods specified in section 12-2C-3 of this article.
Buildings are also subject to the other requirements of this article, including
the floodway restrictions in section
12-2C-3 of this article.
      4.   A certification of occupancy shall not be issued for a building
project until the permit applicant provides the superintendent of buildings
and/or village engineer with a properly completed, signed and sealed as built
FEMA elevation or floodproofing certificate.
   (F)   Buildings On Fill: A residential or nonresidential building may be
constructed on permanent land fill in accordance with the following:
      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) of the building or addition
shall be at or above the FPE.
      2.   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than one foot (1')
deep before compacting and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation of the building before sloping below the base flood elevation. The
top of the fill shall be above the base flood elevation. However, the ten foot
(10') minimum may be waived if a structural engineer certifies an alternative
method to protect the building from damage due to erosion, scour and other
hydrodynamic forces. The fill shall not adversely affect the flow or surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties.
   (G)   Elevated Buildings: A residential or nonresidential building may be
elevated in accordance with the following:
      1.   The lowest floor (including basement) and all electrical, heating,
ventilating, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall
be located at or above the FPE.
      2.   The building or improvements shall be elevated on crawl space,
stilts, piles, walls, or other foundation that is permanently open to
floodwaters and not subject to damage by hydrostatic pressures of the base
flood.
      3.   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines, submersible
pumps, and other waterproofed service facilities may be located below the FPE.
      4.   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored and aligned
in relation to flood flows and adjoining buildings so as to minimize exposure
to known hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces such as uplift, current, waves,
ice and floating debris.
      5.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed of materials resistant
to flood damage.
      6.   The areas below the FPE may only be used for the parking of
vehicles, building access or storage of nonflotable and nonhazardous materials
in an area other than a basement. The applicant shall be advised that
equipment, machinery and fixtures not required for support of the building and
contents located below the lowest floor are not covered by a flood insurance
policy.
      7.   If the building is on a crawl space or other design where the walls
below the FPE are enclosed, the following requirements apply:
         (a)   The walls shall be designed to automatically equalize
hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit
of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified
by a licensed professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
            (1)   There shall be a minimum of two (2) openings having a total
net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed
area subject to flooding shall be provided.
            (2)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
(1') above grade.
            (3)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.
         (b)   The floor of the crawl space shall not be lower than the lowest
grade adjacent to the building's exterior.
         (c)   Gravity storm and sanitary sewer connections are prohibited in
the enclosed area. If there are facilities in the enclosed area connected to
storm and sanitary sewers, the connections must be to sumps, pumps and overhead
sewer lines.
         (d)   If the lowest floor is more than five feet (5') above the floor
of the crawl space, the owner shall sign a nonconversion agreement to assure
that the enclosed lower area will not be improved, finished or converted to a
use other than parking, building access or storage of materials.
   (H)   Manufactured Homes And Recreational Vehicles:
      1.   In addition to the requirements of subsections (E) through (G) of
this section, manufactured homes:
         (a)   Shall have the lowest floor elevated to or above the FPE; and
         (b)   Shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for
the Illinois mobile home tiedown act 1  issued pursuant to 77 Illinois
administrative code part 870.
      2.   Recreational vehicles or travel trailers shall be required to meet
the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in subsection
(H)1 of this section, unless:
         (a)   They are on site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days; and
         (b)   They are fully licensed and ready for highway use. A
recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking
system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utility and
service devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (I)   Floodproofed Buildings: Only a nonresidential building may be
structurally dry floodproofed (in lieu of elevation); provided, that:
      1.   A licensed professional engineer shall certify that the building has
been structurally dry floodproofed below the FPE and that the building and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood.
      2.   The building design shall take into account flood velocities,
duration, rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of
buoyancy, and impacts from debris or ice.
      3.   Floodproofing measures shall be operable without human intervention
and without an outside source of electricity (levees, berms, floodwalls and
similar works are not considered floodproofing for the purpose of this
subsection).
   (J)   Accessory Buildings: Tool sheds and detached garages on an existing
single-family platted lot, may be constructed with the lowest floor below the
FPE, provided the building meets the following requirements:
      1.   The building is not used for human habitation.
      2.   The building shall meet the permanent openings criteria of
subsection (G)7 of this section.
      3.   All areas below the FPE shall be constructed with waterproof
material.
      4.   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to the FPE.
      5.   The building shall be anchored to prevent flotation.
      6.   The building shall be less than six hundred (600) square feet in
floor size.
      7.   The building shall be less than eight thousand five hundred dollars
($8,500.00) in value.
      8.   The building shall be used only for the storage of vehicles or tools
and may not contain other rooms, workshops, greenhouses or similar uses.
   (K)   Critical Facilities:
      1.   Critical facilities are defined as:
         (a)   Buildings or facilities that produce, use, or store highly
volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic and/or water reactive materials;
         (b)   Hospitals, nursing homes, and housing likely to contain
occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid death or injury during a
flood;
         (c)   Police stations, fire stations, vehicle and equipment storage
facilities, and emergency operations centers that are needed for flood response
activities before, during, and after a flood;
         (d)   Public and private utility facilities that are vital to
maintaining or restoring normal services to flooded areas before, during, and
after a flood.
      2.   No critical facility shall be allowed in the SFHA.
   (L)   Known Flood Hazards: The board of trustees shall take into account
flood hazards, to the extent that they are known, in all official actions
related to land management, use and development.
   (M)   Major Developments:
      1.   Subdivisions, annexation agreements, planned unit developments
(PUDs), manufactured home parks and other major developments shall be reviewed
to assure that the proposed developments are consistent with the provisions of
this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage.
      2.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be
located and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural
streams and channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included
within parks or other public grounds.
      3.   The surface of all new arterial streets shall be at or above the
base flood elevation. The surface of all new collector streets shall be at or
above eight inches (8") below the base flood elevation.
      4.   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any Planned Unit Development
or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical
and water systems, must be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
      6.   Plats or plans for new subdivisions, Manufactured Home parks and
Planned Unit Developments shall include a signed statement by a Registered P.E.
that the plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act (765 ILCS 205/2).
      7.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel
trailer parks, Planned Unit Developments and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include BFE data and floodway
delineations. Where this information is not available from an existing adopted
study, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the BFE
per
12-2C-4 and the floodway delineation per the definition in Section
12-2A-3. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-16-2019; Ord. 2092, 3-23-
2022)
 
Notes
1 1. 210 ILCS 120/1 et seq.
12-2C-3: REQUIREMENTS IN FLOODWAYS:
   (A)   Jurisdiction: This section applies to proposed development,
redevelopment, site modification or building modification within a floodway.
      1.   Only those uses and buildings which meet the criteria in this
section shall be permitted.
      2.   All floodway modifications shall be the minimum necessary to
accomplish the purpose of the project.
      3.   All development projects shall also meet the requirements of section
12-2C-2 of this article.
   (B)   Terminology:
      1.   The term "designated floodway" refers to floodways that have been
mapped and designated by IDNR. These floodways are subject to the special
requirements of 17 Illinois administrative code part 3708.
      2.   The term "regulatory floodway" refers to floodways that have not
been mapped and designated by IDNR but are determined by the developer pursuant
to subsection 12-2C-4(C) of this article.
   (C)   Smaller Development Projects In Designated Floodways: The following
development projects may be permitted by the superintendent of buildings and/or
village engineer, provided there is no increase in flood levels. All other
projects in the designated floodway are subject to the requirements of
subsections (D) and (E) of this section.
      1.   Underground and overhead utilities that meet the following
requirements:
         (a)   The utility shall not result in any increase in existing ground
elevations.
         (b)   The project shall not require the placement of aboveground
structures in the floodway.
         (c)   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the pipe
or encasement shall be buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
streambed.
         (d)   Overhead utility lines shall be constructed above the FPE or
attached above the low chord of an existing bridge (with the permission of the
bridge owner). Supporting towers shall not be placed in the watercourse and
shall be designed so as to not catch debris during a flood.
         (e)   Disturbance of streamside vegetation shall be kept to a minimum
during construction to prevent erosion and sedimentation. All disturbed
floodway areas, including the stream banks shall be restored to their original
contours and seeded or otherwise stabilized upon completion of construction.
         (f)   A utility crossing carrying material which may cause water
pollution as defined by the environmental protection act 415 ILCS 5/1 shall be
provided with shutoff valves on each side of the body of water to be crossed.
         (g)   All Illinois commerce commission, national electric safety
codes, and federal requirements for clearance must be met.
      2.   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls that:
         (a)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope;
         (b)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation; and
         (c)   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
      3.   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
      4.   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
         (a)   Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
         (b)   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
         (c)   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional
area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
      5.   Temporary stream crossings that meet the following requirements:
         (a)   The approach roads will be one-half foot (1/2') or less above
natural grade.
         (b)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing up
the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile or
outfall invert.
         (c)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least two
feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall be
nonerosive material, such as riprap or gravel.
         (d)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
         (e)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed within
one year after authorization.
   (D)   Smaller Development Projects In Regulatory Floodways: Within all
riverine SFHAs where the floodway has not been designated, the following
standards shall apply:
      1.   The requirements of subsection 12-2C-4(C) of this article shall be
met.
      2.   Within the regulatory floodway, the following activities may be
permitted by the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer. All other
projects in the designated floodway are subject to the requirements of
subsections (E) and (F) of this section.
         (a)   All activities listed in subsection (C) of this section.
         (b)   The construction of light poles, signposts and similar
structures.
         (c)   The construction of properly anchored, unwalled, open structures
such as playground equipment, pavilions, and carports built at or below
existing grade that would not obstruct the flow of floodwaters.
         (d)   The placement of properly anchored buildings not exceeding
seventy (70) square feet in size, nor ten feet (10') in any one dimension
(e.g., animal shelters and tool sheds).
         (e)   The construction of additions to existing buildings which do not
increase the first floor area by more than twenty percent (20%), which are
located on the upstream or downstream side of the existing building, and which
do extend beyond the sides of the existing building that are parallel to the
flow of floodwaters.
         (f)   Minor maintenance dredging of a stream channel where:
            (1)   The affected length of stream is less than one thousand feet
(1,000');
            (2)   The work is confined to reestablishing flows in natural
stream channels; or
            (3)   The cross sectional area of the dredged channel conforms to
that of the natural channel upstream and downstream of the site.
   (E)   Work In Channels:
      1.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
         (a)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed work;
         (b)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative locations
or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
         (c)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasibly would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected; and
         (d)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project, considering
cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected.
      2.   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection in the channel
may be permitted by the superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer,
provided:
         (a)   The project does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in
length.
         (b)   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of bank.
         (c)   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross sectional
area of the stream channel by more than ten percent (10%).
      3.   The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
      4.   The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer shall notify
the appropriate offices of adjacent communities at least thirty (30) days
before issuing a permit on a project that will alter, relocate or modify a
channel.
   (F)   Larger Floodway Projects: All development proposals other than those
permitted under sections 12-2A-3, 12-2A-4 and 12-2A-5 of this chapter require a
permit from IDNR/OWR. The superintendent of buildings and/or village engineer
shall not issue a permit for a proposed project until the applicant first
obtains a permit or written documentation that a permit is not required from
IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to the rivers, lakes and streams act 1 .
      1.   Application for an IDNR/OWR permit shall be submitted on a form
according to procedures specified by IDNR/OWR.
      2.   No development site shall be occupied, no certificate of occupancy
shall be issued, and no subdivision or other development shall be accepted by
the village board of trustees unless and until all provisions of the IDNR/OWR
permit are met.
      3.   Only appropriate uses are allowed in a floodway. "Appropriate uses"
are activities which:
         (a)   Will not cause a rise in the base flood elevation;
         (b)   Will not create a damaging or potentially damaging increase in
flood heights or velocity;
         (c)   Will not be a threat to public health and safety and welfare;
and
         (d)   Will not impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions
of the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat.
      4.   The approved appropriate uses are as follows:
         (a)   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion, or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife.
         (b)   Buildings, structures or other facilities relating to the use
of, or requiring access to, the water or shoreline, such as in-stream aeration
and similar treatment facilities, and facilities and improvements related to
recreational boating, commercial shipping and other functionally water
dependent use.
         (c)   Storm and sanitary sewer relief outfalls.
         (d)   Underground and overhead utilities.
         (e)   Open space and recreational facilities such as playing fields
and trail systems, including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when
viewed from any one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows.
         (f)   Detached garages, storage sheds, or other nonhabitable accessory
buildings that will not block flood flows nor reduce floodway storage.
         (g)   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto.
         (h)   Parking lots built at or below existing grade where the surface
of the parking lot shall be at or above nine inches (9") below the base flood
elevation.
         (i)   Designated floodway regrading, without fill, to create a
positive nonerosive slope toward a watercourse. Regrading or other
modifications of the floodway for the convenience of site design for a private
development is not considered an appropriate use.
         (j)   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
buildings including dry floodproofing a building and the construction of
floodwalls where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be no more than ten
feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing building.
         (k)   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged
building; provided, that the outside dimensions are not increased.
         (l)   Modifications to an existing building that will not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the FPE and which will not block
flood flows, including, but not limited to, fireplaces, bay windows, decks,
patios and second story additions.
      5.   Appropriate uses do not include:
         (a)   The construction or placement of any new buildings, fill or
building additions.
         (b)   Critical facilities or wastewater treatment plants.
         (c)   Excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate
otherwise nonappropriate uses in the floodway.
         (d)   Fencing (including landscaping or planting designed to act as a
fence).
         (e)   Storage of materials, except as specifically defined in
subsection (F)4 of this section as an appropriate use. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. 615 ILCS 5/4.9 et seq.
12-2C-4: AREAS WITHOUT REGULATORY FLOODPLAIN DATA:
   (A)   Jurisdiction: This section applies to proposed development,
redevelopment, site modification or building modification in SFHAs, (including
AE, AH, AO and Unnumbered A Zones) where no Floodways have been identified and
no BFEs have been established by FEMA, and draining more than a square mile.
Within these areas, all appropriate requirements of section
12-2C-2 of the article shall apply and no development shall be permitted unless
the cumulative effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing
and anticipated uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase
the flow and passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the BFE.
   (B)   Base Flood Elevations: The BFE for each of the remaining SFHAs
delineated as an A Zone, shall be according to the best existing data available
from federal, state or other sources. Should no other data exist, an
engineering study must be financed by the applicant to determine BFEs. The
following procedures shall be used to obtain the base flood elevation for a
site:
      1.   If the base flood elevation is needed, then the BFE shall be
determined from an accepted hydraulic model, based on current industry
standards.
      2.   The flood flows used in the hydraulic models shall be obtained from
an accepted hydrologic model, based on current industry standards, or by
techniques presented in various publications prepared by the United States
Geological Survey for estimating peak Flood discharges.
      3.   Along any watercourses draining more than one square mile, the
analyses shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for approval. Once approved, it must be
submitted to the Illinois State Water Survey floodplain information repository
for filing.
   (C)   Floodway: Within all riverine floodplains where the floodway has not
been determined, the following standards shall apply:
      1.   The developer shall have a Licensed P.E. state in writing and show
through supporting plans, calculations, and data that the project meets the
engineering requirements of Section 702.3.1 through 702.3.9 for the entire
Floodplain as calculated under the provisions of Section 504.0 of this chapter.
      2.   As an alternative, the developer should have an engineering study
performed to determine a Floodway and submit that engineering study to IDNR/OWR
and FEMA for acceptance as a designated floodway.
      3.   Upon acceptance of the Floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer
shall then demonstrate that the project meets the requirements of this chapter.
The Floodway shall be defined according to the definition in Section
12-2A-3.
      4.   A Development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant first
obtains an IDNR/OWR permit or a determination has been made that an IDNR/OWR
permit is not required.
   (D)   Level 1 Developments: Proposals for new level 1 developments:
      1.   Shall include base flood elevation data and floodway delineations.
The applicant's engineer shall be responsible for calculating the needed data.
      2.   The applicant's engineer shall submit the data to IDNR/OWR for
review and approval as best available regulatory data and then send it to the
state water survey. (Ord. 1671, 8-13-2008; amd. Ord. 2038, 10-16-2019)
12-2C-5: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing
easements, covenants or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. This chapter
is intended to repeal the original ordinance or resolution which was adopted to
meet the national flood insurance program regulations, including the previous
chapter 2 of this title, but is not intended to repeal the resolution which the
village passed in order to establish initial eligibility for the program. (Ord.
1671, 8-13-2008)
