MILLSTADT, ILLINOIS
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2025 S-24 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 1303, passed 11-10-25; and
Res., passed 11-6-24; and
State legislation current through 2024 Illinois Legislative Service, Pamphlet
#5
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
(800) 445-5588
www.amlegal.com
TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Chapter
      
10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
10.01   Title of code
   
10.02   Interpretation
   
10.03   Application to future ordinances
   
10.04   Captions
   
10.05   Definitions
   
10.06   Rules of interpretation
   
10.07   Severability
   
10.08   Reference to other sections
   
10.09   Reference to offices
   
10.10   Errors and omissions
   
10.11   Official time
   
10.12   Reasonable time
   
10.13   Ordinances repealed
   
10.14   Ordinances unaffected
   
10.15   Effective date of ordinances
   
10.16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
10.17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
10.18   Section histories; statutory references
   
10.19   Responsibility for acts
   
10.20   Returned checks
   
10.21   Late license fees
 
   
10.99   General penalty
§ 10.01 TITLE OF CODE.
   This codification of ordinances by and for the village of Millstadt,
Illinois shall be designated as the Code of Millstadt and may be so cited.
§ 10.02 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 10.03 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation, shall apply to
ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless
otherwise specifically provided.
§ 10.04 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the title, chapter, and
section numbers are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be
deemed a part of the text of any section.
§ 10.05 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF TRUSTEES, VILLAGE BOARD or BOARD. The legislative body of the
village.
   CODE, THIS CODE or THIS CODE OF ORDINANCES. This municipal code as modified
by amendment, revision, and adoption of new titles, chapters, or sections.
   COUNTY. St. Clair County, Illinois.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of this municipality unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of Illinois.
   SUBCHAPTER. A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a heading in
the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of the chapter,
setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter of the heading.
Not all chapters have subchapters.
   VILLAGE, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Millstadt,
Illinois.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 10.06 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of this village shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the Board
of Trustees or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requisition shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 10.07 SEVERABILITY.
   If any provision of this code as now or later amended or its application to
any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions that can be given effect without the invalid provision or
application.
§ 10.08 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 10.09 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of this village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 10.10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 10.11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within this village for the transaction of all village
business.
§ 10.12 REASONABLE TIME.
   (A)   In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be done in a
reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time or
notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   The time within which an act is to be done, as herein provided, shall
be computed by excluding the first day and including the last. If the last day
be Sunday, it shall be excluded.
§ 10.13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 10.14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 10.15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances passed by the Board of Trustees requiring publication shall
take effect from and after the due publication thereof, unless otherwise
expressly provided. Ordinances not requiring publication shall take effect from
their passage, unless otherwise expressly provided.
§ 10.16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in anyway be affected, released or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 10.17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the Board of Trustees shall desire to amend any existing chapter or
section of this code, the chapter or section shall be specifically repealed and
a new chapter or section, containing the desired amendment, substituted in its
place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement of this
code, the proper number of such chapter or section. In addition to such
indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed ordinance, a
caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the ordinance.
§ 10.18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number and passage
date of the original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances,
if any, are listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 10,
passed 5-13-60; Am. Ord. 15, passed 1-1-70; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-1-80; Am.
Ord. 25, passed 1-1-85)
   (B)   (1)   If an ILCS cite is included in the history, this indicates that
the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute. Example:
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3-2-2) (Ord. 10, passed 1-17-80; Am. Ord. 20, passed 1-
1-85).
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 38.04 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.
      The village shall make available to any person for inspection or copying
all public records, as provided in the Illinois Freedom of Information Act.
   Statutory reference:
      Freedom of Information Act, see ILCS Ch. 5, Act 140, §§ 1 et seq.
§ 10.19 RESPONSIBILITY FOR ACTS.
   Every person concerned in the commission of an act prohibited by this code
of ordinances, whether he directly commits the act, or prosecutes, counsels,
aids or abets in its commission, may be prosecuted and on a conviction is
punishable as if he had directly committed such act.
('73 Code, § 1.07)
§ 10.20 RETURNED CHECKS.
   Any person who pays any bill, fine, charge or fee of the village with any
check or draft which is subsequently returned unpaid to the village because of
insufficient funds or because of a stop order on such check or draft, shall be
liable to the village for a service charge of $25 for each and every check so
returned. Such service charge shall be paid within seven days of notification
in cash, money order, or certified check before the bill , fine, charge or fee
for which the check was rendered shall be considered paid. Should two such
checks or drafts be returned within a one-year period, no further payments
shall be accepted from such person except in the form of cash, certified check,
cashier’s check or money order for a period of 12 months from the date of the
return of the second check or draft. If the said service charge designated
herein is not paid, the village may proceed with any and all legal action
necessary to collect said service charge and the maker of the check or draft
shall be responsible for all costs and attorney fees incurred in said
collection efforts.
(Ord. 1038, passed 10-19-09)
§ 10.21 LATE LICENSE FEES.
   Unless another late license fee penalty is specifically provided by this
code of ordinances for the late payment of any license fee owed to the village
of any particular provision, section or chapter of this code of ordinances, the
license fee owed to the village, if not paid by 5:00 p.m. on the due date,
shall double.
(Ord. 1233, passed 2-8-21)
§ 10.99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   (A)   Standard penalty. Unless another penalty is specifically provided by
this code of ordinances for violation of any particular provision, section or
chapter, any person violating any provision of this code of ordinances, or any
rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof, or any provision of
any code adopted herein by reference, shall upon conviction be subject to a
fine of not less than $150, nor more than $500, and the costs of prosecution.
Each act of violation and each day upon which a violation occurs constitutes a
separate offense.
   (B)   Revocation of license. The revocation of a license or permit shall not
be considered a recovery or penalty so as to bar any penalty being enforced.
   (C)   Failure of officers to perform duties. The failure of an officer or
employee of the village to perform an official duty imposed by this code of
ordinances shall not subject such officer or employee to the penalty imposed
for violation of this code of ordinances, unless a penalty is specifically
provided in the section creating the duty.
('73 Code, § 1.06(a),(e),(i)) (Am. Ord. 622, passed 11-2-92; Am. Ord. 1293,
passed 3-24-25)
TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION
   Chapter
      
30.   BOARD OF TRUSTEES
      
31.   VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
      
32.   POLICE DEPARTMENT
      
33.   FIRE DEPARTMENT
      
34.   PURCHASING AND FINANCE
      
35.   EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTERS
      
36.   TAXATION
      
37.   PLANNING COMMISSION
      
38.   VILLAGE POLICIES
CHAPTER 30: BOARD OF TRUSTEES
Section
General Provisions
   
30.01   Governing body
   
30.02   Powers of Board
   
30.03   Duties and compensation of Trustees
   
30.04   Appointment of committees
Meetings; Rules of Order
   
30.15   Meetings
   
30.16   Rules of order
   
30.17   Order of business
Ordinances
   
30.30   Required majority for passage of ordinances
   
30.31   Record vote
   
30.32   Procedure for passage of ordinances
   
30.33   Action by President
   
30.34   Passage over veto
   
30.35   Title and ordaining clause
   
30.36   Passage date of ordinances
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 30.01 GOVERNING BODY.
   (A)   The governing body of the village shall be the Board of Trustees,
which shall consist of the President of the village, and the Trustees, as the
same may be elected and qualified.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees shall be the sole judge of the election to
office of any of its members, and of their eligibility to hold office. In the
event of a contested election or any issue brought before it as to whether or
not any of its members are eligible to hold their respective offices, such
member as may be directly interested in the contest or the issue pending shall
be incompetent to deliberate thereon.
   (C)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the institution of a suit in
quo warranto.
('73 Code, § 2.01)
§ 30.02 POWERS OF BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall have and possess and exercise all legislative powers,
functions and duties conferred by law upon the village. It shall make all
orders for the doing of work or the making or construction of any improvements;
it shall levy taxes, apportion and appropriate all funds, and audit and allow
all bills, accounts, payrolls and claims, and order payment thereof; and it
shall make or authorize the making of all contracts, no contract being binding
or obligatory upon the village unless either made by ordinance or resolution,
or the making thereof expressly authorized by ordinance or resolution adopted
by the Board.
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may by ordinance or resolution delegate from
time to time authority not governmental in nature, to its officers or employees
of the village. All acts of officers or employees of the village not
specifically authorized by ordinance or resolution of the Board of Trustees
shall be subject to review and approval or disapproval on the part of the
Board.
   (C)   The Board of Trustees shall have power and authority by ordinance or
resolution from time to time to create, fill, discontinue, prescribe or limit
the duties thereof, of such offices and employment when in its judgment such
shall be to the benefit and advantage of this village and not otherwise
contrary to law.
('73 Code, § 2.02)
§ 30.03 DUTIES AND COMPENSATION OF TRUSTEES.
   (A)   The Trustees of the village shall faithfully perform their duties as
Trustees and as such members of the committees to which they are appointed and
otherwise so fulfill their duties that the corporate affairs of the village may
be faithfully and efficiently administered.
   (B)   For their services as Trustees and as members of the committees to
which they are appointed, each Trustee shall receive compensation as set forth
by ordinance from time to time.
('73 Code, § 2.08) (Ord. 455, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 511, passed 2-3-87; Am.
Ord. 554, passed 2-6-89; Am. Ord. 629, passed 2-1-93; Am. Ord. 970, passed 4-2-
07)
§ 30.04 APPOINTMENT OF COMMITTEES.
   Annually at the first meeting in each fiscal year, the President shall
appoint the following Committees, or such others as in his or her judgment may
be advisable, all members of which shall be members of the Board of Trustees:
   (A)   Streets and Alleys;
   (B)   Public Buildings;
   (C)   Cemetery;
   (D)   Accounts;
   (E)   Sewer and Water Plant;
   (F)   Parks; and
   (G)   Ordinances.
('73 Code, § 2.05)
MEETINGS; RULES OF ORDER
§ 30.15 MEETINGS.
   (A)   Meetings to be open to public. All meetings of the Board of Trustees
shall be open to the public, excepting that for the discussion of bids, the
letting of contracts after the same shall have been opened and read in open
meeting, or the appointment of officials or employees, the Board of Trustees
may hold an executive session, excluding therefrom the interested parties.
   (B)   Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be
held on the first and third Mondays in each month, excepting when such days
shall fall on a state or national holiday; whereupon the meeting shall be held
on the succeeding day. All meetings shall convene at 7:00 p.m. official time.
   (C)   Special meetings.
      (1)   Special meetings of the Board of Trustees may be called at any time
by the President or any three Trustees. Such call shall be in writing and shall
be deposited or filed in the office of the Village Clerk; whereupon there shall
be issued out of his office a notice in writing directed to each of the members
of the Board of Trustees, excepting such as issue the call therefor, giving
notice of the holding of the special meeting, the time thereof, and the purpose
thereof, all as set forth in the call, which notice shall be served in person
or by mail upon each of such members, in such manner so as to be received by
such member at least 24 hours prior to the convening of the special meeting.
      (2)   (a)   The form of the call when issued by the President shall be in
substantially the following form:
   CALL FOR SPECIAL MEETING
   I,                         by virtue of the authority in me vested as
President of the Village of Millstadt, Illinois, hereby issue a call for a
Special Meeting of the Board of Trustees to be held at the Village Hall on
               at 7:00 p. m. for the purpose of                             
and for the further purpose of transacting such other business as may come
before the meeting.
   Dated at Millstadt, Illinois, this       day of            19  .
   President of the Village of Millstadt
         (b)   The call, when issued by three Trustees, shall be changed to
conform.
      (3)   The notice of special meeting issued by the Clerk shall be
substantially in the following form:
   NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETING
   Notice is hereby given that                           as President of the
Village of Millstadt, Illinois has issued a call for a special meeting of the
Board of Trustees of the Village of Millstadt, Illinois, to be held at the
Village Hall on                  19   at 7:00 p.m. Said meeting is called for
the purpose of                                   and for the transaction of
such other business as may come before the Board of Trustees. Dated at
Millstadt, Illinois, this        day of              19  .
   Village Clerk
(Corporate Seal)
      (4)   The original call and an original duplicate notice with the return
thereon showing manner of service thereof shall be read at the special meeting,
incorporated in the minutes thereof, and filed in the village records.
      (5)   Attendance at any special meeting without stating objection to the
manner of call or notice or purpose thereof shall constitute a waiver by the
attending member of any defects therein. Failure to object at the earliest
opportunity to the discussion of or action on any purpose not specifically
mentioned in the notice shall constitute a waiver thereof and consent to action
thereon.
('73 Code, § 2.03) (Am. Ord. 1032, passed 6-15-09)
§ 30.16 RULES OF ORDER.
   (A)   Quorum. A majority of the members elected to the Board of Trustees
shall constitute a quorum to do business. A smaller number may, however,
adjourn the meeting from time to time until a quorum shall be present.
   (B)   Presiding officer. Meetings of the Board of Trustees shall be presided
over by the President. In his absence the Board of Trustees may elect a Trustee
to act as President Pro Tem. Such President pro tem shall have only the powers
of a presiding officer, but shall retain the right to vote in his capacity as
Trustee on any ordinance, resolution or motion placed before the Board of
Trustees.
   (C)   President Pro Tem, vote. When one of the Trustees acts as President
Pro Tem, he shall not thereby be entitled to an additional vote in his capacity
as such acting President.
   (D)   Vote of President. The Village President shall not vote on any
ordinance, resolution or motion excepting when:
      (1)   The vote of the Trustees upon the question shall have resulted in a
tie; or
      (2)   Where one-half of the Trustees elected shall have voted in favor of
an ordinance, resolution or motion, even though there is no tie vote.
   (E)   Reconsideration. No vote of the Board of Trustees shall be
reconsidered or rescinded at a special meeting unless there are present at the
special meeting as many members as were present when the vote was taken.
   (F)   Roberts Rules of Order. In all respects not inconsistent with these
ordinances or the state statutes, Roberts Rules of Order shall govern the
conduct of the meetings of the Board of Trustees.
('73 Code, § 2.04)
§ 30.17 ORDER OF BUSINESS.
   At all regular meetings of the Board, the following order of business shall
prevail:
   (A)   Roll call of members and officers;
   (B)   Reading of minutes of all previous meetings not approved;
   (C)   Communications;
   (D)   Reports of Committees;
   (E)   Reports of officers;
   (F)   Unfinished business;
   (G)   New business;
   (H)   Adjournments.
('73 Code, § 2.06)
ORDINANCES
§ 30.30 REQUIRED MAJORITY FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES.
   The passage of all ordinances, for whatever purpose, and of any resolution
or motion, which shall create any liability against the village; or which shall
provide for the expenditure, or appropriation of its money, shall require the
concurrence of a majority of all members elected to the Board of Trustees.
However, the passage of an ordinance, resolution or motion to sell any village
property shall require the concurrence of two-thirds of all members of the
Board.
('73 Code, § 2.07(a))
§ 30.31 RECORD VOTE.
   The yeas and nays shall be taken upon the question of the passage of the
designated ordinances, resolutions or motions, and recorded in the journal of
its meetings. In like manner, the yeas and nays shall be taken upon the
question of the passage of any other resolution or motion, at the request of
any Trustee, and shall be recorded similarly.
('73 Code, § 2.07(b))
§ 30.32 PROCEDURE FOR PASSAGE OF ORDINANCES.
   Passage of ordinances of the village shall be in the following manner:
   (A)   Introduction of a bill for ordinance shall be made by the Village
Clerk, by reading the title thereof;
   (B)   A motion may thereupon be made to place the bill on first reading and
upon receiving an affirmative majority vote thereon, the Clerk shall thereupon
completely read the proposed ordinance;
   (C)   Ten calendar days shall elapse between the first reading of an
ordinance and the vote thereon for final passage, but such ten days waiting
period can be suspended by a two-thirds vote of the Board of Trustees;
   (D)   Amendments shall not be added to any bill for ordinance unless the
motion to make such amendment shall have received a majority affirmative vote;
   (E)   After a proposed ordinance shall have passed first reading and after
the elapse of ten days, except as otherwise herein provided, any member of the
Board of Trustees can call for final passage of the proposed ordinance
whereupon the presiding officer at the meeting shall thereupon put to the Board
the question, “Shall this bill pass and become Ordinance No.     of the Village
of Millstadt?”
('73 Code, § 2.07(c))
§ 30.33 ACTION BY PRESIDENT.
   Upon receiving a favorable vote thereon, it shall be filed in the office of
the Village Clerk; if the President approves such ordinance, he shall sign it;
those which he disapproves in whole or in part shall be returned to the Board
with his written objections thereto, at the next regular meeting of the Board
of Trustees occurring not less than five days after the passage thereof;
failure to return any ordinance or any specified resolution or motion with his
written objection within the designated time shall cause the ordinance or
specified resolution or motion to become effective despite the absence of his
signature thereon. The President may disapprove of any one or more sums
appropriated in any ordinance, resolution or motion making an appropriation,
and if so, the remainder shall be effective. This shall not prevent the
President from disapproving entirely an ordinance, resolution or motion making
an appropriation.
('73 Code, § 2.07(d))
§ 30.34 PASSAGE OVER VETO.
   Every ordinance, resolution or motion that shall be returned to the Board by
the President shall be reconsidered by the Board. If after such
reconsideration, two-thirds of all of the Trustees elected to the Board of
Trustees shall agree to pass an ordinance, resolution or motion notwithstanding
the President's refusal to approve it, then it shall be effective. The vote on
the question of passage over the President's veto shall be by yeas and nays,
and shall be recorded in the journal.
('73 Code, § 2.07(e))
§ 30.35 TITLE AND ORDAINING CLAUSE.
   The title to each ordinance shall disclose the nature and purpose thereof.
The ordaining clause of each ordinance shall be, “Be It Ordained By the
President and Trustees of the Village of Millstadt.”
('73 Code, § 2.07(f))
§ 30.36 PASSAGE DATE OF ORDINANCES.
   All ordinances shall contain thereon a legend as to the date of their
passage, approval and publication.
('73 Code, § 2.07(g))
CHAPTER 31: VILLAGE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES
Section
General Provisions
   
31.01   Qualifications
   
31.02   Oath; bond
   
31.03   Further duties
   
31.04   Compensation
   
31.05   Removal from office
   
31.06   Resignation
   
31.07   State Officials and Employees Ethics Act
   
31.08   Employee handbook adopted
President
   
31.20   Election; term; vacancy
   
31.21   Powers and duties
   
31.22   Compensation
Clerk
   
31.35   Election; term; vacancy
   
31.36   Duties
   
31.37   Compensation
Treasurer
   
31.40   Election; term; vacancy
   
31.41   Duties
   
31.42   Compensation
   
31.43   Village Collector
Other Officials
   
31.50   Village Attorney
   
31.51   Superintendent of Streets and Alleys
   
31.52   Superintendent of Water and Sewer Plant
   
31.53   Custodian of Cemeteries and Sexton
   
31.54   Collector of Special Assessments
   
31.55   Appointment of other village officials
   
31.56   Duties and fees; bond
   
31.57   Certificate of appointment
   
31.58   Duty to successor
   
31.59   Senior Director of Public Works
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 31.01 QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   A person is not eligible for an elective village office unless that
person is a qualified elector of the village and has resided in the village at
least one year next preceding the election or appointment, except as provided
in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-20-25, subsection (b) of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
3.1-25-75, ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-2-2, or ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-2-11. A
person is not eligible to take the oath of office for a municipal office if
that person is, at the time required for taking the oath of office, in arrears
in the payment of a tax or other indebtedness due to the village or has been
convicted in any court located in the United States of any infamous crime,
bribery, perjury, or other felony. (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5(a),(b))
   (B)   No person shall be eligible for any appointive village office unless
that person is a qualified elector of the village or otherwise provided by law.
The residency requirements do not apply, however, to village engineers, health
officers, attorneys, or other officers who require technical training or
knowledge, to an appointed village treasurer, to an appointed village clerk, or
to an appointed village collector (unless the village has designated by
ordinance that the village clerk shall hold the office of collector). The
village may adopt ordinances that allow their firefighters and police officers
to reside outside the corporate limits of the village both at the time of
employment and while serving as a firefighters or police officer.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-6)
   (C)   All full-time employees of the village shall live and reside within
the village. Anyone hired as a full-time village employee shall move within the
village limits and establish residence in the village within six months of
being hired or be terminated as a full-time village employee.
(Ord. 736, passed 2-2-97)
Statutory reference:
   Appointment of President or Trustees to other offices prohibited, see ILCS
Ch. 50, Act 105, § 2
§ 31.02 OATH; BOND.
   (A)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
village officers, whether elected or appointed, shall take and subscribe the
following oath:
      I do solemnly swear that I will support the constitution of the United
States, and the constitution of the state of Illinois, and that I will
faithfully discharge the duties of the office of                according to
the best of my ability.
   (B)   This oath, so subscribed, shall be filed in the office of the Clerk.
   (C)   Before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, all
village officers, except Trustees, shall execute a bond with security, to be
approved by the Board of Trustees. The bond shall be payable to the village in
the penal sums set forth in Title XVII of this code, conditioned upon the
faithful performance of the duties of the office and the payment of all money
received by such officer, according to law and also the ordinances of the
village. Such bond may provide that the obligation of the sureties shall not
extend to any loss sustained by the insolvency, failure, or closing of any bank
or savings and loan association organized and operating either under the laws
of the state or the United States wherein such officer has placed funds in his
custody, if the bank or savings and loan association has been approved by the
Board of Trustees as a depository for these funds. The Treasurer’s bond shall
be an amount of money that is not less than three times the latest federal
census population or any subsequent census figure used for Motor Fuel Tax
purposes. These bonds shall be filed with the Clerk, except the bond of the
Clerk, which shall be filed with the Treasurer.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-25, 3.1-10-30)
§ 31.03 FURTHER DUTIES.
   Every officer shall perform such duties, in addition to those which may be
prescribed by law, and be subject to such other rules and regulations, as the
Board of Trustees may provide by ordinance.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-40)
§ 31.04 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   All village officers, except as otherwise provided, shall receive the
salary or other compensation that is fixed by ordinance. Salaries or other
compensation shall not be increased or diminished, so as to take effect during
the term of any elected village officer. The salaries, fees, or other
compensation of any appointed village officer, not including those appointed to
fill vacancies in elective offices, may be increased but not diminished so as
to take effect during the term for which the officer was appointed.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-5)
   (B)   The Board of Trustees may fix the salary of all village officers and
employees, in the annual appropriation ordinance or budget ordinance. They may
fix the salary of all officers who are elected for a definite term in an
ordinance other than the appropriation or budget ordinance. Salaries which are
fixed in the annual appropriation ordinance shall neither be increased nor
diminished during the fiscal year for which the appropriation is made. Salaries
which are fixed by ordinance for those officers who are elected for a definite
term shall neither be increased nor diminished during that term, and shall be
fixed at least two months prior to a general village election in which voting
is held for those offices.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-10)
Cross-reference:
   Compensation of President, see §
31.22
   Compensation of Treasurer, see §
31.42
   Compensation of Trustees, see §
30.03
§ 31.05 REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.
   Except where otherwise provided by statute, the President may remove any
officer appointed by him or her under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 and this chapter, on
any written charge, whenever he or she is of the opinion that the interests of
the village demand removal, but he or she shall report the reasons for the
removal to the Board of Trustees at a meeting to be held not less than five nor
more than ten days after the removal. If the President fails or refuses to
report to the Board of Trustees the reasons for the removal, or if the Board of
Trustees by a two-thirds vote of all its members authorized by law to be
elected, disapproves of the removal, the officer thereupon shall be restored to
the office from which he or she was removed. The vote shall be by yeas and
nays, which shall be entered upon the Board’s journal. Upon restoration, the
officer shall give a new bond and take a new oath of office. No officer shall
be removed a second time for the same offense.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10)
§ 31.06 RESIGNATION.
   Any officer of the village may resign from his or her office. If an officer
resigns he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor has been
chosen and has qualified.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5(d))
§ 31.07 STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT.
   (A)   The regulations of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15) and ILCS Ch. 5, Act
430, §§ 10-10 through 10-40) of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act,
ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq., (hereinafter referred to as the “Act” in
this section) are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the
officers and employees of the village to the extent required by ILCS Ch. 5, Act
430, § 70-5.
   (B)   The solicitation or acceptance of gifts prohibited to be solicited or
accepted under the Act, by any officer or any employee of the village, is
hereby prohibited.
   (C)   The offering or making of gifts prohibited to be offered or made to an
officer or employee of the village under the Act, is hereby prohibited.
   (D)   The participation in political activities prohibited under the Act, by
any officer or employee of the village, is hereby prohibited.
   (E)   For purposes of this section, the terms “officer” and “employee” shall
be defined as set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c).
   (F)   The penalties for violations of this section shall be the same as
those penalties set forth in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5 for similar violations
of the Act.
   (G)   This section does not repeal or otherwise amend or modify any existing
ordinances or policies which regulate the conduct of the village officers and
employees. To the extent that any such existing ordinances or policies are less
restrictive than this section, however, the provisions of this section shall
prevail in accordance with the provisions of ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 7-5(a).
   (H)   Any amendment to the Act that becomes effective after the effective
date of this section shall be incorporated into this section by reference and
shall be applicable to the solicitation, acceptance, offering and making of
gifts and to prohibited political activities. However, any amendment that makes
its provisions optional for adoption by municipalities shall not be
incorporated into this section by reference without formal action by the
corporate authorities of the village.
   (I)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares the Act unconstitutional in its
entirety, then this section shall be repealed as of the date that the Illinois
Supreme Court's decision becomes final and not subject to any further appeals
or rehearings. This section shall be deemed repealed without further action by
the corporate authorities of the village if the Act is found unconstitutional
by the Illinois Supreme Court.
   (J)   If the Illinois Supreme Court declares part of the Act
unconstitutional but upholds the constitutionality of the remainder of the Act,
or does not address the remainder of the Act, then the remainder of the Act as
adopted by this section shall remain in full force and effect; however, that
part of this section relating to the part of the Act found unconstitutional
shall be deemed repealed without further action by the corporate authorities of
the village.
(Ord. 747, passed 6-21-99; Am. Ord. 886, passed 5-3-04)
§ 31.08 EMPLOYEE HANDBOOK ADOPTED.
   The Employee Handbook attached to Ordinance No. 828, passed 9-16-02, and by
reference made a part thereof is hereby adopted as the Employee Handbook for
the village.
(Ord. 773, passed 6-5-00; Am. Ord. 828, passed 9-16-02; Am. Ord. 935, passed
11-7-05; Am. Ord. 948, passed 8-7-06; Am. Ord. 984, passed 10-15-07; Am. Ord.
1008, passed 8-4-08; Am. Ord. 1116, passed 1-21-14)
PRESIDENT
§ 31.20 ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY.
   (A)   As set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-5, the President shall be
elected by the electors of the village at a general village election held
therein.
   (B)   As set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-10, the President shall
hold his or her office for a term of four years and until his or her successor
is elected and has qualified. The four-year term for President may be changed
to two years pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-65.
   (C)   Whenever a vacancy in the office of President occurs during his or her
term, the vacancy shall be filled for the remainder of the term in the manner
provided in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-10-50 and 3.1-10-55. During the period
from the time that the vacancy occurs until a President is elected, and has
qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the appointment of an Acting President
by the Board of Trustees.
§ 31.21 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   As set forth in ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-45-5, the President of the
village shall be President of the Board of Trustees thereof and shall preside
at all meetings of the Board. He or she shall devote to the duties of his or
her office whatever time the faithful discharge thereof may require.
   (B)   The President shall perform all the duties which are prescribed by
law, including the Municipal Code and village ordinances, and shall take care
that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed. The President from time
to time may, and annually shall, give the Board of Trustees information
relative to the affairs of the village, and may recommend for their
consideration measures as he or she believes expedient.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-5)
   (C)   The President shall have the power to administer oaths and
affirmations upon all lawful occasions.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-20)
   (D)   The President at all times may examine and inspect the books, records,
and papers of any agent, employee, or officer of the village.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-20)
   (E)   The President may designate in writing another person to affix the
signature of the President to any written instrument or instruments required to
be signed by the President. The President shall send written notice of this
designation to the Board of Trustees, stating the name of the person whom he
has selected and what instrument or instruments the person will have authority
to sign. A written signature of the President executed by the person so
designated, with the signature of the person so designated underneath, shall be
attached to the notice. The notice, with the signatures attached, shall be
recorded in the journal of the Board and then filed with the Village Clerk.
When the signature of the President is placed on a written instrument at the
direction of the President in the specified manner, the instrument or
instruments, in all respects, shall be as binding on the village as if signed
by the President in person.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-30)
   (F)   If the President is temporarily absent because of an incapacity to
perform official duties, but the incapacity does not create a vacancy in the
office, the Board of Trustees shall elect one of their members to act as
President Pro Tem. The President Pro Tem, during this absence or disability,
shall perform the duties and possess all the rights and powers of the President
but shall not be entitled to vote both as President Pro Tem and as Trustee. In
the absence of the President, Acting President, and President Pro Tem, the
Board of Trustees may elect one of their members to act as temporary
chairperson. The temporary chairperson shall have only the powers of a
presiding officer and a right to vote only in the capacity as Trustee on any
ordinance, resolution or motion.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35)
Statutory reference:
   Duties as conservator of the peace, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-25 and
Ch. 50, Act 735, § 2
§ 31.22 COMPENSATION.
   The President shall receive the compensation that is established by the
Board of Trustees in the annual appropriation or budget ordinance or by special
ordinance. An increase or decrease in the salary of the President shall not
take effect during the term for which that President is elected. His or her
salary shall be fixed at least two months before an election in which voting is
held for his or her office.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-10) (Am. Ord. 970, passed 4-2-07)
CLERK
§ 31.35 ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY.
   At every other election for Trustees, a Clerk shall also be elected who
shall hold office for a four-year term. Whenever a vacancy in the office of a
Clerk elected under this section occurs during the term, the vacancy shall be
filled for the remainder of the term at the next general village election as
provided by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50. During the period from the time
that the vacancy occurs until a Clerk is elected, as provided in this section,
and has qualified, the vacancy may be filled by the appointment of an Acting
Clerk by the President with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-25-90)
§ 31.36 DUTIES.
   (A)   The Clerk shall keep the corporate seal, to be provided by the Board
of Trustees, and all papers belonging to the village the custody and control of
which are not given to other officers. The Clerk shall attend all meetings of
the Board of Trustees including executive sessions, and keep a full record of
its proceedings in the journal, except if the Clerk is the subject matter of
the meeting and his or her presence creates a conflict of interest. The record
of those proceedings shall be made available for public inspection within seven
days after being approved or accepted by the Board of Trustees as the official
minutes of their proceedings. Copies of all papers duly filed in the Clerk’s
office, and transcripts from the journals and other records and files of the
Clerk’s office, certified by the Clerk under the corporate seal, shall be
evidence in all courts in the same manner as if the originals were produced.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90)
   (B)   The Clerk shall perform such duties, in addition to those which may be
prescribed by law, and be subject to such other rules and regulations, as the
Board of Trustees may provide by ordinance.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-40)
   (C)   The Clerk shall appoint the various clerks and subordinates in his
office which the Board of Trustees may authorize, and shall be held
responsible, severally, for the fidelity of all persons so appointed by him or
her. This power, however, is subject to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §
10-1-1 et seq. The power of the Clerk is also subject to the provisions of ILCS
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-45)
   (D)   The Clerk shall have power to administer oaths and affirmations upon
all lawful occasions.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-20)
Statutory reference:
   Clerk authorized to hold office of Comptroller or of Collector, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-115, 3.1-35-130, and 3.1-35-135
§ 31.37 COMPENSATION.
   The Clerk shall receive the compensation that is established by the Board of
Trustees in the annual appropriation or budge ordinance or by special
ordinance. An increase or decrease in the salary of the Clerk shall not take
effect during the term for which that Clerk is elected. His or her salary shall
be fixed at least 180 days before the beginning of the terms of the officers
whose compensation is to be fixed.
(Am. Ord. 970, passed 4-2-07)
Statutory reference:
   Authority of village to fix compensation of village employees, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-10
TREASURER
§ 31.40 ELECTION; TERM; VACANCY.
   (A)   The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall appoint a Village Treasurer.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5)
   (B)   The Treasurer may resign from his or her office. If the Treasurer
resigns, he or she shall continue in office until his or her successor has been
chosen and has qualified.
   (C)   The term of office of the Treasurer shall not exceed that of the
President.
§ 31.41 DUTIES.
   (A)   (1)   The Treasurer shall receive all money belonging to the village
and shall keep his or her books and accounts in the manner prescribed by
ordinance. These books and accounts shall always be subject to the inspection
of any member of the Board of Trustees, provided, however, that the village may
by ordinance designate a person or institution which, as bond trustee, shall
receive from the County Collector amounts payable to the village as taxes
levied pursuant to a bond issuance.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall keep a separate account of each fund or
appropriation and the debits and credits belonging thereto.
      (3)   The Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the
treasury a receipt, specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid.
The Treasurer shall file copies of these receipts with the Clerk, with the
Treasurer’s monthly reports. If the Treasurer has in his or her possession
money properly appropriated to the payment of any warrant lawfully drawn upon
him or her, the Treasurer shall pay the money specified in this warrant to the
person designated by the warrant.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-40)
   (B)   At the end of every month, and more often if required by the Board of
Trustees, the Treasurer shall render an account under oath to the Board of
Trustees, or to an officer designated by ordinance, showing the state of the
treasury at the date of the account and the balance of money in the treasury.
The Treasurer shall accompany the account with a statement of all money
received into the treasury and on what account, together with all warrants
redeemed and paid by him or her. On the day he or she renders an account, these
warrants, with all vouchers held by him or her, shall be delivered to the Clerk
and filed, together with the account, in the Clerk’s office. All paid warrants
shall be marked “paid.” The Treasurer shall keep a register of all warrants,
which shall describe each warrant, showing its date, amount, and number, the
fund from which paid, the name of the person to whom paid, and when paid.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-45)
   (C)   (1)   The Treasurer may be required to keep all funds and money in his
or her custody belonging to the village in such places of deposit designated by
ordinance. When requested by the Treasurer, the Board of Trustees shall
designate one or more banks or savings and loan associations in which may be
kept the funds and money of the village in the custody of the Treasurer. When a
bank or savings and loan association has been designated as a depository, it
shall continue as a depository until ten days have elapsed after a new
depository is designated and has qualified by furnishing the statements of
resources and liabilities as required by this section. When a new depository is
designated, the Board of Trustees shall notify the sureties of the Treasurer of
that fact in writing at least five days before the transfer of funds. The
Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for all funds or money which
he deposits in a designated bank or savings and loan association while the
funds and money are so deposited.
      (2)   The Treasurer may require any bank or savings and loan association
to deposit with the Treasurer securities or mortgages which have a market value
at least equal to the amount of the funds or moneys of the village deposited
with the bank or savings and loan association that exceeds the insurance
limitation provided by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the Federal
Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation.
      (3)   The Treasurer is authorized to enter into agreements of any
definite or indefinite term regarding the deposit, redeposit, investment,
reinvestment, or withdrawal of village funds.
      (4)   (a)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Act or any other
law, each official custodian of municipal funds, including, without limitation,
each municipal treasurer or finance director or each person properly designated
as the official custodian for municipal funds, including, without limitation,
each person properly designated as official custodian for funds held by an
intergovernmental risk management entity, self-insurance pool, waste management
agency, or other intergovernmental entity composed solely of participating
municipalities ,is permitted to:
            1.   Combine moneys from more than one fund of a single
municipality, risk management entity, self-insurance pool, or other
governmental entity composed solely of participating municipalities for the
purpose of investing such moneys;
            2.   Join with other official custodians or treasurers of
municipal, intergovernmental risk management entity, self-insurance pool, waste
management agency, or other intergovernmental entity composed solely of
participating municipalities for the purpose of jointly investing the funds of
which the official custodians or treasurers have custody; and
            3.   Enter into agreements of any definite or indefinite or
indefinite term regarding the redeposit, investment, or withdrawal of
municipal, risk management entity, self-insurance agency, waste management
agency, or other intergovernmental entity funds.
         (b)   When funds are combined for investment purposes as authorized in
this section, the moneys combined are for those purposes shall be accounted for
separately in all respects, and the earnings from such investments shall be
separately and individually computed, recorded, and credited to the fund,
municipality, intergovernmental risk management entity, self-insurance pool,
waste management agency, or other governmental entity, as the case may be, for
which the investment was acquired.
         (c)   Join investments shall be made only in investments authorized by
law for investment of municipal funds. The grant of authority contained in this
division (C)(4)(c) is cumulative, supplemental, and in addition to any other
law and shall not be construed as a limitation of any power and authority
otherwise granted.
      (5)   No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds
as permitted by this section unless it has complied with the requirements
established by ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235, § 6.
      (6)   In addition to any other investments or deposits authorized under
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35 etc., municipalities are authorized to invest the
funds and public moneys in the custody of the Treasurer in accordance with the
Public Funds Investment Act, ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-50)
   (D)   The Treasurer shall keep all money belonging to the village and in his
or her custody separate and distinct from his or her own money and shall not
use, either directly or indirectly, the village's money or warrants for the
personal use and benefit of the Treasurer or of any other person. Any violation
of this provision shall subject him or her to immediate removal from office by
the Board of Trustees, who may declare the Treasurer’s office vacant.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1.-35-55)
   (E)   (1)   The Treasurer shall report to the Board of Trustees, as often as
they require, a full and detailed account of all receipts and expenditures of
the village, as shown by his or her books, up to the time of the report.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-60)
      (2)   Any Treasurer who fails, neglects, or refuses to discharge any duty
imposed on him or her, or who violates any provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§
3.1-35-65 through 3.1-35-80, is guilty of a petty offense, and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 in addition to any
other penalties prescribed by law.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-80)
   (F)   All money received on any special assessment shall be held by the
Treasurer as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the improvement for
which the assessment was made, and the money shall be used for no other
purpose, except to reimburse the village for money expended for such
improvement.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-85)
   (G)   (1)   The Treasurer may deposit funds in a savings and loan
association, savings bank, or state or national bank in this state, or deposit
those funds into demand deposit accounts in accordance with ILCS Ch. 30, Act
235, § 6.5. When deposits become collected funds and are not needed for
immediate disbursement, they shall be invested within two working days at
prevailing rates or better. The Treasurer may require the bank, savings bank,
or savings and loan association to deposit with him securities guaranteed by
agencies and instrumentalities of the federal government equal in market value
to the amount by which the funds deposited exceed the federally insured amount.
The Treasurer is authorized to enter into an agreement with any bank, savings
bank, or savings and loan association, with any federally insured financial
institution or trust company, or with any agency of the U.S. government
relating to the deposit of securities.
      (2)   The Treasurer shall be discharged from responsibility for any funds
for which securities are so deposited with him or her, and the funds for which
securities are so deposited shall not be subject to any otherwise applicable
limitation as to amount.
      (3)   No bank or savings and loan association shall receive public funds
as permitted by this section, unless it has complied with the requirements
established pursuant to ILCS Ch. 30, Act 235, § 6 or is otherwise exempt from
compliance as authorized by ILCS Ch. 30, Act 233, § 6.5.
(ILCS Ch. 30, Act 225, § 1)
§ 31.42 COMPENSATION.
   For his or her services as Treasurer, the shall receive compensation as set
forth by ordinance from time to time.
(Ord. 970, passed 4-2-07)
§ 31.43 VILLAGE COLLECTOR.
   (A)   There is established hereby the office of Village Collector, an
executive office of the village. The Village Collector shall be appointed for
an indefinite term by the Village President by and with the consent of the
Board of Trustees and shall receive such compensation as is approved by the
President and Board of Trustees in the annual budget.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of said Collector to assist in collection of all
accounts due the village.
   (C)   The Village Clerk may hold the office of Village Collector, if so
appointed as set forth in division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 1285, passed 8-26-24)
OTHER OFFICIALS
§ 31.50 VILLAGE ATTORNEY.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Village Attorney to prosecute and defend
all suits and actions before any court of the county or before any board,
authority, commission or agency of the county, to which the village is a party,
or in which, in the opinion of the Board of Trustees, the interests of the
village are in any wise affected, or in which the official acts of any of the
officers or employees of the village are involved.
   (B)   The Village Attorney shall also advise the Board of Trustees and the
officers of the village on such legal questions as may arise in relation to the
business of the village.
   (C)   The Village Attorney shall prepare all ordinances, resolutions or
motions that may be requested of him or her by any Trustee.
   (D)   The Village Attorney shall annually render a report on any litigation
or proceeding that may have been pending during the preceding year, so that the
Board of Trustees may be advised therein.
   (E)   The Village Attorney shall have the authority to dismiss any suit in
which the village is plaintiff or prosecution, in which in his or her opinion,
the necessary proof cannot be made.
('73 Code, § 3.05)
§ 31.51 SUPERINTENDENT OF STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys to
superintend the opening, grading, construction and repairing of all streets,
alleys and sidewalks, and of constructing and repairing all culverts and storm
sewers within the village, under the direction of the Committee on Streets and
Alleys.
   (B)   The Superintendent of Streets and Alleys shall superintend all
breaking and repairing of the surface of any street or alley within the
village, so that it shall not become hazardous to traffic or public safety.
   (C)   All tools, machinery, equipment and supplies for the care and
maintenance of streets, alleys and sidewalks of the village shall be under his
or her care, custody and control.
   (D)   The Superintendent shall make monthly reports to the Board of Trustees
of his or her actions.
   (E)   The Superintendent shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees
and there make report of the condition of his or her Department, with
recommendations as to purchase of supplies, machinery, changes in operation or
such other things that may properly come within his or her jurisdiction.
('73 Code, § 3.07)
§ 31.52 SUPERINTENDENT OF WATER AND SEWER PLANT.
   (A)   The Superintendent shall have the care, custody and control of the
sources of water, machinery, equipment, supplies, buildings, grounds and sewers
that constitute the Village Water and Sewer Plant.
   (B)   All work performed thereon shall be under his or her supervision and
direction, subject to the control of the Commission on Water and Sewer Plant.
   (C)   He or she shall attend all meetings of the Board of Trustees and there
make report of the condition of his or her Department, with recommendations as
to purchase of supplies, machinery, changes in operation or such other things
that may properly come within his or her jurisdiction.
('73 Code, § 3.08) (Am. Ord. 966, passed 1-15-07)
§ 31.53 CUSTODIAN OF CEMETERIES AND SEXTON.
   (A)   The Custodian of Cemeteries and Sexton shall have the care, custody
and control of the cemeteries of the village, under the direction of the
Cemetery Committee.
   (B)   The Custodian shall keep the cemeteries in a well-kept condition so
that they may at all times be attractive for the repose therein of the remains
of departed. He or she shall perform all duties of a sexton in the cemeteries.
   (C)   The Custodian shall make a report to the Board of Trustees on request
of the condition of the cemeteries, and recommend such action for the purchase
of supplies, equipment or for the sale of burial permits or maintenance of the
cemeteries as he or she deems advisable.
   (D)   All Sexton fees collected or earned by him or her shall be the
property of the village and shall be reported monthly by him or her to the
Board of Trustees.
   (E)   The Custodian shall not permit any interments not complying with the
provisions of the ordinances of the village, nor permit the erection of any
markers or tombstones inconsistent with the provisions of the village
ordinances.
('73 Code, § 3.09)
§ 31.54 COLLECTOR OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the office of Village Collector of Special
Taxes and Special Assessments. The Village Clerk shall be ex officio Collector
of Special Taxes and Special Assessments.
   (B)   The Collector of Special Taxes and Special Assessments shall execute a
bond to the village, with corporate surety, for the faithful performance of the
duties of his or her office, in the penal sum of not less than double the
amount of the estimated tax and special assessment collections for the current
year. The bond shall not be less than $5,000. The bond may be waived by
resolution of the Board of Trustees when in the opinion of the Board the amount
of estimated tax and special assessments to be collected shall not warrant the
expense of a bond.
   (C)   Remuneration of the Collector of Special Taxes and Special Assessments
shall be provided for from time to time by the Board of Trustees, by ordinance.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the Collector to collect and receive and give
receipts to any person or persons paying such special taxes or special
assessments as may from time to time be assessed and due and collectible for
local improvements upon any property specially benefitted thereby.
   (E)   All moneys received by the Collector on any special assessment shall
be held by him or her as a special fund to be applied to the payment of the
improvement for which such special assessment or special tax was levied and
extended, and the money shall be used for no other purpose whatsoever, except
to reimburse the village for moneys expended therefor; or shall be applied to
the payment of such bonds as may be issued in anticipation of the collection
thereof, all in accordance with the statutes therefor provided.
   (F)   It shall be his or her duty to make a report in writing on or before
March 10 in each year to the County Collector, or such other officer authorized
by the General Revenue Laws of this state to apply for judgment and sell land
for taxes due the county and state, which report shall show all of the lands,
town lots and real property on which he or she shall have been unable to
collect special taxes or special assessments due and unpaid thereon, together
with his or her warrant received by him or her authorizing the collection
thereof. The report shall be accompanied by his or her oath that the list is a
correct return and report of the lands, lots and real property on which the
special tax or special assessment levied by authority of the village shall
remain due and unpaid; that he or she is unable to collect the same or any part
thereof, and that he or she has given the notices required by law that the
warrants have been received by him or her for collection.
   (G)   It shall be his or her duty to execute all warrants for the collection
of special taxes and special assessments which by law and the ordinances of the
village are required to be executed by the Collector.
('73 Code, § 3.12)
§ 31.55 APPOINTMENT OF OTHER VILLAGE OFFICIALS.
   The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall
appoint such other officers and commissioners as are set forth in Title XVII of
this code.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5)
§ 31.56 DUTIES AND FEES; BOND.
   The President and Board of Trustees may prescribe the duties of the officers
appointed pursuant to §
31.55 and the amount to be charged for services rendered by those officers, and
may require them to execute whatever bonds are prescribed by statute or
ordinance.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-45-10)
§ 31.57 CERTIFICATE OF APPOINTMENT.
   Whenever a person has been appointed or elected to office, the President
shall issue a certificate of appointment or election, under the corporate seal,
to the Clerk. All officers elected or appointed under ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5 and
this chapter, except the Clerk, Trustees, and President, shall be commissioned
by warrant, under the corporate seal, signed by the Clerk and the presiding
officer of the Board of Trustees.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-55-5)
§ 31.58 DUTY TO SUCCESSOR.
   Within five days after written notification and request, a person who has
been an officer of the village shall deliver to the successor in office all
property, books, and effects in the former officer’s possession, belonging to
the village. A former officer who violates this section is liable for all the
damages caused by the violation and is subject to the penalty prescribed by
ordinance.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-35)
§ 31.59 SENIOR DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS.
   There is hereby created the position of Senior Director of Public Works who
shall have supervisory authority over the streets and alleys of the village,
the Water and Sewer Plant of the village, the village cemetery, the parks, pool
and buildings of the village, and the Building and Zoning Departments of the
village. The supervisory authority of the Senior Director shall extend to all
personnel under his or her direction and supervision, and he or she shall be
responsible for the implementation of all provisions of the Employee Handbook
that pertain to the personnel under his or her direction and supervision. In
addition, the Senior Director shall, at a minimum, conduct annual performance
reviews of those employees under his or her direction and control. The Senior
Director shall be appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the
Village Board at the first regular meeting of the Village Board in May of each
year. It is the intent of the Village of Millstadt that the position of Senior
Director of Public Works shall be on a policy-making level in the village
government.
   (A)   Streets and alleys. The Senior Director shall superintend the
Superintendent of Streets and Alleys and shall have the final authority in
reference to all duties and responsibilities delineated in §
31.51.
   (B)   Water and Sewer Plant. The Senior Director shall superintend the
Superintendent of the Water and Sewer Plant and shall have final authority in
reference to all duties and responsibilities delineated in §
31.52. His or her duties and responsibilities shall include but not be limited
to reading meters, J.U.L.I.E. locates, fixing leaks, cleaning sewers, sewer
inspections and general cleanup after digging.
   (C)   Cemetery. The Senior Director shall superintend the Custodian of
Cemeteries and Sexton and shall have final authority in reference to all duties
and responsibilities delineated in §
31.53.
   (D)   Building and Zoning. The Senior Director shall superintend the
Building Commissioner and the Zoning Administrator and shall have final
authority in reference to all duties and responsibilities assigned to the
Building Commissioner and Zoning Administrator under the ordinances of the
village.
   (E)   Parks and pool. The Senior Director shall have the care, custody, and
control of the parks of the village, under the direction of the Parks
Committee. This includes, but is not limited to: mowing and trimming all grass
in the parks according to village guidelines; keeping the bathrooms clean and
stocked; keeping the pavilions clean; keeping trees in the parks trimmed;
maintaining the flower beds; emptying the trash cans; maintaining the park
buildings; maintaining the ball diamonds; maintaining the pool; maintaining the
playground equipment; maintaining the volleyball court; and maintaining the
grandstands and walking paths.
   (F)   Buildings and maintenance shop. The Senior Director shall be
responsible for the maintenance of all village-owned buildings and all work
performed thereon shall be under his or her supervision and direction, subject
to the control of the Village Board. In addition, the Senior Director shall
have the care, custody and control of the village maintenance shop and his or
her duties shall include but not be limited to: maintaining all equipment;
keeping clean and washing all police cars; changing oil in the police cars;
keeping the shop clean; keeping the maintenance yard organized; and receiving
all stock deliveries.
(Ord. 965, passed 1-15-07)
CHAPTER 32: POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
   
32.01   Creation of Department; composition
   
32.02   Appointments
   
32.03   Term of service
   
32.04   Duties of Chief
   
32.05   Duties of members
   
32.06   Rules and regulations
   
32.07   Serving process
   
32.08   Conduct of members
   
32.09   Witness fees
   
32.10   Resignation
   
32.11   Employment outside of the Police Department
   
32.12   Stolen property
   
32.13   Other laws to govern conduct of police officers
   
32.14   Special police officers
   
32.15   Hiring standards
   
32.16   Auxiliary police officers
   
32.17   Part-time police
§ 32.01 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is created a Police Department, an executive department of the
village. The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police, also known
as the Village Marshal, and such other members as may be provided for by the
President and Board of Trustees from time to time. The Chief of Police shall be
the head of the Police Department and have supervision over all officers and
members thereof. In addition to the Chief of Police, the Police Department
shall consist of a lieutenant, a sergeant and patrol officers.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86; Am. Ord. 928, passed 8-15-05)
§ 32.02 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police and all other members of the Police Department
shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   All members of the Police Department shall be residents of the
village. Anyone hired to be a member of the Police Department shall move within
the village limits and establish residence within six months of being hired or
be terminated as a member of the Police Department.
   (C)   The member of the Police Department holding the rank and office of
lieutenant shall be second in command of the Police Department and in the
absence of the Chief of Police from the village, or during other periods of the
Chief of Police's absence, shall assume all of the duties herein imposed by
this chapter upon the Chief of Police. His hours of duty shall be fixed by the
Chief of Police and while on duty he shall have command of all patrol units.
The lieutenant shall be subject to the orders of the Chief of Police and the
President.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86; Am. Ord. 928, passed 8-15-05)
§ 32.03 TERM OF SERVICE.
   All members of the Police Department shall serve at the pleasure of the
Board of Trustees and may be removed by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.04 DUTIES OF CHIEF.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall keep records and make such reports
concerning the activities of his Department as may be required by statute or by
the Board of Trustees, and he shall attend all meetings of the Board of
Trustees. The Chief shall be responsible for the performance by the Police
Department of its functions and all persons who are members of the Police
Department shall serve subject to the orders of the Chief. The Chief shall be
governed in the discharge of his duties by the lawful commands of the
President.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall be specifically charged with the supervision
of all members of the Department and shall be held strictly responsible for the
conduct, and efficiency of all such members for the general good order of the
Department, and shall be responsible to the President and Board of Trustees. He
shall have regular hours of duty during each working day. The Chief of Police
shall have a thorough knowledge of all sections of the village, and when going
on duty shall immediately familiarize himself with all police business
transacted since his last tour of duty. The Chief of Police shall diligently
inquire into all complaints and charges of laxity and misconduct in the
performance of duty by members under his command and shall take such steps as
set forth in these rules and regulations, or as he may deem necessary when not
in conflict with these rules and regulations.
   (C)   The Chief of Police shall receive and give proper attention to
complaints of all persons referred to him and perform such other duties as may
be required from time to time prescribed by law.
   (D)   The Chief of Police shall have full power and authority to reprimand
any member of the Police Department, and to file charges against any member of
the Police Department with the Board of Trustees. In addition the Chief of
Police shall have the authority to suspend without pay a member of his
department for a period of not more than five days, but he shall notify the
Board of Trustees for a review of the suspension within 24 hours after such
suspension. Any police officer so suspended may appeal to the Board of Trustees
for a review of the suspension within 24 hours after such suspension and upon
such appeal the Board of Trustees may sustain the action of the Chief of the
Department, may reverse it with instructions that the man receive his pay for
the period involved or may suspend the officer for an additional period of not
more than 30 days or discharge him, depending upon the facts presented.
   (E)   The Chief of Police shall have custody and control of all books,
records, machines, tools, apparatus or equipment of every kind necessary for
the use of the Department and establish and maintain a detailed record of all
such items in inventory.
   (F)   All rules and regulations described in this chapter which are
applicable to the members of the Police Department are also applicable to the
Chief of Police.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.05 DUTIES OF MEMBERS.
   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police Department to see to the
enforcement of all of the provisions of this code and any other ordinance of
the village and all statutes applicable therein, and to preserve order and
prevent infractions of the law and arrest violators thereof.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.06 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of the Police Department may make or prescribe such rules and
regulations as he shall deem advisable, such rules, when approved by the Board
of Trustees shall be binding on such members. Such rules and regulations may
cover, besides the conduct of the members, uniforms and equipment to be work or
carried, hours of service, vacations and all other similar matters necessary or
desirable for the better efficiency of the Department.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.07 SERVING PROCESS.
   No member of the Police Department shall serve any process except on command
of the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.08 CONDUCT OF MEMBERS.
   (A)   General conduct. It shall be the duty of every member of the Police
Department to conduct himself in a proper and law abiding manner, at all times,
and to avoid the use of unnecessary force. Each member of the Police Department
shall obey the orders and directions of his superiors.
   (B)   Police officer's responsibility. Members of the Police Department will
have regular hours assigned to them for active duty each day, and when not so
employed they shall be considered off duty. They shall, however, be held to be
subject to duty at all times, and although practically relieved from the
routine performance of duty, are at all times subject to orders from the proper
authorities and to calls from superiors. The fact that they may be technically
off duty shall not relive them from the responsibility of taking proper police
action in any matter coming to their attention at any time. In order to be able
to fully execute this responsibility, all police officers may carry firearms at
all times when in the village.
   (C)   Absence from duty. No member of the Police Department shall be absent
from his regular hours of duty without permission. In the event of sickness,
notice shall be given to the commanding officer, allowing him ample time to
cancel days off or make other necessary changes to fill the vacancy of any such
persons reporting sick.
   (D)   Leaving the village. No member of the Police Department doing patrol
duty shall go beyond the limits of the village unless in the performance of
actual police duty, or on direct orders from the superior officer.
   (E)   Attention to duty. All regular member of the Police Department,
regardless of rank, shall at all times be attentive to their duties.
   (F)   Asleep on duty. Sleeping or loafing on duty is a serious dereliction,
and any member or employee of the Police Department utility of such conduct is
subject to charges for neglect of duty.
   (G)   Department property. Police Department stationery shall not be used
for personal correspondence, nor shall any Police Department property,
whosoever, be used for private purposes.
   (H)   False reports. No member of the Police Department shall knowingly make
a misstatement or make a false report.
   (I)   Address and telephone. Member of the Police Department shall notify
the Chief of Police of any change in their residence address or telephone
number.
   (J)   Insubordination. Members and employees of the Police Department shall
treat their superiors and fellow officers with respect, and in their demeanor
toward other associates in the Police Department shall be courteous and
considerate, guarding themselves against jealousy and other unfriendly
feelings. It is their duty to inform their superior officers of any neglect or
disobedience of orders that may come to their knowledge. Members and employees
shall not, under any circumstances, or in any manner whatsoever, speak
critically or derogatorily to any member of the Police Department, or to any
person outside the Police Department regarding the orders of instructions
issued by a superior officer, provided, in any case where there is a sound
reason to believe that such orders or instructions are inconsistent or unjust,
it is the right and duty of any member or employee to appeal to higher
authority.
   (K)   Courtesy. Courtesy and civility towards the public are demanded from
all members and employees of the Police Department and any conduct to the
contrary will not be tolerated. Members and employees in their conduct and
deportment shall be quiet, civil and orderly and shall at all times be
attentive and serious in the discharge of their duties, controlling their
tempers and exercising the utmost patience and discretion. They must at all
times refrain from using violent, profane and insolent language, but when
required must act with sufficient force to perform their duties. They shall be
civil and respectful towards each other.
   (L)   Criticizing. Members of the Police Department shall not discuss or
criticize publicly or privately the personal habits, character or conduct or
the official action of city officials and members of the Police Department
unless it be a violation of the rules and regulations, in which case the same
should be reported to their superior officers.
   (M)   Name and number. A police officer shall furnish such information or
render such aid to all persons when requested, as is consistent with his
duties. The police officer shall at all times, when in uniform, keep his badge
in sight, and give his name and badge number in a respectful manner when
requested.
   (N)   Care of equipment. Members and employees of the Police Department
shall be respectable for the good care of Police Department's property whether
fixed or movable, assigned to their use or keeping, and shall promptly report
to their commanding officers the loss or damage to, or unserviceable condition
of such property. Roughness or carelessness in the handling of such property
will not be tolerated and will be made the subject of charges of superior
officers who will be responsible for the strict enforcement of this rule. Any
member found guilty of damages to or destruction of city property, either
through wilfulness or negligence, shall be required to pay all costs of repairs
or replacements thereto, besides suffering any penalty for the violation of
this section.
   (O)   Lost equipment. All members of the Police Department shall immediately
report to the Chief of Police any loss of any city equipment that has been
furnished to the individual.
   (P)   Performance of duties. No member of the Police Department shall
perform his duty or duties in an ineffective manner.
   (Q)   Drinking. Members of the Police Department shall not drink any
intoxicating liquor while either on duty or in uniform.
   (R)   Intoxication. No member of the Police Department shall become
intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol while either on or off duty.
   (S)   Altercations. Members of the Police Department shall refrain from
physical alterations, except in line of duty and shall not maltreat any person
or prisoner.
   (T)   Conduct. No member of the Police Department shall conduct himself in a
disorderly or any other manner as to bring discredit on the Police Department.
   (U)   Confidential information. No member of the Police Department shall
give out or release to the public any information covering the affairs,
business or operation of the Police Department without the consent of the Board
of Trustees.
   (V)   Bribes. No member of the Police Department shall accept bribes of
money, gifts or other articles of apparent or actual value.
   (W)   Firearms. All regular members of the Police Department shall buy a
service weapon approved by the Chief of Police. The same shall be submitted for
inspection, and the members shall be qualified for use of firearms by a
training course required by law.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.09 WITNESS FEES.
   Every member of the Police Department shall appear as witness whenever this
is necessary in a prosecution for a violation of an ordinance or of any state
or federal law. No such members shall retain any witness fee for service as
witness in any action or suit to which the village is a party, any fees paid
for such services shall be turned over to the Chief, who shall deposit the same
with the Village Treasurer.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.10 RESIGNATION.
   (A)   All members of the Police Department shall give 14-days' written
notice to the Chief of Police and Village Clerk of their intentions of
resigning from the Police Department.
   (B)   Any member leaving the Police Department without due notice as
aforesaid shall be disqualified from ever again becoming a member of the Police
Department. However, before any resignation is accepted all equipment and
property belonging to the village must be returned to the village.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.11 EMPLOYMENT OUTSIDE OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   All regular members of the Police Department shall devote their entire and
exclusive time to the business of the Police Department. Any outside employment
or business interest that does not interfere with the efficiency of the Police
Department may be submitted in writing to the Board of Trustees for its
approval and in any case the police officer should be available for emergency
duty.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.12 STOLEN PROPERTY.
   The Chief of Police shall have the custody of all lost, abandoned or stolen
property recovered in the village and maintain detailed records of all such
property.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.13 OTHER LAWS TO GOVERN CONDUCT OF POLICE OFFICERS.
   In addition to the rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, the laws
of the state, this code and any other ordinance of the village, and federal
laws pertaining to an affecting police officers shall be the governing factors
in the conduct of all members of the Police Department, who shall at all times
be subject to the same. It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police and the
Board of Trustees to enforce the foregoing rules and regulations.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.14 SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS.
   The President, with the approval of the Board of Trustees, may appoint any
reputable person as a special police officer to serve for such term and on such
conditions as may be designated by the terms of such appointment. Special
police officers shall have the powers and duties of a conservator of the peace,
and shall have no compensation from the village unless such compensation is
ordered by the Board of Trustees. Appointments may be revoked at any time by
the President, the Board of Trustees or the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 488, passed 1-20-86)
§ 32.15 HIRING STANDARDS.
   (A)   All police officers, other than those officers who shall be employed
on a full-time basis, shall be qualified to enter and successfully complete any
training mandated by the Illinois Law Enforcement Training Standards Board.
   (B)   The aforesaid hiring standard, particularly with respect to part-time
police officers employed by the village, shall be submitted to the Illinois Law
Enforcement Training Standards Board, as required by statute.
(Ord. 723, passed 7-21-97)
§ 32.16 AUXILIARY POLICE OFFICERS.
   There is hereby created a unit of auxiliary police officers appointed by the
President with the approval of the Board of Trustees and subject to the
following:
   (A)   The operation of the Police Department Auxiliary Unit shall be in
accordance with Chapter 351 of the Millstadt Police Department Policy Manual.
   (B)   Auxiliary police officers shall not have Conservator of the Peace
powers.
   (C)   Auxiliary police officers shall not be required to be residents of the
village.
(Ord. 1075, passed 2-22-11)
§ 32.17 PART-TIME POLICE.
   (A)   Employment. The village may employ part-time police officers from time
to time as they deem necessary.
   (B)   Duties.  A part-time police officer shall have all the
responsibilities of a full-time police officer and such specific duties as
delineated in the General Orders of the Police Department, but the number of
hours a part-time officer may work within a calendar year is restricted. Part-
time police officers shall not be assigned to supervise or direct full-time
police officers. Part-time police officers shall be trained in accordance with
the Illinois Police Training Act (ILCS Ch. 50, Act 705, §§ 1 et seq.) and the
rules and requirements of the ILETSB.
   (C)   Hiring standards. Any person employed as a part-time police officer
must meet the following standards:
      (1)   Be of good moral character, of temperate habits, of sound health,
and physically and mentally able to perform assigned duties.
      (2)   Be at least 21 years of age.
      (3)   Pass a medical examination.
      (4)   Possess a high school diploma or GED certificate.
      (5)   Possess a valid State of Illinois driver's license.
      (6)   Possess no prior felony convictions.
      (7)   Any individual who has served in the U.S. military must have been
honorably discharged.
   (D)   Discipline.  Part-time officers shall be under the disciplinary
jurisdiction of the Chief of Police. Part-time police officers serve at the
discretion of the village authorities, shall not have any property rights in
said employment, and may be removed by the village authorities at any time.
Part-time police officers shall comply with all applicable rules and General
Orders issued by the Police Department.
(Ord. 1091, passed 4-16-12)
CHAPTER 33: FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
General Provisions
   
33.01   Scene of fire
Union Fire Company
   
33.10   Right to fight fires
   
33.11   Village to furnish equipment; supervision; insurance
   
33.12   Liability of village
Bureau of Fire Prevention
   
33.25   Establishment
   
33.26   Chief of Fire Department to supervise
   
33.27   Designation of Chief Inspector
   
33.28   Duties; responsibilities
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 33.01 SCENE OF FIRE.
   The Fire Department officer in command, or any firefighter designated by
him, may exercise the powers and authority of a police officer in directing
traffic at the scene of any fire or where the Fire Department has responded to
any emergency call for so long as Fire Department equipment is on the scene, in
the absence of or in assisting the police.
('73 Code, § 41.03)
UNION FIRE COMPANY
§ 33.10 RIGHT TO FIGHT FIRES.
   (A)   From year to year, unless written notice to terminate shall be given
by either party at least 60 days prior to May 1 of any year, the Union Fire
Company is given the right to fight and control fires within the corporate
limits of the village.
   (B)   The undertaking of its responsibilities hereby created shall not
entitle the Union Fire Company to any benefits or consideration from the
village except those specifically herein set forth.
('73 Code, § 6.01(a),(b))
§ 33.11 VILLAGE TO FURNISH EQUIPMENT; SUPERVISION; INSURANCE.
   (A)   The village will provide and make available to the Union Fire Company
such firefighting equipment as the village sees fit and proper to furnish. The
village will make available to the Company the present firehouse for storage of
the firefighting equipment and provide for the repair and maintenance thereof.
   (B)   The Company shall furnish supervision for the proper maintenance of
such equipment and building, the expense of which after prior approval by the
village shall be borne by it.
   (E)   The village will keep in effect certain policies of insurance to cover
the risks of workmen's compensation, property and public liability claims in
the principal amounts as are now provided.
('73 Code, § 6.01(c),(d),(e))
§ 33.12 LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.
   (A)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as giving to the Union
Fire Company or its members any right to burden the village with any charges or
expenses without the prior approval of the village; nor to charge the village
for any services rendered either by it or any of its members hereunder; nor to
make a claim against the village for any injuries or damages suffered by it or
its members over and beyond the kinds of risks for which the village has
secured insurance protection, nor for amounts exceeding the coverage therefor.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be construed as creating any employer-
employee relationship between the village and the members of the Company.
('73 Code, § 6.01(f),(g))
BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
§ 33.25 ESTABLISHMENT.
   A Bureau of Fire Prevention is and the same is hereby established.
('73 Code, § 6.02(a))
§ 33.26 CHIEF OF FIRE DEPARTMENT TO SUPERVISE.
   The Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be operated under the supervision of the
Chief of the Fire Department of the village.
('73 Code, § 6.02(b))
§ 33.27 DESIGNATION OF CHIEF INSPECTOR.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall designate an officer or member of the
Fire Department as Chief Inspector of the Bureau of Fire Prevention, and may
also designate such numbers of assistant inspectors as shall from time to time
be authorized by the President and Board of Trustees.
('73 Code, § 6.02(c))
§ 33.28 DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Bureau of Fire
Prevention to investigate, report, and recommend on the following matters:
      (1)   Measures necessary to prevent fires.
      (2)   The storage and use of explosives and flammable materials.
      (3)   Installation and maintenance of automatic and other fire alarm
systems and fire extinguishing equipment.
      (4)   The maintenance and regulation of fire escapes.
      (5)   The investigation of the cause, origin and circumstances of fire.
      (6)   Those matters consistent with fire prevention in general.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the Bureau of Fire Prevention upon request to
furnish to the Chief of the Fire Department any and all reports or
recommendations, and it shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department
to recommend to the President and Board of Trustees such additional ordinances
or amendments to existing ordinances as he may deem necessary for the safe
guarding of life and property against fire.
('73 Code, § 6.01(d),(e))
CHAPTER 34: PURCHASING AND FINANCE
Section
General Provisions
   
34.01   Fiscal year
   
34.02   Warrants
   
34.03   Annual budget adoption
Purchasing
   
34.15   Competitive bids to be obtained; exceptions
   
34.16   Procedure in contracts over $20,000
   
34.17   Emergency contracts
   
34.18   Contracts or purchase not exceeding $50
   
34.19   Contracts on purchases of $50 to $20,000
   
34.20   Contracts exempt from purchasing regulations
   
34.21   Invalid purchase contracts
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 34.01 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the village shall commence on May 1 in each year, and
shall end on April 30 of the succeeding year.
('73 Code, § 3.13)
§ 34.02 WARRANTS.
   (A)   All warrants drawn on village funds must be signed by the President
and countersigned by the Village Clerk and the Village Treasurer, and shall
state by name or symbol the particular appropriation to which the warrant is
chargeable, the amount thereof and the payee thereof.
   (B)   No warrant payable on demand shall be issued unless at that time there
shall be sufficient monies in the appropriate fund to pay the warrant.
('73 Code, § 3.14)
§ 34.03 ANNUAL BUDGET ADOPTION.
   The following enumerated sections of ILCS Chapter 65, Act 5 are adopted and
by reference made a part of this code with the same force and effect as those
set forth here verbatim; and the terms “this Act” wherever used in any such
sections shall mean this section of this code whenever necessary to effectuate
the meaning of the section:
Section No. Section Heading
Section No.                    Section Heading
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.3 Compilation and contents of budget.
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.4 Passage of annual budget — effect.
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.5 Capital improvement, repair or replacement fund.
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.6 Revision of annual budget.
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.7 Funds for contingency purposes.
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.9 Public inspection, notice and bearing on budget.
ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.10Abandonment.
 
('73 Code, § 3.22) (Ord. 439, passed - - )
PURCHASING
§ 34.15 COMPETITIVE BIDS TO BE OBTAINED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Requirements. Any labor, lease, goods or services to be purchased,
sale of personal property, equipment or supplies, or public improvement which
is not to be paid for in whole or in part by a special assessment or special
taxation, where the expenses or costs thereof will exceed $20,000, shall be
constructed or purchased either:
      (1)   By a contract let to the lowest responsible bidder after
advertising for bids, except that any such contract may be entered into by the
proper officers without advertising for bids if authorized by a vote of two-
thirds of all the Trustees elected; or
      (2)   In the manner following, if authorized by a vote of two-thirds of
all the Trustees elected: the proper officers or departmental head shall make
such purchase or shall superintend and cause such work or construction to be
carried out but all material of the value of $20,000 and upward used in any
construction work or public improvement shall be purchased by contract let to
the lowest responsible bidder in the manner prescribed herein. Nothing herein
contained shall apply to any contract with the Federal Government or any agency
thereof.
   (B)   Exceptions.  
      (1)   Contracts which by their nature are not adaptable to award by
competitive bidding, such as but not limited to contracts for the services of
individuals possessing high degree of professional skill where the ability or
fitness of the individual plays an important part, auditing, contracts for
supplies, materials, parts or equipment which are available only from a single
source, contracts for printing of finance committee pamphlets, comptroller's
estimates, and departmental reports, contracts for the printing or engraving of
bonds, water certificates, tax warrants and other evidences of indebtedness,
contracts for utility services such as water, heat, light, telephone or
telegraph and contracts for the purchase of magazines, books, periodicals and
similar articles of an educational or instructional nature, and the binding of
such magazine, books, periodicals, pamphlets, reports and similar articles
shall not be subject to competitive bidding.
      (2)   The Clerk hereinafter provided for is hereby expressly authorized
to procure from any federal, state or local governmental unit or agency thereof
such materials, supplies, commodities or equipment as may be made available
through the operation of any legislation heretofore or hereafter enacted
without conforming to the competitive bidding requirements of ILCS Ch. 65, Act
5, § 8-10. Regular employment contracts in the municipal service, whether with
respect to the classified service or otherwise, shall not be subject to the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-10, nor shall ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-10
be applicable to the granting or issuance pursuant to powers conferred by laws,
ordinances or resolutions, of franchises, licenses, permits or other
authorizations by the corporate authorities of the municipality, or by
departments, offices, institutions, boards, commissions, agencies or other
instrumentalities thereof, nor to contracts or transactions, other than the
sale or lease of personal property, pursuant to which the municipality is the
recipient of money. The Clerk may sell or cause to be loaned with proper
surety, materials common only to the municipal water distribution system, to
such corporations and individuals, upon a proper showing that they are unable
to obtain such materials for the purpose of obtaining water from the water
system, or while awaiting shipment from manufacturers or vendors of such
material, provided, that proper charges for the sale of such material shall be
made to such extent as to save the municipality from monetary losses in such
transactions.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-10-4)
('73 Code, §§ 4.01 and 4.02) (Am. Ord. 1011, passed 10-6-08)
§ 34.16 PROCEDURE IN CONTRACTS OVER $20,000.
   (A)   Publication. All proposals to award purchase orders or contracts
involving amounts in excess of $20,000 shall be published once at least ten
days, excluding Sundays and legal holidays, in advance of the date announced
for the receiving of bids, in a secular English language daily newspaper of
general circulation throughout the village and shall simultaneously be posted
on readily accessible bulletin boards in the office of the Clerk. Nothing
contained in this section shall be construed to prohibit the Clerk from placing
additional announcements in recognized trade journals.
   (B)   Advertisements for bids. Advertisement for bids shall describe the
character of the proposed contract, purchase or improvement in sufficient
detail to enable the bidders thereon to know what their obligations will be,
either in the advertisement itself, or by reference, to detailed plans and
specifications on file in the office of the Clerk at the time of publication of
the announcement. The advertisement shall also state the date, time and place
assigned for the opening of bids, and such bids will be received at any time
subsequent to the time indicated in the announcement.
   (C)   Deposit on bids. Cash, cashier's check, a certified check, a
comptroller's certificate of moneys owed the particular vendor, or a bid bond
with adequate surety approved by the Clerk as a deposit of good faith, in a
reasonable amount, but not in excess of 10% of the contract amount may be
required of each bidder by the Clerk on all bids involving amounts in excess of
$20,000 and, if so required, the advertisement for bids shall be specify.
   (D)   Opening of sealed bids. All sealed bids shall be publicly opened by
the Board of Trustees. All bids shall be open to public inspection in the
office of the Clerk for a period of 48 hours before the award is made.
   (E)   Bid award. The award of any purchase or contract in excess of $20,000
shall be made by the Board of Trustees to the lowest or highest responsible
bidder, depending on whether the village is to receive or expend money.
   (F)   Lowest responsible bidder. Contract shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
village to accept. In awarding the contract in addition to price the Board of
Trustees shall consider:
      (1)   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract to provide the service required;
      (2)   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      (3)   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, and
efficiency of the bidder;
      (4)   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;
      (5)   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service;
      (6)   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the
bidder to perform the contract or provide the service;
      (7)   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
      (8)   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract; and
      (9)   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid.
   (G)   Responsible bidder or construction contracts. In addition to the other
requirements of its ordinances, the village shall require a bidder or
construction projects over $20,000 to meet and satisfy the following applicable
criteria and to submit evidence of such compliance:
      (1)   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois.
      (2)   Evidence of compliance with:
         (a)   Federal Employer Tax Identification Number or Social Security
Number (for individuals)
         (b)   Provision of Section 2000(e) of Chapter 21, Title 42 of the
United States Code and Federal Executive Order No. 11246 as amended by
Executive Order No. 11375 (known as the Equal Opportunity Employer provisions).
      (3)   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverages:
general liability, workers' compensation, completed operations, automobile,
hazardous occupation, and product liability.
      (4)   Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act,
including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and retirement for those
trades covered in the act.
      (5)   The bidder and all bidder's sub-contractors must participate in
active apprenticeship and training programs approved and registered with the
United States Department of Labor's Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training for
each of the trades of work contemplated under the awarded contract.
      (6)   All contractors and sub-contractors are required to turn in
certified payrolls as specified in Illinois Public Act 94-0515.
('73 Code, § 4.03) (Am. Ord. 581, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1011, passed 10-6-08)
§ 34.17 EMERGENCY CONTRACTS.
   In the event of an emergency affecting the public health, welfare or safety
so declared by the Village President, a contract may be let or a purchase made,
to the extent necessary to resolve such emergency without public advertisement
in a sum not to exceed $20,000. The President shall file his authority for such
expenditure in writing in the office of the Clerk and a copy to the Board of
Trustees and shall provide the date or time when the emergency shall terminate
and shall name the person authorized to make such expenditure or contract and
the amount or amounts to be expended.
('73 Code, § 4.04) (Am. Ord. 581, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1011, passed 10-6-08)
§ 34.18 CONTRACTS OR PURCHASE NOT EXCEEDING $50.
   A village officer may make purchases or award contracts not in excess of $50
to the highest or lowest bidder, depending on whether the village is expending
or receiving money, without authorization by the Board of Trustees or
procurement of bids as set forth in this chapter. The sum herein authorized to
be expended shall constitute the total payment for such contract or purchase
and shall not be expended as an installment or partial payment on a larger
amount nor shall it be expended in any manner to circumvent directly or
indirectly the other provisions of this chapter providing for authorization or
bidding when a larger sum is to be expended.
('73 Code, § 4.05)
§ 34.19 CONTRACTS ON PURCHASES OF $50 TO $20,000.
   A village officer shall certify to the Chairperson of the Purchasing
Committee of the Board of Trustees all requisitions or purchase orders or
proposed contracts in the sum of $50 to $20,000 together with all necessary
attachments thereto including written itemized statements, descriptions of
transaction, quantity, and all other data and information relative to the
transaction, contract, purchase or lease to properly enable the Chairperson to
approve or disapprove the request. The purchasing committee shall approve or
disapprove the request and shall thereafter present the committee's
recommendations thereon to the Board of Trustees for concurrence or disapproval
or such other action as may be required by law. Approval by the Board of
Trustees of an expenditure, contract, lease or purchase shall empower the
departmental head to enter into a contract to be executed by the Village
President on behalf of the village or to make the purchase. The approval or
authorization by the Board may provide such other terms, conditions, directions
or restrictions as may be required by the Board of Trustees.
('73 Code, § 4.06) (Am. Ord. 581, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1011, passed 10-6-08)
§ 34.20 CONTRACTS EXEMPT FROM PURCHASING REGULATIONS.
   The provisions of this subchapter shall not apply to local improvement
contracts, special assessments or to purchases or contracts otherwise
specifically provided for by state statutes.
('73 Code, § 4.07)
§ 34.21 INVALID PURCHASE CONTRACTS.
   Any purchase or contract executed in violation of this subchapter shall be
null and void as to the village and if public funds have been expended
thereupon, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the village.
('73 Code, § 4.08)
CHAPTER 35: EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTERS
Section
Emergency Services and Disaster Agency
   
35.01   Establishment of Agency
   
35.02   Coordinator
   
35.03   Functions
   
35.04   Local disaster emergencies
   
35.05   Service as mobile support team
   
35.06   Mutual aid agreements
   
35.07   Emergency action
   
35.08   Compensation
   
35.09   Reimbursement by state
   
35.10   Purchases and expenditures
   
35.11   Oath
   
35.12   Office space
   
35.13   Appropriation; levy of taxes
National Incident Management System
   
35.25   National Emergency Management System (NIMS) adopted
Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan
   
35.35   St. Clair County Multi-Hazard Mitigation Plan
EMERGENCY SERVICES AND DISASTER AGENCY
§ 35.01 ESTABLISHMENT OF AGENCY.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Millstadt Emergency Services and Disaster
Agency (ESDA) to prevent, minimize, repair and alleviate injury or damage
resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack, sabotage, or other hostile
action, or from natural or man-made disaster, in accordance with “The Illinois
Emergency Services and Disaster Act of 1975” [i.e., as amended, ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.].
   (B)   In this chapter such Agency shall be referred to as ESDA.
   (C)   The ESDA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members
as may be selected by the Coordinator.
('73 Code, § 9.01) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.02 COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The Coordinator of the Village ESDA shall be appointed by the Village
President and shall serve until removed by same.
   (B)   The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training, and operation of the ESDA, subject to the direction
and control of the Village President as provided by statute.
   (C)   In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve
as the Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated by him or
her, shall be and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as
provided in this chapter.
('73 Code, § 9.02) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.03 FUNCTIONS.
   The Village ESDA shall perform such ESDA functions within the village as
shall be prescribed in and by the State ESDA plan and program prepared by the
Governor, and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the
Governor, and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate
limits as may be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other
political subdivision, municipality, or quasi-municipality entered into as
provided in “The Illinois ESDA Act of 1975” [i.e., as amended, ILCS Ch. 20, Act
3305, §§ 1 et seq.]
('73 Code, § 9.03) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.04 LOCAL DISASTER EMERGENCIES.
   A local disaster emergency in accordance with this chapter and “The Illinois
ESDA Act of 1975” [i.e., as amended, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.] may
be declared only by the Village President. It shall not be continued or renewed
for a period in excess of seven days except by or with the consent of the
Village Board of Trustees. Any order or proclamation declaring, continuing or
terminating a local disaster emergency shall be given prompt and general
publicity and shall be filed promptly with the Village Clerk.
('73 Code, § 9.04) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.05 SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM.
   (A)   Any or all members of the Village ESDA organization may be designated
as members of a Mobile Support Team created by the Director of the State ESDA
as provided by law.
   (B)   The leader of such Mobile Support Team shall be designated by the
coordinator of the Village ESDA organization.
   (C)   Any member of a Mobile Support Team who is a village employee or
officer while serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director,
shall receive the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and
immunities incident to such employment or office. Any such member who is not a
paid officer or employee of the village, while so serving, shall receive from
the state reasonable compensation as provided by law.
('73 Code, § 9.05) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.06 MUTUAL AID AGREEMENTS.
   The Coordinator of ESDA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other
cities or political subdivisions of the state, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Village President and by the State
Director of ESDA.
('73 Code, § 9.06) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.07 EMERGENCY ACTION.
   If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the state
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from man-made or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village ESDA to
cooperate fully with the State ESDA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law.
('73 Code, § 9.07) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.08 COMPENSATION.
   Members of the ESDA who are paid employees or officers of the village, if
called for training by the State Director of ESDA, shall receive for the time
spent in such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position
held; members who are not such village employees or officers shall receive for
such training time such compensation as may be established by the Village
President.
('73 Code, § 9.08) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.09 REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE.
   The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the state to the village for expenses incident to training
members of the ESDA as prescribed by the State Director of ESDA, compensation
for services and expenses of members of a Mobile Support Team while serving
outside the village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of
ESDA, as provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the state
incident to ESDA activities as provided by law.
('73 Code, § 9.09) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.10 PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES.
   (A)   The Village President may, on recommendation of the Village
Coordinator of ESDA, authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the
village in a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the
explosion of any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public
health and safety, protect property, and provide emergency assistance to
victims in the case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
   (B)   In the event of enemy caused or other disaster, the Village
Coordinator of ESDA is authorized, on behalf of the village, to procure such
services, supplies, equipment or material as may be necessary for such
purposes, in view of the exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or
formalities normally prescribed by law pertaining to village contracts or
obligations, as authorized by “The Illinois ESDA Act of 1975” [i.e., as
amended, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.], provided that if the Village
President meets at such time he or she shall act subject to the directions and
restrictions imposed by that body.
('73 Code, § 9.10) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.11 OATH.
   Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village ESDA
organization shall, before entering upon his or her duties, subscribe to the
following oath, which shall be filed with the Coordinator:
   “I,                     , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support
and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of the United
States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the territory,
institutions, and facilities thereof, both public and private, against all
enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely, without any
mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully
discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or
affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a member of any
political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of the government
of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and that during
such time as I am affiliated with the Millstadt ESDA organization, I will not
advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization that
advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state
by force or violence.”
('73 Code, § 9.11) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.12 OFFICE SPACE.
   The Village President is authorized to designate space in a village
building, or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President for the
Village ESDA as its office.
('73 Code, § 9.12) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
§ 35.13 APPROPRIATION; LEVY OF TAXES.
   The Village President may make an appropriation for ESDA purposes in the
manner provided by law, and may levy in addition for ESDA purposes only, a tax
not to exceed $.05 per $100, of the assessed value of all taxable property in
addition to all other taxes, as provided by the “The Illinois ESDA Act of 1975”
[i.e., as amended, ILCS Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.]; however, that amount
collectable under such levy shall in no event exceed $.25 per capita.
('73 Code, § 9.13) (Ord. 365, passed - - )
NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
§ 35.25 NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS) ADOPTED.
   The County of St. Clair hereby adopts the National Incident Management
System (NIMS) as its system for preparing for and responding to disaster
incidents.
(Res. –, passed 12-4-06)
MULTI-HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN
§ 35.35 ST. CLAIR COUNTY MULTI-HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.
   The Village of Millstadt hereby adopts the St. Clair County Multi-Hazard
Mitigation Plan as an official plan.
(Res. 10-07, passed 9-20-10)
CHAPTER 36: TAXATION
Section
Retailers Occupation Tax
   
36.01   Imposition of tax
   
36.02   Filing of report
   
36.03   Payment of tax
   
36.04   Clerk to transmit copy of provisions to State Department of Revenue
Service Occupation Tax
   
36.15   Imposition of tax
   
36.16   Filing of report
   
36.17   Payment of tax
   
36.18   Clerk to transmit copy of provisions to State Department of Revenue
Use Tax
   
36.30   Imposition of tax
   
36.31   Collection of tax
   
36.32   Clerk to transmit copy of provisions to State Department of Revenue
Municipal Grocery Taxes
   
36.40   Municipal Grocery Retailers’ Occupation Tax imposed
   
36.41   Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax
   
36.42   Illinois Department of Revenue to administer both taxes
RETAILERS OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.01 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property at retail in the village at the rate of 1% of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
section is in effect, in accordance with the provisions of Illinois Municipal
Code § 8-11-1 [i.e., ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1].
('73 Code, § 33.01(a))
§ 36.02 FILING OF REPORT.
   Every such person engaged in such business in the village shall file all
reports to the State Department of Revenue as required by Section Three of “An
Act in Relation to a Tax upon Persons Engaged in the Business of Selling
Tangible Personal Property to Purchasers for Use or Consumption” approved June
28, 1933, as amended [i.e., ILCS Ch.. 35, Act 120, § 3].
('73 Code, § 33.01(b))
§ 36.03 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time such report is filed there shall be paid to the State Department
of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed on account of the receipts from
sales of tangible personal property during the preceding month.
('73 Code, § 33.01(c))
§ 36.04 CLERK TO TRANSMIT COPY OF PROVISIONS TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The Village Clerk is directed to transmit to the State Department of Revenue
a certified copy of this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 33.01(d))
SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX
§ 36.15 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service at the rate of 1% of the cost price of all
tangible personal property transferred by the servicemen either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service, in accordance with the provisions of Illinois Municipal Code §
8-11-5 [i.e., ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5].
('73 Code, § 33.02(a))
§ 36.16 FILING OF REPORT.
   Every supplier or serviceman required to account for the Service Occupation
Tax for the benefit of this village shall file, the report to the State
Department of Revenue required by Section Nine of the “Service Occupation Tax
Act” approved July 10, 1961, as amended [i.e., ILCS Ch. 35, Act. 115, § 9].
('73 Code, § 33.02(b))
§ 36.17 PAYMENT OF TAX.
   At the time such report is filed, there shall be paid to the State
Department of Revenue the amount of tax hereby imposed.
('73 Code, § 33.02(c))
§ 36.18 CLERK TO TRANSMIT COPY OF PROVISIONS TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The Village Clerk is directed to transmit to the State Department of Revenue
a certified copy of this subchapter.
('73 Code, § 33.02(d))
USE TAX
§ 36.30 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed in accordance with the provisions of the Illinois
Municipal Code § 8-11-6 [i.e., ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6], upon the
privilege of using in the municipality any item of tangible personal property
which is purchased outside the state at retail from a retailer, and which is
titled or registered with an agency of state government. The tax shall be at a
rate of 1% of the selling price of such tangible property with selling price to
have the meaning as defined in the Use Tax Act.
('73 Code, § 33.04(a)) (Ord. 349, passed - - )
§ 36.31 COLLECTION OF TAX.
   Such tax shall be collected by the Illinois Department of Revenue for all
municipalities imposing the tax and shall be paid before the title or
certificate of registration for the personal property is issued.
('73 Code, § 33.04(b)) (Ord. 349, passed - - )
§ 36.32 CLERK TO TRANSMIT COPY OF PROVISIONS TO STATE DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE.
   The Village Clerk is hereby directed to transmit to the State Department of
Revenue a certified copy of this subchapter not later than five days after its
effective date.
('73 Code, § 33.04(c)) (Ord. 349, passed - - )
MUNICIPAL GROCERY TAXES
§ 36.40 MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS’ OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail in this municipality at the rate of 1% of the gross
receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
subchapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24).
(Ord. 1298, passed 7-14-25)
§ 36.41 MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX.
   A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in this municipality in the
business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to making those sales
of service, transfer groceries as an incident to a sale of service. The rate of
this tax shall be the same rate identified in §
36.40 above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24).
(Ord. 1298, passed 7-14-25)
§ 36.42 ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE TO ADMINISTER BOTH TAXES.
   The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Illinois Department of Revenue shall have full
power to administer and enforce the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 1298, passed 7-14-25)
CHAPTER 37: PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
General Provisions
   
37.01   Creation
   
37.02   Membership
   
37.03   Appointment and term of office
   
37.04   Compensation
Powers and Procedures
   
37.05   Procedure
   
37.06   Powers and duties
   
37.07   Land subdivision or resubdivision and the official map
   
37.08   Improvements
   
37.09   Expenditures
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 37.01 CREATION.
   In order that adequate provisions be made for the preparation and
implementation of a Comprehensive Plan for the Village of Millstadt, and for
the guidance, direction and control of growth, development or redevelopment
within the Village of Millstadt, a Planning Commission is hereby created.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
§ 37.02 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Village of Millstadt Planning Commission shall consist of the
members of the Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth in
Chapter 152.
   (B)   The Zoning Administrator and the Village Engineer shall be ex-officio
members of the Planning Commission and as such may participate in general
discussions before the body but shall have no right to vote on matters before
said Commission.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96; Am. Ord. 1284, passed 6-24-24)
§ 37.03 APPOINTMENT AND TERM OF OFFICE.
   (A)   Members of the Planning Commission shall be individually appointed and
assigned to a specific term of office by the President of the Board, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The initial terms of office shall be as follows:
      (1)   One member for one year;
      (2)   One member for two years;
      (3)   One member for three years;
      (4)   One member for four years;
      (5)   One member for five years.
   (C)   One of the members so appointed shall be named as Chairman by the
President of the Board at the time of the member's appointment and shall be
empowered with the authority to call meetings and public hearings, preside over
such meetings and hearings, compel the attendance of witnesses, issue
subpoenas, and administer oaths.
      (1)   In the absence of the Chairman at any meeting or hearing, the
members present shall first appoint one of their members as Acting Chairman and
that member shall thereby be empowered with all the authority of the Chairman
during said meeting or hearing.
   (D)   At the end of each appointed term, the successor to each member shall
be appointed for a term of three years.
   (E)   Any member of the Planning Commission desiring to resign his or her
appointment before said term has expired, shall notify the President of the
Board of Trustees in writing.
      (1)   Resignations so received shall be effective upon the date received
by the President unless another date is specifically provided for within said
notice of resignation.
      (2)   The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of
Trustees, shall, at the earliest possible time, appoint a successor for the
unexpired term of the member.
   (F)   The President, with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees,
may remove any member of the Planning Commission for cause.
      (1)   Upon such removal from office, the President, with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees, shall, at the earliest possible time, appoint
a successor for the unexpired term of the member so removed.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
§ 37.04 COMPENSATION.
   The members of the Planning Commission shall serve without compensation.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
POWERS AND PROCEDURES
§ 37.05 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Immediately upon its creation, the members of the Planning Commission
shall meet, organize, elect a Recording Secretary and where appropriate, adopt
rules and regulations of organization and procedure consistent with village
ordinances and state laws. Thereafter, the Planning Commission may change or
alter any such rules or regulations.
   (B)   The Commission shall keep written records of its proceedings which
shall be open to the public in accordance with state law, and shall file
minutes and other written records with the Municipal Clerk where they shall be
open to public inspection in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
§ 37.06 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Planning Commission shall have the following powers and duties:
   (A)   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees of the Village of
Millstadt, a Comprehensive Plan for present and future development or
redevelopment within the Village.
      (1)   The Plan may be adopted in whole or in separate geographical or
functional parts, each of which, when adopted, shall be the Official
Comprehensive Plan, or part thereof, of the Village of Millstadt.
      (2)   Such plan shall be advisory, except as to such part thereof as has
been implemented by ordinances duly enacted by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (3)   All requirements for public hearings, filing or notice of adoption
with the County Recorder of Deeds and filing of the plan and ordinances with
the Municipal Clerk shall be complied with as provided by law.
      (4)   To provide for the health, safety, comfort and convenience of the
habitants of the village, such plan or plans may establish reasonable standards
of design for subdivisions and for resubdivisions of unimproved land and of the
areas subject to redevelopment in respect to public improvements as herein
defined and shall establish reasonable requirements governing the location,
width, course, and surfacing or public streets and highways, alleys, ways for
public service facilities, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, parks,
playgrounds, school grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes,
storm water drainage, water supply and distribution, sanitary sewers, and
sewage collection and treatment. The requirements specified herein shall become
regulatory only when adopted by ordinance.
   (B)   To designate land suitable for annexation to the municipality and the
recommended zoning classification for such land upon annexation.
   (C)   To recommend to the Board of Trustees of the Village of Millstadt,
from time to time, such changes in the Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof,
as may be deemed necessary.
   (D)   To prepare and recommend to the Village Board of Trustees, from time
to time, plans, and/or recommendations for specific improvements in pursuance
of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
   (E)   To give aid to the officials of the Village of Millstadt, charged with
the direction of projects for improvements embraced within the Official Plan,
or parts thereof, in order to further the implementation of such improvements
and generally to promote the realization of the Official Comprehensive Plan.
   (F)   To cooperate with municipal or regional planning commissions and other
agencies or groups to further the local planning program and to assure
harmonious and integrated planning for the area.
   (G)   To administer and enforce provisions of the Millstadt Subdivision
Code, by assuming responsibility for specific duties outlined in said Code,
including the consideration of Requests for Variances and Amendments to the
text of said Subdivision Code.
      (1)   In the event of such requests, to conduct, in accordance with law,
meetings and public hearings at the call of the Chairman or at such other times
as the Planning Commission may determine;
      (2)   To compel, by action of the Chairman, the attendance of witnesses
at such meetings and hearings to allow the testimony of such witnesses or any
other person or their designated agent or attorney, and to administer oaths to
those who so testify;
      (3)   To keep records of its hearings and other official actions, and
minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question,
or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact;
      (4)   To file immediately in the office of the Village Clerk, a copy of
every rule, regulation, order, requirement, decision, or determination of the
Planning Commission, the contents of which shall be public record.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
§ 37.07 LAND SUBDIVISION OR RESUBDIVISION AND THE OFFICIAL MAP.
   (A)   At any time before, during or after the formal adoption of the
Official Comprehensive Plan by the corporate authorities, an official map may
be designated by ordinance. Said map may consist of the whole area included
within the official comprehensive plan, or one or more separate geographical or
functional parts, and may include all or any part of the contiguous
unincorporated area within 1-½ miles from the corporate limits of the village.
      (1)   The requirements for public hearing, filing of notice of adoption
with the County Recorder of Deeds, and filing of said plan and ordinances,
including the official map, with the Municipal Clerk shall be complied with as
provided for by law.
      (2)   No map or plat of any subdivision or resubdivision presented for
the record affecting land within the corporate limits of the village within
contiguous territory which is not more than 1½ miles beyond the corporate
limits shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision
shown thereon provides for standards of design, and standards governing
streets, alleys, public ways, ways for public service facilities, street
lights, public grounds, size of lots to be used for residential purposes, storm
and flood water runoff channels and basins, water supply and distribution,
sanitary sewers, and sewage collection and treatment in conformity with the
applicable requirements of the ordinances, including the Official Map.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
§ 37.08 IMPROVEMENTS.
   The Municipal Clerk shall furnish the members of the Planning Commission for
their consideration, a copy of all ordinances, plans and data relative to
public improvements of any nature, and of requests before the Zoning Board of
Appeals for amendments to the text of the Zoning Code, the rezoning of land, or
the issuance of special use permits. The Planning Commission may consider such
actions in relation to the Comprehensive Plan, and report in relation thereto
for the consideration of the Village Board of Trustees, if it deems a report
necessary or advisable.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
§ 37.09 EXPENDITURES.
   If the Planning Commission shall deem it advisable to secure technical
advice or services, it may do so upon authorization from the Village Board of
Trustees and an appropriation by the Village Board of Trustees therefor.
(Ord. 698, passed 3-1-96)
CHAPTER 38: VILLAGE POLICIES
Section
   
38.01   Fee for deceptive payment
   
38.02   Administrative fee for impounded motor vehicles
   
38.03   Policy prohibiting sexual harassment
§ 38.01 FEE FOR DECEPTIVE PAYMENT.
   Any person who issues or delivers to the village a check or other order upon
a real or fictitious depository in an amount exceeding the funds in said
depository which results in non-payment of any fee, charge or expense due to
the village shall pay to the village the sum of $25 in addition to the unpaid
fee, charge or expense and any other costs, charges, fees and interest required
by ordinance or other law.
(Ord. 989, passed 1-8-08)
§ 38.02 ADMINISTRATIVE FEE FOR IMPOUNDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Redemption of vehicle.
      (1)   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any vehicle
impounded associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an
offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and release of the vehicle for
any of the following offenses, as defined by the State of Illinois, a fee of
$200 per vehicle shall be payable to the village.
         (a)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, any misdemeanor in violation of the Criminal Code of
2012 (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5).
         (b)   Driving while a driver's license, permit, or privilege to
operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 6-303; except that vehicle shall not be subject to seizure or impoundment
if the suspension is for an unpaid citation (parking or moving) or due to
failure to comply with emission testing.
         (c)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle with an expired driver’s
license, in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101, if the period of
expiration is greater than one year.
         (d)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle without ever having been
issued a driver's license or permit, in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-
101, or operating a motor vehicle without ever having been issued a driver's
license or permit due to a person's age.
         (e)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle by a person against whom a
warrant has been used by a circuit clerk in Illinois for failing to answer
charges that the driver violated ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 6-101, 6-303, or 11-
501.
         (f)   Driving under the influence of alcohol, another drug or drugs,
an intoxicating compound or compounds, or any combination thereof, in violation
of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.
      (2)   Before the owner or person entitled to possession of any vehicle
impounded associated with the investigation, arrest, and detention of an
offender, or the removal, impoundment, storage, and release of the vehicle for
any of the following offenses, as defined by the State of Illinois, a fee of
$400 per vehicle shall be payable to the village.
         (a)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, any felony in violation of the Criminal Code of 2012
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5).
         (b)   Operation of or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or
in the attempt to commit, a violation of the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch.
720, Act 550).
         (c)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, an offense in violation of the Illinois Controlled
Substances Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570).
         (d)   Operation or use of a motor vehicle while soliciting,
possessing, or attempting to solicit or possess cannabis or a controlled
substance, as defined by the Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 550) or
the Illinois Controlled Substances Act (ILCS Ch. 720, Act 570).
      (3)   For all other vehicles towed by the Police Department, for any
reason other than the above listed offenses in divisions (A)(1) and (A)(2) of
this section, a tow release will be issued by the Police Department free of
charge.
      (4)   All administrative fees and towing and storage charges shall be
imposed on the registered owner of the motor vehicle or the agents of that
owner.
      (5)   The fees shall be in addition to any other penalties that may be
assessed by a court of law for the underlying violations; and any towing or
storage fees, or both charged by the towing company.
      (6)   The fees shall be collected by and paid to the village.
      (7)   The towing or storage fees, or both, shall be collected by and paid
to the person, firm, or entity that tows and stores the impounded vehicle.
      (8)   Whenever a police officer has cause to believe that a motor vehicle
is subject to impoundment, the officer shall provide for the towing of the
vehicle to a facility authorized by the municipality.
      (9)   At the time the vehicle is towed, the Police Department, shall
notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or person
identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or any
person who is found to be in control of the vehicle at the time of the alleged
offense, of the fact of the seizure, and of the vehicle owner's or lessee's
right to an administrative hearing.
      (10)   The Police Department shall also provide notice that the motor
vehicle will remain impounded pending the completion of an administrative
hearing, unless the owner or lessee of the vehicle or a lienholder posts with
the city a bond equal to the administrative fee as provided by ordinance and
pays for all towing and storage charges.
      (11)   The registered owner or lessee of the vehicle and any lienholder
of record shall be provided with a notice of hearing which shall:
         (a)   Be served upon the owner, lessee, and any lienholder of record
either by personal service or by first class mail to the interested parties'
addresses as registered with the Secretary of State;
         (b)   Be served upon interested parties within ten days after a
vehicle is impounded by the city;
         (c)   Contain the date, time, and location of the administrative
hearing. An initial hearing shall be scheduled and convened no later than 45
days after the date of the mailing of the notice of hearing by the city; and
         (d)   Notify owner or any interested party that administrative hearing
must be requested within 15 days of mailing of the notice. Failure to make a
request will result in a waiver of the hearing and forfeiture of any bond
posted.
      (12)   The administrative hearing shall be held according to the
following requirements:
         (a)   Formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply;
         (b)   The hearing shall be recorded;
         (c)   Shall be conducted by a hearing officer who is an attorney
licensed to practice law in the State of Illinois for a minimum of three years;
         (d)   Hearing officer shall be empowered to administer oaths and to
secure by subpoena both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of relevant books and papers;
         (e)   Persons appearing at a healing may be represented by counsel at
their expense;
         (f)   At the conclusion of the administrative hearing, the hearing
officer shall issue a written decision either sustaining or overruling the
vehicle impoundment;
         (g)   If the basis for the vehicle impoundment is sustained by the
administrative hearing officer, any administrative fee posted to secure the
release of the vehicle shall be forfeited to the city; and
         (h)   All final decisions of the administrative hearing officer shall
be subject to review under the provisions of the Administrative Review Law.
      (13)   Vehicles not retrieved from the towing facility or storage
facility within 35 days after the administrative hearing officer issues a
written decision shall be deemed abandoned and disposed of in accordance with
the provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4 Article II.
      (14)   It shall be the duty of the towing or storage company in
possession of the vehicle to obtain documentation issued by the Police
Department confirming compliance with the foregoing requirements and to retain
photocopies of that documentation in their files for a period of not less than
six months following release of the vehicle. The foregoing information shall be
made available to the authorities of the village for inspection and copying,
upon their request, by the towing or storage company. The towing or storage
company is prohibited from releasing any vehicle they may tow within the
village until and unless they obtain the documentation as aforesaid.
      (15)   Unless stayed by a court of competent jurisdiction, any fine,
penalty, or administrative fee imposed under this section which remains unpaid
in whole or in part after the expiration of the deadline for seeking judicial
review under the Administrative Review Law may be enforced in the same manner
as a judgment entered by a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Department administrative tow fee waiver. The owner or person entitled
to possession of any vehicle impounded for offenses identified in division (A)
(1) and (A)(2) of this section may request a waiver of the assessed
administrative department fee for a financial hardship, urgent medical
necessity for ongoing care or primary transportation for children less than 12
years to the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall be responsible for
reviewing the waiver request and considering all relevant information before
rendering a decision. The Chief of Police's decision shall be final.
(Ord. 1112, passed 8-5-13)
§ 38.03 POLICY PROHIBITING SEXUAL HARASSMENT'.
   (A)   Prohibition on sexual harassment. It is unlawful to harass a person
because of that person's sex. The courts have determined that sexual harassment
is a form of discrimination under Title VII of the U.S. Civil Rights Act of
1964, as amended in 1991. All persons have a right to work in an environment
free from sexual harassment. Sexual harassment is unacceptable misconduct which
affects individuals of all genders and sexual orientations. It is a policy of
the village to prohibit harassment of any person by any municipal official,
municipal agent, municipal employee or municipal agency or office on the basis
of sex or gender. All municipal officials, municipal agents, municipal
employees and municipal agencies or offices are prohibited from sexually
harassing any person, regardless of any employment relationship or lack
thereof.
   (B)   Definition of sexual harassment. This policy adopts the definition of
sexual harassment as stated in the Illinois Human Rights Act, which currently
defines sexual harassment as:
      (1)   Any unwelcome sexual advances or requests for sexual favors or any
conduct of a sexual nature when:
         (a)   Submission to such conduct is made either explicitly or
implicitly a term or condition of an individual's employment,
         (b)   Submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such individual, or
         (c)   Such conduct has the purpose or effect of substantially
interfering with an individual's work performance or creating an intimidating,
hostile or offensive working environment.
      (2)   Conduct which may constitute sexual harassment includes:
         (a)   Verbal: sexual innuendos, suggestive comments, insults, humor,
and jokes about sex, anatomy or gender-specific traits, sexual propositions,
threats, repeated requests for dates, or statements about other employees, even
outside of their presence, of a sexual nature.
         (b)   Non-verbal: suggestive or insulting sounds (whistling), leering,
obscene gestures, sexually suggestive bodily gestures, "catcalls", "smacking"
or "kissing" noises.
         (c)   Visual: posters, signs, pin-ups or slogans of a sexual nature,
viewing pornographic material or websites.
         (d)   Physical: touching, unwelcome hugging or kissing, pinching,
brushing the body, any coerced sexual act or actual assault.
         (e)   Textual/electronic: "sexting" (electronically sending messages
with sexual content, including pictures and video), the use of sexually
explicit language, harassment, cyber stalking and threats via all forms of
electronic communication (e-mail, text/picture/video messages, intranet/on-line
postings, blogs, instant messages and social network websites like Facebook and
Twitter).
      (3)   The most severe and overt forms of sexual harassment are easier to
determine. On the other end of the spectrum, some sexual harassment is more
subtle and depends, to some extent, on individual perception and
interpretation. The courts will assess sexual harassment by a standard of what
would offend a "reasonable person."
   (C)   Procedure for reporting an allegation of sexual harassment.
      (1)   An employee who either observes sexual harassment or believes
herself/himself to be the object of sexual harassment should deal with the
incident(s) as directly and firmly as possible by clearly communicating her/his
position to the offending employee, and her/his immediate supervisor. It is not
necessary for sexual harassment to be directed at the person making the report.
      (2)   Any employee may report conduct which is believed to be sexual
harassment, including the following:
         (a)   Electronic/direct communication. If there is sexual harassing
behavior in the workplace, the harassed employee should directly and clearly
express her/his objection that the conduct is unwelcome and request that the
offending behavior stop. The initial message may be verbal. If subsequent
messages are needed, they should be put in writing in a note or a memo.
         (b)   Contact with supervisory personnel.
            1.   At the same time direct communication is undertaken, or in the
event the employee feels threatened or intimidated by the situation, the
problem must be promptly reported to the immediate supervisor of the person
making the report, a department head, a director of human resources, an ethics
officer, the city manager or administrator, or the chief executive officer of
the municipality.
            2.   The employee experiencing what he or she believes to be sexual
harassment must not assume that the employer is aware of the conduct. If there
are no witnesses and the victim fails to notify a supervisor or other
responsible officer, the municipality will not be presumed to have knowledge of
the harassment.
         (c)   Resolution outside municipality. The purpose of this policy is
to establish prompt, thorough and effective procedures for responding to every
report and incident so that problems can be identified and remedied by the
municipality. However, all municipal employees have the right to contact the
Illinois Department of Human Rights (IDHR) or the Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission (EEOC) for information regarding filing a formal complaint with
those entities. An IDHR complaint must be filed within 180 days of the alleged
incident(s) unless it is a continuing offense. A complaint with the EEOC must
be filed within 300 days.
      (3)   Documentation of any incident may be submitted with any report
(what was said or done, the date, the time and the place), including, but not
limited to, written records such as letters, notes, memos and telephone
messages.
      (4)   All allegations, including anonymous reports, will be accepted and
investigated regardless of how the matter comes to the attention of the
municipality. However, because of the serious implications of sexual harassment
charges and the difficulties associated with their investigation and the
questions of credibility involved, the claimant's willing cooperation is a
vital component of an effective inquiry and an appropriate outcome.
   (D)   Prohibition on retaliation for reporting sexual harassment
allegations.
      (1)   No municipal official, municipal agency, municipal employee or
municipal agency or office shall take any retaliatory action against any
municipal employee due to a municipal employee's:
         (a)   Disclosure or threatened disclosure of any violation of this
policy,
         (b)   The provision of information related to or testimony before any
public body conducting an investigation, hearing or inquiry into any violation
of this policy, or
         (c)   Assistance or participation in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of this policy.
      (2)   For the purposes of this policy, retaliatory action means the
reprimand, discharge, suspension, demotion, denial of promotion or transfer, or
change in the terms or conditions of employment of any municipal employee that
is taken in retaliation for a municipal employee's involvement in protected
activity pursuant to this policy.
      (3)   No individual making a report will be retaliated against even if a
report made in good faith is not substantiated. In addition, any witness will
be protected from retaliation.
      (4)   Similar to the prohibition against retaliation contained herein,
the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act (ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 15-10)
provides whistleblower protection from retaliatory action such as reprimand,
discharge, suspension, demotion, or denial of promotion or transfer that occurs
in retaliation for an employee who does any of the following:
         (a)   Discloses or threatens to disclose to a supervisor or to a
public body an activity, policy, or practice of any officer, member, state
agency, or other state employee that the state employee reasonably believes is
in violation of a law, rule, or regulation,
         (b)   Provides information to or testifies before any public body
conducting an investigation, hearing, or inquiry into any violation of a law,
rule, or regulation by any officer, member, state agency or other state
employee, or
         (c)   Assists or participates in a proceeding to enforce the
provisions of the State Officials and Employees Ethics Act.
      (5)   Pursuant to the Whistleblower Act (ILCS Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15(a)),
an employer may not retaliate against an employee who discloses information in
a court, an administrative hearing, or before a legislative commission or
committee, or in any other proceeding, where the employee has reasonable cause
to believe that the information discloses a violation of a state or federal
law, rule, or regulation. In addition, an employer may not retaliate against an
employee for disclosing information to a government or law enforcement agency,
where the employee has reasonable cause to believe that the information
discloses a violation of a state or federal law, rule, or regulation. (ILCS Ch.
740, Act 174, § 15(b)).
      (6)   According to the Illinois Human Rights Act (ILCS Ch. 775, Act 5, §
6-101), it is a civil rights violation for a person, or for two or more people
to conspire, to retaliate against a person because he/she has opposed that
which he/she reasonably and in good faith believes to be sexual harassment in
employment, because he/she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified,
assisted, or participated in an investigation, proceeding, or hearing under the
Illinois Human Rights Act.
      (7)   An employee who is suddenly transferred to a lower paying job or
passed over for a promotion after filing a complaint with IDHR or EEOC, may
file a retaliation charge - due within 180 days (IDHR) or 300 days (EEOC) of
the alleged retaliation.
   (E)   Consequences of a violation of the prohibition on sexual harassment.
In addition to any and all other discipline that may be applicable pursuant to
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreement, any person who violates this policy or the
prohibition on sexual harassment contained in ILCS Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-65, may
be subject to a fine of up to $5,000 per offense, applicable discipline or
discharge by the municipality and any applicable fines and penalties
established pursuant to local ordinance, state law or federal law. Each
violation may constitute a separate offense. Any discipline imposed by the
municipality shall be separate and distinct from any penalty imposed by an
ethics commission and any fines or penalties imposed by a court of law or a
state or federal agency.
   (F)   Consequences for knowingly making a false report.
      (1)   A false report is a report of sexual harassment made by an accuser
using the sexual harassment report to accomplish some end other than stopping
sexual harassment or retaliation for reporting sexual harassment. A false
report is not a report made in good faith which cannot be proven. Given the
seriousness of the consequences for the accused, a false or frivolous report is
a severe offense that can itself result in disciplinary action. Any person who
intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation of any provision of
this policy shall be subject to discipline or discharge pursuant to applicable
municipal policies, employment agreements, procedures, employee handbooks and/
or collective bargaining agreements.
      (2)   In addition, any person who intentionally makes a false report
alleging a violation of any provision of the State Officials and Employees
Ethics Act to an ethics commission, an inspector general, the State Police, a
State's Attorney, the Attorney General, or any other law enforcement official
is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. An ethics commission may levy an
administrative fine of up to $5,000 against any person who intentionally makes
a false, frivolous or bad faith allegation.
(Ord. 1169, passed 1-8-18)
TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS
   Chapter
      
50.   GARBAGE AND REFUSE
      
51.   SEWERS
      
52.   WATER
      
53.   GENERAL UTILITIES
      
54.   CONTROL OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE/DETENTION, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL
CHAPTER 50: GARBAGE AND REFUSE
Section
General Provisions
   
50.01   Definitions
   
50.02   Burning of garbage
   
50.03   Cost of residential refuse and garbage collection
   
50.04   Disconnection for late payment
Collection of Garbage; Containers
   
50.15   Collection standards
   
50.16   Only selected company to collect garbage; certain containers to be used
   
50.17   Hours of collection
   
50.18   Placement of containers
   
50.19   Container specifications
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 50.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue of combustion of such fuels as wood, coal, coke,
charcoal, and the like.
   BULKY WASTE. Furniture, appliances and all other waste and discard that is
generated from within a normal household, exclusive of motor vehicle parts.
   COMMERCIAL REFUSE. All ashes and rubbish arising out of the operation of
business and industry, excluding highly combustibles and all other refuse
resulting from the ordinary operation of private residences or households.
   GARBAGE. All animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food. GARBAGE includes the perishable
offal from the growing of fruit or vegetables but does not mean plants, vines,
trees or bushes.
   HIGHLY COMBUSTIBLE RUBBISH. All waste substances capable of exploding or
highly inflam- mable material such as gunpowder, photographic plates or
negatives, substances saturated with inflammable petroleum products, or the
like.
   RESIDENTIAL REFUSE. All ashes and rubbish resulting from the ordinary
operation of private residences or households. RESIDENTIAL REFUSE shall not
include contractor generated construction debris, any rubbish or waste material
arising or accumulating from any building construction, improvement or repairs
on any private premises or real estate nor shall it include any highly
combustibles.
   RUBBISH. All waste substances incapable of explosion, such as tin cans,
tinware and other metallic substances, bottles, glassware, earthenware, ashes,
leaves, grass clippings, paper and the like, excluding furniture and
appliances.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89)
§ 50.02 BURNING OF GARBAGE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to burn papers, excelsior, or any other flammable
material, which may be blown about by the wind, anywhere in the village, unless
the same is burned in a stove, fireplace or furnace, or in an incinerator
sufficiently fine to prevent the escape of ignited particles.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to burn any garbage or other organic refuse
outside of any building at any time.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful to light or maintain any outside fire at any time
except between the hours of sunrise and sunset.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful to build or maintain any outside fire within
three feet of a property line or within 12 feet of any combustible materials.
   (E)   All outside burning as described in this section shall be constantly
attended by a competent person until such fire is extinguished; and such person
shall have an operable hose connected to the water supply or other fire
extinguishing equipment readily available for use if necessary.
   (F)   The Chief of the Fire Department may prohibit any outside fires when
atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fire hazardous.
   (G)   The burning of leaves and other yard waste by the owner or occupant of
premises within the village is hereby permitted on the days and during the
hours herein specified if such leaves and yard waste have been raked and piled
and all other conditions and requirements of this section have been met. The
specific days and hours for such burning are Wednesdays from 11:00 a.m. until
7:00 p.m. and Saturdays from 9:00 a.m. until 4:00 p.m., except that during the
months of November, December, January, February and March no burning shall be
permitted on Wednesdays after sunset. No burning shall be allowed on any public
street, surface, public easement, or within any open storm water ditch within
the public right-of-way.
   (H)   Any person aggrieved by this section may apply to the Chief of the
Fire Department for relief; and, after investigation, the Fire Chief may grant
a variance where a literal enforcement of this section would result in
exceptional difficulties or unusual hardships, so that substantial justice will
be done and the public safety and welfare secured.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89; Am. Ord. 1026, passed 5-4-09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 50.03 COST OF RESIDENTIAL REFUSE AND GARBAGE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The cost of residential refuse and garbage collected by the company
selected by the village shall be $9.90 per month for the period October 1, 2007
to September 30, 2008, and $10.20 per month for the period October 1, 2008 to
September 30, 2009, and $10.50 per month for the period October 1, 2009 to
September 30, 2010, which shall be billed in advance by the village and sent to
residents with their regular water bills. The residential refuse and garbage
collection bill sent by the village shall become due and payable on the same
due date as the water bills. If the residential refuse and garbage bill becomes
past due, a delayed payment charge in the amount of 10% of the bill rendered
shall be imposed and collected and shall continue at the rate of 10% penalty
per month until paid.
   (B)   If the residential refuse and garbage collection bill is not paid
within 30 days, the village shall have the right to discontinue both water
service and residential refuse and garbage collection service for the
delinquent residence. If water service is discontinued for a delinquent
residence, no future connection shall be permitted until all costs and charges
authorized by
Chapter 52 are paid.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89; Am. Ord. 614, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 700, passed 5-6-
96; Am. Ord. 880, passed 4-5-04; Am. Ord. 944, passed 5-1-06; Am. Ord. 983,
passed 10-1-07)
§ 50.04 DISCONNECTION FOR LATE PAYMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
      (1)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set forth
on the bill; and
      (2)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second bill
will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid within
ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued for
nonpayment; and
      (3)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
   (B)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained; only
questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence of
payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
   (C)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility service
to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be instated only after all
bills for service then due have been paid and any deposit required has been
made.
COLLECTION OF GARBAGE; CONTAINERS
§ 50.15 COLLECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Residential refuse and garbage shall be collected and disposed of by a
company selected by the village. The village shall enter into an exclusive
contract for the collection of residential refuse and garbage with the company
selected by the village. All residents shall be required to have their
residential refuse and garbage collected and disposed of by the company
selected by the village.
   (B)   The company selected by the village shall not be required to collect
and dispose of any commercial refuse or garbage. Commercial refuse, garbage and
highly combustible rubbish shall be collected and disposed of by the owners of
the items who may contract with a company of their choice.
   (C)   Residential refuse and garbage shall be collected at regular intervals
on collection days to be determined by the village and the company selected by
it. The village and the company selected by it shall determine the point of
collection when not otherwise designated in this chapter, shall determine the
hours of collection and shall distribute to all households notices or memoranda
outlining the provisions of this chapter and stating the collection days, hours
and points of collection.
   (D)   Only one large item of bulky waste, such as furniture or appliances,
shall be picked up per collection day. All bulky waste consisting of leaves,
grass clippings and/or tree trimmings shall be bagged or bundled. Bundles shall
be limited to four feet in length.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89)
§ 50.16 ONLY SELECTED COMPANY TO COLLECT GARBAGE; CERTAIN CONTAINERS TO BE
USED.
   (A)   Residential refuse and garbage shall not be collected by anyone other
than the company selected by the village.
   (B)   No resident shall place residential refuse, commercial refuse or
garbage in a container belonging to another except as may be permitted by this
chapter or the exclusive contract with the company selected by the village.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89)
§ 50.17 HOURS OF COLLECTION.
   It shall be unlawful for any refuse or garbage collector to collect any
refuse or garbage between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89)
§ 50.18 PLACEMENT OF CONTAINERS.
   Except for the placement of large containers by the company selected by the
village, all residents shall place their containers for their premises on
collection days in front of their premises not more than five feet from the
street property line. The containers shall be removed from the front of the
premises within 24 hours from the time of collection. Employees of the company
selected by the village may leave written or printed notices at the home of any
person charged with the duty of maintaining the containers, if such containers
are not maintained, handled or placed in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter. If the conditions specified in the notice is not rectified by the next
collection, the company selected by the village shall notify the village.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89)
§ 50.19 CONTAINER SPECIFICATIONS.
   The capacity and number of containers for all refuse and garbage shall be
sufficient to hold all accumulation of refuse and garbage between collection
days. For collection purposes, all residential refuse and garbage shall be
placed in watertight containers of not more than 30 gallons capacity each, with
the exception of grass clippings, leaves and paper which may be deposited in
waterproof bags and sealed. All garbage and refuse containers shall have tight-
fitting covers which shall be in place at all times except when filling,
emptying or cleaning the container. Container covers shall have suitable bales
or handles in good repair so as to facilitate safe handling and lifting by
collectors.
(Ord. 560, passed 4-27-89)
CHAPTER 51: SEWERS
Section
General Provisions
   
51.01   Definitions
   
51.02   Depositing objectionable waste prohibited
   
51.03   Discharge of sewage and other polluted waters to natural outlets
   
51.04   Privies, septic tanks and other facilities
   
51.05   Owner's responsibility to install suitable toilet facilities
   
51.06   Protection of sewage works from damage
   
51.07   Powers and authority of inspectors
   
51.08   Sewage disposal facilities
   
51.09   Violations
Private Sewage Disposal System
   
51.20   Connecting building sewer to private sewage disposal system
   
51.21   Permit required; application; fee
   
51.22   Completed installation prerequisite to permit becoming effective
   
51.23   Compliance with state provisions required
   
51.24   Connection to public sewer required when available
   
51.25   Facilities to be maintained in sanitary manner
   
51.26   Provisions not to interfere with additional requirements
   
51.27   Building sewer to be connected to public sewer when available; private
sewage disposal system to be filled
Building Sewer and Connection
   
51.40   Written permit required
   
51.41   Discharges to comply with standards
   
51.42   Classes of permits; application
   
51.43   Sufficient reserve capacity required
   
51.44   Costs to be borne by owner; indemnity of village
   
51.45   Separate building sewer for every building
   
51.46   Old building sewers
   
51.47   Size and slope
   
51.48   Elevation of building sewer
   
51.49   Surface runoff and groundwater
   
51.50   Building sewer to conform to provisions
   
51.51   Notification required for inspection
   
51.52   Excavation to be barricaded and lighted; restoration of streets
Use of Public Sewers
   
51.65   Discharge of stormwater and other unpolluted drainage
   
51.66   Prohibited discharges to public sewers
   
51.67   Discharge of certain wastes restricted
   
51.68   Pretreatment, equalization of waste flows
   
51.69   Grease, oil and sand interceptors
   
51.70   Preliminary treatment facilities
   
51.71   Control manhole
   
51.72   Measurements, tests and analyses
   
51.73   Special agreements or arrangements
Charges; Billing
   
51.85   User charge
   
51.86   Billing
   
51.87   Major leaks
   
51.88   Delinquent bills
   
51.89   Lien; notice; foreclosure
   
51.90   Disposition of revenues
   
51.91   Access to records
   
51.92   Accounts and records
   
51.99   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Applications
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 51.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The Administrator of the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency.
   APPROVING AUTHORITY. The Board of Trustees of the village.
   BASIC USER CHARGE. The basic assessment levied on all users of the public
sewer systems.
   BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic mater under standards laboratory procedure
in five days at 20° C., expressed in milligrams per liter.
   BUILDING SEWER. The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal.
   BUILDING DRAIN. That part of the lowest piping of a drainage system which
receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the
walls of the building and conveys it to the building  sewer or other approved
point of discharge, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of
the building wall.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT CHARGE. A charge levied on users to improve, extend or
reconstruct the sewage treatment works.
   COMBINED SEWER. A sewer which is designed and intended to receive
wastewater, storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   COMMERCIAL USER. Transit lodging, retail and wholesale establishments or
places engaged in selling merchandise or rendering services.
   CONTROL MANHOLE. A structure located on a site from which industrial wastes
are discharged. Where feasible, the manhole shall have an interior drop. The
purpose of a CONTROL MANHOLE is to provide access for the village
representative to sample and/or measure discharges.
   DEBT SERVICE CHARGE. The amount to be paid each billing period for payment
of interest, principal and coverage of loans and revenue bonds outstanding.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   EASEMENT. An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by
others.
   EFFLUENT CRITERIA. Defined in an applicable NPDES PERMIT.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 4466 et. seq.) as
amended.
   FEDERAL GRANT. The U.S. government participation in the financing of the
construction of treatment works as provided by the Title II-Grants for
Construction of Treatment Works of the Act and implementing regulations.
   FLOATABLE OIL. Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
   GARBAGE. Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking
and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of food.
   INDUSTRIAL USERS. Includes establishments engaged in manufacturing
activities involving the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials of
substance into projects.
   INDUSTRIAL WASTE. Solid, liquid or gaseous substance discharged permitted to
flow or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, commercial or business
establishment or process or from the development, recovery or processing of any
natural resource as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   INSTITUTIONAL/GOVERNMENTAL USER. Includes schools, churches, penal
institutions, and users associated with federal, state and local government.
   MAJOR CONTRIBUTING INDUSTRY. An industrial user of the publicly owned
treatment works that: has a flow of 50,000 gallons or more per average work
day; or has a flow greater that ten percent of the flow carried by the
municipal system receiving the waste; or has in its waste, a toxic pollutant in
toxic amounts as defined in standards issued under section 307(a) of the
Federal Act; or is found by the permit issuant authority, in connection with
the issuance of the NPDES permit to the publicly owned treatment works
receiving the waste, to have significant impact, either singly or in
combination with other contributing industries, on that treatment works or upon
the quality of effluent from that treatment works.
   mg/l or MILLIGRAMS PER LITER. a unit of the concentration of water or
wastewater constituent. It is 0.001 g of the constituent in 1,000 ml of water.
It has replaced the unit formerly used commonly, parts per million, to which it
is approximately equivalent, in reporting the results of water and wastewater
analysis.
   NATURAL OUTLET. Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other
body of surface or groundwater.
   NPDES PERMIT. Any permit or equivalent document or requirements issued by
the Administrator, or, where appropriated by the Director, after enactment of
the Federal Clean Water Act to regulate the discharge of pollutants pursuant to
Section 402 of the Federal Act.
   pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the hydrogen-ion
concentration expressed by the procedures outlined in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   PERSON. Any and all persons, natural or artificial including any individual,
firm, company, municipal, or private corporation, association, society,
institution, enterprise, governmental agency or other entity.
   POPULATION EQUIVALENT. A term used to evaluate the impact of industrial or
other waste on a treatment works or stream. One population equivalent is 100
gallons of sewage per day, containing 0.17 pounds of BOD and 0.20 pounds of
suspended solids.
   ppm. Part per million by weight.
   PRETREATMENT. The treatment of wastewater from sources before introduction
into the wastewater treatment works.
   PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE.  The wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half-inch (1.27 centimeters) in any
dimension.
   PUBLIC SEWER. A sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the
village. It shall also include sewers within or outside the village boundaries
that serve one or more persons and ultimately discharge into the village
sanitary sewer system, even though those sewers may not have been constructed
with village funds.
   REPLACEMENT. Expenditures for obtaining and installing equipment,
accessories, or appurtenances which are necessary during the useful life of the
treatment works to maintain the capacity and performance for which such works
were designed and constructed. The term OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE includes
replacement.
   RESIDENTIAL USER. All dwelling units shall as houses, mobile home,
apartments, permanent multi- family dwellings.
   SANITARY SEWER. A sewer that conveys sewage or industrial wastes or a
combination of both, and into which storm, surface and groundwater or polluted
industrial wastes are not intentionally admitted.
   SEWAGE is used interchangeably with WASTEWATER.
   SEWER. A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids,
including storm, surface and groundwater drainage.
   SEWERAGE. The system of sewers and appurtenances for the collection,
transportation and pumping of sewage.
   SEWERAGE FUND. The principal accounting designation for all revenues
received in the operation of the sewerage system.
   SHALL is mandatory; MAY is permissible.
   SLUG. Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of low exceeds for any
period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times the average 24-
hour concentration of flows during normal operation.
   STATE ACT. The Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act of 1970 [i.e., ILCS Ch. 30,
Act 405, §§ 1 et seq.].
   STATE GRANT. The state participation in the financing of the construction of
treatment works as provided for by the Illinois Anti-Pollution Bond Act and for
making such grants as filed with the Secretary of State of this state.
   STORM SEWER. A sewer that carries storm, surface and groundwater drainage
but excludes sewage and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
   STORMWATER RUNOFF. That portion of the precipitation that is drained into
the sewers.
   SURCHARGE. The assessment in addition to the wastewater service charge which
is levied on those persons whose wastes are greater in strength than the
concentration values established in §
51.85.
   SUSPENDED SOLIDS (SS). Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in water, sewage or industrial waste, and which are removable by a
laboratory filtration device. Quantitative determination of suspended solids
shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in the IEPA Division of
Laboratories Manual of Laboratory Methods.
   UNPOLLUTED WATER. Water quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefitted by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
   USEFUL LIFE. The estimated period during which the collection system and/or
treatment works will be operated.
   USER CHARGE. A charge levied on users of treatment works for the cost of
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   USER CLASS. The type of user “residential institutional/governmental,
commercial,” or “industrial, institutional/governmental, commercial,” or
“industrial” as defined herein.
   WASTEWATER. The spent water of a community. From this standpoint of course,
it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any
groundwater, surface water and storm water that may be present.
   WASTEWATER FACILITIES. The structures, equipment, and processes required to
collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and transport
effluent to a watercourse.
   WASTEWATER SERVICE CHARGE. The charge per quarter or month levied on all
users of the wastewater facilities. The service charge shall be computed as
outline in §
51.85.
   WASTEWATER TREATMENT WORKS. An arrangement of devices and structures for
treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and sludge. Sometimes used as
synonymous with WASTE TREATMENT PLANT or WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANT or
POLLUTION CONTROL PLANT.
   WATERCOURSE. A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either continuously
or intermittently.
   WATER QUALITY STANDARDS. Defined in the Water Pollution Regulation of
Illinois.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 574, passed 10-25-89)
§ 51.02 DEPOSITING OBJECTIONABLE WASTE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be
deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the
village or in any areas under the jurisdiction of the village, any human or
animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.03 DISCHARGE OF SEWAGE AND OTHER POLLUTED WATERS TO NATURAL OUTLETS.
   It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the village
or in any area under the jurisdiction of the village, any sewage or other
polluted waters, except where suitable treatment has been provided in
accordance with subsequent provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.04 PRIVIES, SEPTIC TANKS AND OTHER FACILITIES.
   Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or
maintain any privy, vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or
used for the disposal of sewerage.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.05 OWNER'S RESPONSIBILITY TO INSTALL SUITABLE TOILET FACILITIES.
   The owner of all houses, buildings or properties used for human occupancy,
employment, recreation or other purposes, situated within the village and
abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or
may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the
village, is hereby required at his expense to install suitable toilet
facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper
sewer in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, within 90 days after
date of official notice to do so, provided that the public sewer is within 100
feet of the property line. Pumping facilities may be necessary to be provided
by the owner.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.06 PROTECTION OF SEWAGE WORKS FROM DAMAGE.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which
is a part of the sewage works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.07 POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS.
   (A)   The village and other duly authorized employees of the village, the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, bearing proper credentials and
identification, shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of
inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter. The village or its representative shall have no
authority to inquire into any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil
refining, ceramic, paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct
bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterway or
facilities for waste treatment.
   (B)   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to
in division (A) of this section, the village or duly authorized employees of
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Agency
shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the
company and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the
village employees and shall indemnify the company against liability claims and
demand for personal injury or property damage asserted against the company and
growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused
by negligence or failure of the company to maintain conditions as required in §
51.72.
   (C)   The village and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying
within the easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.08 SEWAGE DISPOSAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   Every dwelling house, factory or business building in the village
fronting on sanitary sewer mains and constructed subsequent to the placing of
the sewer mains, shall be furnished by the owner or agent thereof with suitable
sanitary toilet facilities properly connected to such sewer service. Where
sewer service is not available, all such premises so located shall be furnished
with such other types of toilet facilities as may be approved by the Chief of
Police or any representative appointed therefor by the President and Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   Where outside privies are used, they shall be of approved design and
shall be so located that the outside walls thereof shall be at least five feet
distant from the line of every adjoining lot, and at least 20 feet from the
nearest wall of any house, school, factory or other place of residence or
business, and at least ten feet distant from any street, alley or public park,
and every owner or agent or person in control of any of such premises who shall
violate or fail to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be
deemed guilty of creating and maintaining a nuisance.
   (C)   (1)   No outdoor toilets, privies, cesspools or septic tanks shall be
used, maintained or permitted to be used or maintained upon any premises
located within the village, excepting the premises hereinafter described and
set forth, which are excluded from the application of this section by reason of
grade line, namely:
         (a)   All that part of Lot 20, part of the Northwest Quarter of
Section 15, lying within the corporate limits of the village.
         (b)   All of Lots 19 to 30, inclusive, of Jos. Kopp's Addition,
reference being had to the plat thereof recorded in the Recorder's office of
St. Clair County, Illinois in Book of Plats “A” on page 69.
         (c)   All that part of Lot 6, part of the Southwest Quarter of Section
10, lying East of the extension southerly of the centerline of Mulberry Street
or South of the extension eastwardly of the centerline of the alley between
Lots 13 to 18 inclusive, and Lots 19 to 24, inclusive, of said Jos. Kopp's
Addition.
         (d)   All of Lot 8, being part of the Southwest Quarter of Section 10.
         (e)   All that part of Lot 19, part of the Northwest Quarter of
Section 13, which lies within the corporate limits line of the village.
         (f)   All of that part of Lot 1, part of the Southwest Quarter of
Section 10, lying within the corporate limits line of the village.
         (g)   All that part of Lot 1, part of the Northwest Quarter of Section
15, lying within the corporate limits line of the village.
      (2)   All of the premises being located in Township One South, Range Nine
West of the Third Principal Meridian.
('73 Code, § 12.09) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.09 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter except
§§
51.40 through
51.52 shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any
person for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
   (B)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reasons of such violation.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
§ 51.20 CONNECTING BUILDING SEWER TO PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM.
   Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the
provisions of §
51.05 the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system
complying with the provisions of this subchapter.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.21 PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION; FEE.
   Before commencement of construction of a private sewage disposal system the
owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the village. The
application for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the village,
which the applicant shall supplement by any plans, specifications and other
information as deemed necessary by the village. A permit and inspection fee of
$50 shall be paid to the village at the time the application is filed.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.22 COMPLETED INSTALLATION PREREQUISITE TO PERMIT BECOMING EFFECTIVE.
   A permit for a private sewage disposal system shall not become effective
until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the village. The
village shall be allowed to inspect the work any state of construction and, in
any event, the applicant for the permit shall notify the village when the work
is ready for final inspection, and before any underground portions are covered.
The inspection shall be made within 24 hours of the receipt of written notice
by the village.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.23 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE PROVISIONS REQUIRED.
   The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal
system shall comply with all recommendations of the Private Sewage Disposal
Licensing Act [i.e., ILCS Ch. 225, Act 225, §§ 1 et seq.] and Code and with the
State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency [IEPA]. No permit shall be
issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil
absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than 10,000 square
feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural
outlet.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.24 CONNECTION TO PUBLIC SEWER REQUIRED WHEN AVAILABLE.
   At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a
private sewage disposal system, as provided in §
51.05, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with
this chapter, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private sewage
disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.25 FACILITIES TO BE MAINTAINED IN SANITARY MANNER.
   The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities
in a sanitary manner at all times, and at no expense to the village.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.26 PROVISIONS NOT TO INTERFERE WITH ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   No statement contained in this subchapter shall be construed to interfere
with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the village.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.27 BUILDING SEWER TO BE CONNECTED TO PUBLIC SEWER WHEN AVAILABLE; PRIVATE
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM TO BE FILLED.
   When a public sewer becomes available, the building sewer shall be connected
to the sewer within 60 days and the private sewage disposal system shall be
cleaned of sludge and filled with clean back-run gravel or dirt.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
BUILDING SEWER AND CONNECTION
§ 51.40 WRITTEN PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with, or opening
into; use; alter; or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without
first obtaining a written permit from the village.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.41 DISCHARGES TO COMPLY WITH STANDARDS.
   All disposal by any person into the sewer system is unlawful except those
discharges in compliance with federal stands promulgated pursuant to the
Federal Act and more stringent state and local standards.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.42 CLASSES OF PERMITS; APPLICATION.
   (A)   There shall be two classes of building permits: for residential,
wastewater service, and for commercial, institutional/government or industrial
wastewater service. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make
application on a special form furnished by the village. (See
Appendix A to this chapter.)
   (B)   The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans,
specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of
the village. A permit and inspection fee of $2,000 per unit for a residential
or commercial building sewer permit shall be paid to the village at the time
the application is filed. An industry, as a condition of permit authorization,
must provide information describing its wastewater constituents,
characteristics and type of activity.
   (C)   No building sewer permits shall be issued for service outside the
corporate limits of the village.
   (D)   No private sewage collection systems linked to either public or
private sewage treatment processes shall be allowed within the corporate limits
of the village.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 728, passed 9-15-97; Am. Ord. 836, passed 2-
17-03; Am. Ord. 943, passed 4-17-06; Am. Ord. 1044, passed 2-16-10)
§ 51.43 SUFFICIENT RESERVE CAPACITY REQUIRED.
   A building sewer permit will only be issued and a sewer connection shall
only be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the downstream sewerage
facilities, including sewers, pump stations and wastewater treatment
facilities, have sufficient reserve capacity to adequately and efficiently
handle the additional anticipated waste load.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.44 COSTS TO BE BORNE BY OWNER; INDEMNITY OF VILLAGE.
   All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the
village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned
by the installation of the building sewer.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.45 SEPARATE BUILDING SEWER FOR EVERY BUILDING.
   A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every
building, except that where one building stands at the rear of another on an
interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the
rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or driveway, the building
sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.46 OLD BUILDING SEWERS.
   Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when
they are found, on examination and test by the village, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.47 SIZE AND SLOPE.
   The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer,
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing,
testing and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of
the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the
village. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the
American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution Control Federation
Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois shall apply.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.48 ELEVATION OF BUILDING SEWER.
   Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an
elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by a means which is approved by
the village, and discharged to the building sewer.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.49 SURFACE RUNOFF AND GROUNDWATER.
   No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation
drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a
building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected directly or
indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.50 BUILDING SEWER TO CONFORM TO PROVISIONS.
   The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to
the requirements of the building and plumbing code, or other applicable rules
and regulations of the village, or the procedures set forth in appropriate
specifications of the American Society of Testing Materials, Water Pollution
Control Federation Manual of Practice No. 9, and Standard Specifications for
Water and Sewer Main Construction in Illinois. All such connections shall be
made gastight and watertight. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the village before installation.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.51 NOTIFICATION REQUIRED FOR INSPECTION.
   The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify at least 24 hours
in advance the Village Office when the building sewer is ready for inspection
and connection to the public sewer. The connection shall be made under the
supervision of the village or its representative.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.52 EXCAVATION TO BE BARRICADED AND LIGHTED; RESTORATION OF STREETS.
   All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the
work shall be restored in manner satisfactory to the village.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS
§ 51.65 DISCHARGE OF STORMWATER AND OTHER UNPOLLUTED DRAINAGE.
   (A)   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any stormwater,
surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated
cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
   (B)   Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to
such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers,
or to a natural outlet approved by the approving authority. Industrial cooling
water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged, on approval of the
village, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.66 PROHIBITED DISCHARGES TO PUBLIC SEWERS.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
   (A)   Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid or gas.
   (B)   Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewerage treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard
in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
   (C)   Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other
corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
   (D)   Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works such as, but not limited to, ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings; entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, and the like,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.67 DISCHARGE OF CERTAIN WASTES RESTRICTED.
   No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged the following described
substances, materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of
the village, that such wastes can harm either the sewers, sewage treatment
process, or equipment; have an adverse effect on the receiving stream, or
otherwise endanger life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In
forming this opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the village will
give consideration to such factors as the quantities of subject wastes in
relation to flows and velocities in the sewers; materials of construction of
the sewers; nature of sewage treatment process; capacity of the sewage
treatment plant; degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment
plant, and maximum limits established by regulatory agencies. The substances
prohibited are:
   (A)   Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F. (65° C.)
   (B)   Any water or waste containing toxic or poisonous materials; or oils,
whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32° F.
and 150° F. (0° C. and 65° C.)
   (C)   Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval
of the village.
   (D)   Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not.
   (E)   Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an excessive
chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material received in the
composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceeds the limits established
by the village for such materials.
   (F)   Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odor-
producing substances, in such concentration exceeding limits which may be
established by the village, as necessary, after treatment of the composite
sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal or other public agencies
of jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
   (G)   Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the village in compliance with applicable
state or federal regulations.
   (H)   Any wastes or waters having a pH in excess of 9.5.
   (I)   Any mercury or any of its compounds in excess of 0.0005 mg/l as Hg at
any time except as permitted by the village in compliance with applicable state
and federal regulations.
   (J)   Any cyanide in excess of 2.0 mg/l at any time except as permitted by
the village in compliance with applicable state and federal regulations.
   (K)   Materials which exert or cause:
      (1)   Unusual concentration of inert suspended solids (such as, but not
limited to, Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of dissolved
solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride).
      (2)   Excessive discoloration, including but not limited to dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions.
      (3)   Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine requirements in
such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage treatment
works.
      (4)   Unusual volume of load or concentration of wastes constituting
“slugs” as defined herein.
   (L)   Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed, or are
amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage treatment plant
effluent cannot meet the requirements of other agencies having jurisdiction
over discharge to the receiving waters.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.68 PRETREATMENT, EQUALIZATION OF WASTE FLOWS.
   (A)   If any waters or wastes are discharged to the public sewers, which
waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in §
51.67, and/or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided
in 40 CFR 403, June 26, 1978 and any amendments thereto, and which in the
judgment of the village may have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works,
process equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitute a public nuisance, the village may:
      (1)   Reject the wastes.
      (2)   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers.
      (3)   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
      (4)   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions
§
51.90.
   (B)   If the village permits the pretreatment of equalization of waste
flows, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject
to the review and approval of the approving authority, and subject to the
requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.69 GREASE, OIL AND SAND INTERCEPTORS.
   Grease traps, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided, when, in the
opinion of the village, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand or
other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required
for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the village, and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.70 PRELIMINARY TREATMENT FACILITIES.
   Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided, they
shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.71 CONTROL MANHOLE.
   Each industry shall be required to install a control manhole and, when
required by the village, the owner of any property serviced by a building sewer
carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole, together
with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the building sewer to
facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole,
when required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by the village. The manhole shall be
installed by the owner at his expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to
be safe and accessible at all times.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.72 MEASUREMENTS, TESTS AND ANALYSES.
   (A)   (1)   The owner of any property serviced by a building sewer carrying
industrial wastes shall provide laboratory measurements, tests and analyses of
waters and wastes to illustrate compliance with this chapter and any special
conditions for discharge established by the village or regulatory agencies
having jurisdiction over the drainage.
      (2)   The number, type and frequency of laboratory analyses to be
performed by the owner shall be as stipulated by the village, but no less than
once per year the industry must supply a complete analysis of the constituents
of the wastewater discharge to assure that compliance with the federal, state
and local standards are being met. The owner shall report the results of
measurements and laboratory analyses to the village at such times and in such a
manner as prescribed by the village. The owner shall bear the expense of all
measurements, analyses and reporting required by the village.
      (3)   At such times as deemed necessary the village reserves the right to
take measurements and samples for analysis by an outside laboratory service.
   (B)   All measurements, tests and analyses of the characteristics of wastes
and wastes in which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in
accordance with the last edition of IEPA Division of Laboratories Manual of
Laboratory Methods, and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or
upon suitable samples taken at the control manhole. In the event that no
special manhole has been required the control manhole shall be considered to be
the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by customarily
accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon the sewage works
and to determine the existence of hazards to life, limb and property. The
particular analyses involved will determine whether a 24-hour composite of all
outfalls of a premises is appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples
should be taken. Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses
are obtained from 24-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's are
determined from periodic grab samples.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
§ 51.73 SPECIAL AGREEMENTS OR ARRANGEMENTS.
   No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the village and any concern whereby an
industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the
village for treatment, subject to payment thereof, by the industrial concern,
provided that such payments are in accordance with federal and state guidelines
for user charge system.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87) Penalty, see §
51.99
CHARGES; BILLING
§ 51.85 USER CHARGE.
   (A)   Every person whose premises are served by the Authority will be
charged for the sewer services provided. A basic charge based on the water
meter readings, or if available, a discharge metering device approved by the
Authority, and the basic charges shall be as follows and are levied to defray
the cost of operation and maintenance and replacement of the treatment works:
      (1)   Minimum charge. The total minimum rate for customers residing
within the corporate limits of the village is $15.79 monthly based upon a
minimum usage of 1,700 gallons. The total minimum rate for customers residing
outside the corporate limits of the village is $23.69 monthly based upon a
minimum usage of 1,700 gallons.
      (2)   Basic user charges. For usage in excess of 1,700 gallons monthly,
in addition to the minimum charges above, $9.29 per 1,000 gallons metered shall
be the basic rate charge for customers residing within the corporate limits of
the village and $13.94 per 1,000 gallons metered shall be the basic rate charge
for customers residing outside the corporate limits of the village.
         (a)   Sewer connections only. The minimum charge for users of sewer
connections only shall be at the rate of $15.79 monthly for customers residing
within the corporate limits of the village and $23.69 monthly for customers
residing outside the corporate limits of the village. An additional $9.29 per
1,000 gallons of wastewater discharged into the sewer system in excess of the
minimum 1,700 gallons monthly usage shall be charged to customers residing
within the corporate limits of the village, and an additional $13.94 per 1,000
gallons of wastewater discharged into the sewer system in excess of the minimum
1,700 gallons monthly usage shall be charged to customers residing outside the
corporate limits of the village.
         (b)   Other sewer connections. All charges for use of sewer
connections where water is supplied thereto by the Authority subject to the
special provisions herein shall be as follows:
            1.   A minimum charge of $15.79 monthly for customers residing
within the corporate limits of the village, and $23.69 monthly for customers
residing outside the corporate limits of the village, which rates shall apply
as a service charge so long as the sewer connection is in service and
regardless whether or not water is used during the period, and which minimum
charges shall entitle the user to discharge 1,700 gallons of water monthly into
the sewer system.
            2.   For all water metered to said premises in excess of the 1,700
gallons, a charge therefor shall be at the rate of $9.29 per 1,000 gallons of
water metered for customers residing within the corporate limits of the
village, and at the rate of $13.94 per 1,000 gallons of water metered for
customers residing outside the corporate limits of the village. The above rates
shall apply to the amount of water passing through the water meter except when
an approved discharge metering system is utilized. In this case the rates shall
apply to that water discharged to the system.
   (B)   Basis of wastewater service charges. The wastewater service charge for
the use of and for service supplied by the wastewater facilities of the village
shall consist of a basic user charge for operation and maintenance plus
replacement.
      (1)   (a)   The basic user charge shall be based on water usage as
recorded by water meters and/or sewage meters for wastes having the following
normal domestic concentrations:
            1.   A five day, 20° C. biochemical oxygen demand (BOD of 204 mg/
l.)
            2.   A suspended solids (SS) content of 260 mg/l.
         (b)   It shall consist of operation and maintenance costs plus
replacement and shall be computed as follows:
            1.   Estimate wastewater volume, pounds of SS and pounds of BOD to
be treated.
            2.   Estimate the projected annual revenue required to operate and
maintain the wastewater facilities including a replacement fund for the year,
for all works categories.
            3.   Proportion the estimated O, M and R costs to each user class
by volume, suspended solids and BOD.
            4.   Proportion the estimated operation, maintenance and
replacement (O, M and R) costs to wastewater facility categories by volume,
suspended solids and BOD.
      (2)   Wastewater service charge shall be computed as follows:
         CW = CM + CDM + (Vu-X) Cu + (Vu-X) CUD + CS
         Where:
      CW      =   Amount of waste service charge ($) per billing period.
      CM      =   Minimum charge for Operation, Maintenance and Replacement
      CDM      =   Minimum charge for debt service
      Vu      =   Wastewater Volume for the billing period
      X      =   Allowable consumption in gallons for the minimum charge
      Cu      =   Basic user rate for operation, maintenance and replacement
   (C)   Notification. The users of the wastewater treatment service will be
notified annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and that
portion of the user charges which are attributed to the wastewater treatment
operation, maintenance and replacement.
   (D)   Annual review. The adequacy of the wastewater service charge shall be
reviewed not less often than annually, by Certificate Public Accountants for
the village in their annual audit report. The wastewater service charge shall
be revised periodically to reflect a charge in local capital costs including
replacement costs.
   (E)   Measurement of flow. The volume of flow used for computing basic user
charges shall be the metered water consumption read to the lowest even
increments of 100 gallons.
      (1)   If the person discharging wastes into the public sewers procures
any part, or all, of his or her water from sources other than the Public
Waterworks System, all or a part of which is discharged into the public sewers,
the person shall install and maintain, at his or her expense, water meters of a
type approved by the village for the purpose of determining the volume of water
obtained from these other sources.
      (2)   Devices for measuring the volume of waste discharged may be
required by the village if these volumes cannot otherwise be determined from
the metered water consumption records.
      (3)   Metering devices for determining the volume of waste shall be
installed, owned and maintained by the owner. Following approval and
installation, such meters may not be removed, unless service is canceled,
without the consent of the village.
   (F)   Automatic increase. In the event that the water supplier for the
village raises water rates and charges for the cost and use of water being
supplied, then those rates and charges shall be automatically applied to the
rates charged by the village to its customers.
   (G)   The rates and charges prescribed in division (A) of this section and
its subdivisions shall increase by 4% on January 1, 2020, and shall increase by
an additional 2% each year thereafter on January 1, with the final increase to
take place on January 1, 2026.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 526, passed 9-8-87; Am. Ord. 536, passed 5-
16-88; Am. Ord. 574, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 621, passed 11-16-92; Am. Ord.
649, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 692, passed 10-16-95; Am. Ord. 772, passed 6-5-00;
Am. Ord. 797, passed 5-7-01; Am. Ord. 943, passed 4-17-06; Am. Ord. 977, passed
8-6-07; Am. Ord. 978, passed 8-20-07; Am. Ord. 1056, passed 4-19-10; Am. Ord.
1083, passed 10-3-11; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 1-18-17; Am. Ord. 1198, passed 9–9-
19)
§ 51.86 BILLING.
   (A)   The rates or charges for service shall be payable monthly or bi-
monthly depending on the classification of service for which bills are
rendered. The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the
service shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service to such
premises and the service is furnished to the premises by the village only upon
the condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the services
are jointly and severally liable therefor to the village.
   (B)   Bills for sewer service shall be sent out by the Village Treasurer on
the first day of the month or bi-monthly succeeding the period for which the
service is billed.
   (C)   All sewer bills are due and payable 15 days after being sent out. A
penalty of 10% shall be added to all bills not paid by the 15th day after they
have been rendered.
   (D)   If it is determined that a water leak has occurred between the water
meter and the premises, the sewer bill shall be adjusted to an amount which
shall be the average of the regular rate for the usage over the previous three
months before the leak was located.
   (E)   Anyone responsible for the payment of sewer services may request that
a meter be reread. If it is determined that the original reading was accurate,
there will be a $25 charge to the premises which shall be stated on the next
month’s bill. If it is determined that the meter was inaccurate, no additional
charge shall be assessed.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 836, passed 2-17-03)
§ 51.87 MAJOR LEAKS.
   (A)   If the customer establishes that a major leak for a billing period has
occurred, the customer shall pay water and sewer bills based upon the first
25,000 gallons of water received by the customer at the regular rate
established by the village ordinances.
   (B)   If the customer establishes that due to a water leak water in excess
of 25,000 gallons has been received by the customer, the customer shall pay for
any water in excess of 25,000 gallons based upon the actual cost incurred by
the village to purchase the water; the customer shall not be required to pay
for any sewer usage based upon water received in excess of 25,000 gallons.
   (C)   No water leak will be considered as major unless at least 25,000
gallons of water has been received by the customer for a billing period.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the customer to establish to the
complete satisfaction of the village that a major water leak has occurred.
   (E)   Each billing period shall be reviewed individually.
(Ord. 1021, passed 11-17-08)
§ 51.88 DELINQUENT BILLS.
   (A)   If the charges for such services are not paid within 30 days after the
rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall be discontinued
subject to division (B) of this section and shall not be reinstated until all
claims are settled.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
   (B)   (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city’s form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his or her bill
shall have a right to a hearing at which time he or she may be represented in
person and by counsel or any other person of his or her choosing and may
present orally or in writing his or her complaint and contentions to the city
official in charge of utility billing. This official shall be authorized to
order that the customer’s service not be discontinued and shall have the
authority to make a final determination of the customer’s complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
      (3)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be instated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid and any deposit required
has been made.
§ 51.89 LIEN; NOTICE; FORECLOSURE.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever a bill for sewer service remains unpaid for 60 days for
monthly service or 90 days for bi-monthly service after it has been rendered,
the Village Treasurer shall file with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement
of lien claim. This statement shall contain the legal description of the
premises served, the amount of the unpaid bill, and a notice that the village
claims a lien for this amount as well as for all charges subsequent to the
period covered by the bill.
      (2)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises
and the Village Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his or her address be known to the Treasure, whenever
such bill remains unpaid for the period of 60 days for a monthly bill or 90
days for a bi-monthly bill after it has been rendered.
      (3)   The failure of the Village Treasurer to record such lien or to mail
such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing
section.
   (B)   Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges shall be sold for
nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be applied to pay
the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the foreclosure of
statutory liens. Such foreclosure shall be by bill-in equity in the name of the
village. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to institute
such proceedings in the name of the village in any court having jurisdiction
over such matters against any property for which the bill has remained unpaid
60 days for monthly service and 90 days in the case of a bi-monthly bill after
it has been rendered.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.90 DISPOSITION OF REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the sewerage
system shall be deposited in the sewerage account of the Sewerage Fund. All
such revenues and moneys shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and
apart from his private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the
village and all of said sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be
delivered to the Village Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the
same, or at such more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed
by the President and Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the
sewerage system and all other funds and moneys incidental to the operation of
such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the
amount of the fund designated as the “Sewerage Fund of the Village.”
   (C)   The Village Treasurer shall administer such fund in every respect in
the manner provided by ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-40 through 3.1-35.85.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.91 ACCESS TO RECORDS.
   The IEPA or USEPA or its authorized representative shall have access to any
books, documents, papers and records of the village which are applicable to the
village system of user charges or industrial cost recovery for the purpose of
making audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure
compliance with the terms of the special and general conditions to any state
grant.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
§ 51.92 ACCOUNTS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   The Village Treasurer shall establish a proper system of accounts and
shall keep proper books, records, and accounts in which complete and correct
entries shall be made of all transactions relative to the sewerage system, and
at regular annual intervals the Village Treasurer shall cause to be made an
audit by an independent auditing concern of the books to show the receipts and
disbursements of the sewerage system.
   (B)   In addition to the customary operating statements, the annual audit
report shall also reflect the revenues and operating expenses of the wastewater
facilities, including a replacement cost, to indicate that sewer service
charges under the waste cost recovery system and capital amounts required to be
recovered under the industrial cost recovery system do in fact meet these
regulations. In this regard, the financial information to be shown in the audit
report shall include the following:
      (1)   Flow data showing total gallons received at the wastewater plant
for the current fiscal year.
      (2)   Billing data to show total number of gallons billed per fiscal
year.
      (3)   Number of users connected to the system.
      (4)   Number of nonmetered users.
      (5)   A list of users discharging nondomestic and industrial wastes and
volume of waste discharged.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87; Am. Ord. 574, passed 10-25-89)
§ 51.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person found to be violating any provision of this chapter, except
§§
51.40 through
51.52, shall be served by the village with written notice stating the nature of
the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory
correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in
such notice, permanently cease all violations. The village may revoke any
permit for sewage disposal as a result of any violation of any provision of
this chapter.
   (B)   Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in §§
51.40 through
51.52 shall be guilt of a misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined
in an amount not less than $25 per day nor more than $500 per day. Each day in
which any such violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
   (C)   Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall
become liable to the village by reasons of such violation.
(Ord. 517, passed 4-6-87)
APPENDIX A: APPLICATIONS
Section
   
1.   Private sewage disposal application
   
2.   Residential or commercial building sewer application
§ 1. PRIVATE SEWAGE DISPOSAL APPLICATION.
   To the Village of Millstadt:
A.   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the  (Owner, Owner's Agent)
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install sanitary sewage disposal facilities to
serve the  (Residence, Commercial Building, etc.)  at said location.
   1.   The proposed facilities include:
                                                                                
to be constructed in complete accordance with the plans and specifications
attached hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
   2.   The area of the property is           square feet.
   3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the work
is:         .
   4.   The maximum number of persons to be served by the proposed facilities
is:                    .
   5.   The locations and nature of all sources of private or public water
supply within the one hundred (100) feet (30.5 meters) of any boundary of said
property are shown on the plat attached hereunto as Exhibit “B”.
B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
   1.   To furnish any additional information relating to the proposed work
that shall be requested by the Village.
   2.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Municipal Code, of the
Village of Millstadt, and of all other pertinent ordinances or regulations that
may be adopted in the future.
   3.   To operate and maintain the wastewater disposal facilities covered by
this application in sanitary manner at all times, in compliance with all
requirements of the Village and at no expense to the Village.
§ 2. RESIDENTIAL OR COMMERCIAL BUILDING SEWER APPLICATION.
To the Village of Millstadt:
A.   THE UNDERSIGNED, being the  (Owner, Owner's Agent)  of the property
located at  (Number) (Street)
DOES HEREBY REQUEST a permit to install and connect a building to serve the
(Residence, Store, Plant, etc.)  at said location.
   1.   The following indicated fixtures will be connected to the proposed
building sewer:
 
Number     Fixtures      Number     Fixtures
     �Kitchen Sinks      �Water Closets
     �Lavatories         �Bath Tubs
     �Laundry Tubs       �Showers 
     �Urinals           �Garbage Grinders
 
      Specify other fixtures
                                                                                                
   2.   The maximum number of persons who will use the above fixtures is
                            .
   3.   The name and address of the person or firm who will perform the
proposed work is                 .
   4.   Plans and specifications for the proposed building sewer are attached
hereunto as Exhibit “A”.
B.   In consideration of the granting of this permit, THE UNDERSIGNED AGREES:
   1.   To accept and abide by all provisions of the Village Code of the
Village of Millstadt and of all pertinent ordinances or regulations that may be
adopted in the future.
   2.   To maintain the building sewer at no expense to the Village.
   3.   To notify the Village when the building sewer is ready for inspection
and connection to the public seer, but before any portion of the work is
covered.
DATE:                             SIGNED:  (Applicant)
     (Address of Applicant)
(Certification by Village Treasurer)
$                 connection fee paid.
$                 inspection fee paid.
Application approved and permit issued:
DATE:                             SIGNED:  (Approving Authority)
CHAPTER 52: WATER
Section
General Provisions
   
52.01   Definitions
   
52.02   Tampering with equipment prohibited
   
52.03   Use of groundwater as potable water supply prohibited
Water Service
   
52.15   All service to be metered
   
52.16   Application for taps and service connections
   
52.17   Meters to be open to inspection
   
52.18   Meter damaged; cost of repair
   
52.19   Placement of meter; cost to relocate
   
52.20   Village not liable for interruption of supply
   
52.21   Inspection by village
   
52.22   Water usage detrimental to system
   
52.23   Electric ground wires
   
52.24   Shortage and purity of supply
   
52.25   Noncompliance with rules
   
52.26   Fire hydrants
   
52.27   Rules to become part of contract
   
52.28   Tampering with waterworks or supply system
   
52.29   Resale of water
Connections; Extensions
   
52.40   Potable water service connection
   
52.41   Cross-connection control
   
52.42   Watermain extension
Fire Mains
   
52.55   Private fire connections
   
52.56   Issuance of special permit for connection and extension of fire main
   
52.57   Expense of fire mains
   
52.58   Fire connection fees
Charges; Billings
   
52.70   User charge
   
52.71   Billing
   
52.72   Delinquent bills; lien
   
52.73   Disposition of revenues
   
52.74   Special provisions
   
52.75   Water service billing deposit
   
52.76   Metered charges
   
52.77   Appeals
Administration and Enforcement
   
52.85   Village or duly authorized employees to observe safety rules
   
52.86   Right of entry
   
52.87   Revocation of permit
   
52.88   Civil action
   
52.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 52.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. The Illinois Environmental Protection Agency [IEPA].
   APPROVED. Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
   AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM. Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
   BACKFLOW. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances into
the distribution pipes of a potable water system from any other source other
than the intended source of the potable water supply.
   BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. Any device, method or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in this state must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
   CONSUMER or CUSTOMER. The owner, official custodian or person in control of
any premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
   CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM. Any water system located on the customer's
premises. A building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water
system.
   CONTAMINATION. An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
   CROSS-CONNECTION. Any physical connection or arrangement between two
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
   DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
   DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY. An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valve approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
   FIXED PROPER AIR GAP. The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
   HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting from a real or potential danger to the health and well-
being of consumers. The word “severe” as used to qualify HEALTH HAZARD means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
   INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION. A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a safe
potable water system.
   INSPECTION. A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.
   NONPOTABLE WATER. Water not safe for drinking, personal or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604.
   PLUMBING. The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or
extension of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping,
fixtures, appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes,
including without limitations lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a
private water supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or
at the curb to, within and about any building or buildings where a person or
persons, live, work or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge
of piping units to and including pressure tanks in water supply systems.
Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a
building drain and a sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any
building or buildings where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the
point of connection of such building drain to the building sewer or private
sewage disposal system five feet beyond the foundation walls.
   POLLUTION. The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as to
constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
   POTABLE WATER. Water which meets the requirements of 35 Ill. Adm. Code 604
for drinking, culinary and domestic purposes.
   POTENTIAL CROSS-CONNECTION. A fixture or appurtenance with threaded nose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
   PROCESS FLUID(S). Any fluid or solution which may be chemically,
biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration
such as would constitute a health, pollution or system hazard if introduced
into the public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not
limited to:
      (1)   Polluted or contaminated waters;
      (2)   Process waters;
      (3)   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which
may have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
      (4)   Cooling waters;
      (5)   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells,
lakes, streams or irrigation systems;
      (6)   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
      (7)   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids
used in industrial or other processes, or for firefighting purposes;
   PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY. All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively or severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least 15 service connections or which regularly serve at
least 25 persons at least 60 days per year. A PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY is either a
community water supply or a noncommunity water supply.
   REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE. A device containing a
minimum of two independently acting check valves together with an automatically
operated pressure differential relief valve located between the two check
valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow-and at the
cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two checks shall be less
than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check valve, the
differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall operate to
maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the supply
pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shut-off valves located at each
end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly located test
cocks.
   SERVICE CONNECTION. The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances,
at the watermain through which water is supplied to the user.
   SURVEY. The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping
system regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply
system and must include the location, type and  most recent inspection and
testing date of all cross-connection control devices and methods located within
that customer's piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should
not be an actual plumbing inspection.
   SYSTEM HAZARD. A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
   USED WATER. Any water supplied by a public water supply system after is has
passed through the service connection and is no longer under the control of the
village.
   WATER PURVEYOR. The owner of a public water system.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.02 TAMPERING WITH EQUIPMENT PROHIBITED.
   No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break,
damage, destroy or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which
is a part of the water works. Any person violating this provision shall be
subject to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.03 USE OF GROUNDWATER AS POTABLE WATER SUPPLY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The use or attempt to use groundwater as a potable water supply within
the area described on Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance 1283, passed 5-28-24,
and Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance 1289, passed 10-28-24, by the
installation or drilling of wells or by any other method is hereby prohibited.
This prohibition specifically includes the Village of Millstadt.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
limited liability company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
trust, estate, political subdivision, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents, or assigns.
      (2)   POTABLE WATER. Any water used for human or domestic consumption,
including, but not limited to, water used for drinking, bathing, swimming,
washing dishes, or preparing foods.
   (C)   Any person violating the provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of up to $500 for each violation.
(Ord. 1182, passed 10-22-18; Am. Ord. 1283, passed 5-28-24; Am. Ord. 1289,
passed 10-28-24)
WATER SERVICE
§ 52.15 ALL SERVICE TO BE METERED.
   All water service, whether for domestic, commercial or industrial use shall
be metered. All meters shall be so placed and installed as to render the same
accessible at all times for the purpose of reading or repairing, and so as to
be free from danger of freezing. Meters outside of a building shall be set in a
suitable meter box approved by the village. Water will not be turned on for new
customers until the meter has been installed and all other requirements of this
chapter on the part of the property owner have been fully complied with. Multi-
unit residential, commercial or industrial buildings shall have a separate
meter installed per unit. All new mobile home park developments shall be
required to have a separate meter installed per mobile home unit; a single or
shared meter shall no longer be permitted.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.16 APPLICATION FOR TAPS AND SERVICE CONNECTIONS.
   An applicant desiring a water tap or service connection with the waterworks
system of the village, shall file a written application at the Village Hall,
signed by the owner of the property for which the tap or service connection is
desired, or by the duly authorized agent of such owner. The application shall
be accompanied by payment of the fee hereinafter prescribed to cover the cost
of such service connection and meter; in the event such application is made by
an agent for the owner, then the application shall also be accompanied by the
written authorization of the owner to the agent for making the application.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.17 METERS TO BE OPEN TO INSPECTION.
   All water meters and water fixtures, connections and appurtenances on
private property connected with the waterworks system of the village shall be
open to the inspection by the proper officers and employees of the village at
all reasonable hours.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.18 METER DAMAGED; COST OF REPAIR.
   Whenever a meter is found to have been damaged by hot water being forced
back into it from the consumer's hot water or heating apparatus, or for any
other cause within control of the consumer, the consumer shall pay the village
for the actual cost of the removal, repairing and replacing of the damaged
meter and all previous water bills shall be corrected on an estimated basis to
cover such period as it appears that the meter was out of order for such
damage.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.19 PLACEMENT OF METER; COST TO RELOCATE.
   The village shall no longer permit the installation of meters inside homes,
businesses, industries, and the like. Furthermore, whenever an existing inside
meter is found to be defective and in need of replacement, a new meter and
appurtenances shall be installed by the village outside of a home, business,
industry, and the like in accordance with this chapter. Fifty percent of the
village's cost to relocate a meter to the outside shall be paid by the
customers.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.20 VILLAGE NOT LIABLE FOR INTERRUPTION OF SUPPLY.
   (A)   The village shall have the right to shut off the supply of water
whenever it is necessary to make repairs, improvements, enforce rules, or for
any operating reason. In all cases, if possible, as reasonable notice as
circumstances allow, will be given to consumers, but in emergencies, the water
may be shut off without notice. All hot water faucets shall be left open during
any shut-off, to prevent damage to plumbing. Such necessary work will be done
as rapidly as may be practical and whenever feasible at such times as will
cause the least inconvenience. The village shall not be held responsible for
liable because of any shut-off of supply for any direct or resultant damages to
any person, company or consumer, or to any pipe, fixtures or plumbing.
   (B)   Water for steam boilers, gas engines, ice plants or other industrial
use, will not be furnished by direct pressure from the mains, but only to tanks
holding ample reserve supply. Should any equipment be supplied direct from
mains, then in case of any shut-off of water, the village will not be held
responsible or liable for any direct or resulting damage because of interrupted
supply, insufficient pressure, or otherwise.
   (C)   Whenever watermains, pipes and service connections are taken up, shut
off, or interfered with by reason of any village street improvements, the
village will endeavor to maintain service so far as reasonably possible, but
will not be directly or indirectly liable for any interruption, poor pressure,
or damage of any kind to anyone affected thereby.
   (D)   The village expressly stipulates with all its consumers and other
persons that it will not insure or be responsible or liable in any manner for
any losses or damages, direct or resultant, by reason of any fire, and all
water service furnished shall always be conditional upon acts of God,
inevitable accidents, fire, strikes, riots, war, or any other cause not within
the reasonable control of the village.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.21 INSPECTION BY VILLAGE.
   The village shall have access to all portions of the premises of the
consumer at any reasonable time for inspection of the use of water, and the
consumer's pipe, fixtures, plumbing, and any other apparatus in any manner
connected to the water system of the village. The village shall have the right
and option to demand change or stopping of use or to require any repair,
change, removal or improvement of any pipe, fixture, plumbing or other
apparatus that would in any manner affect the water supply or system of the
village or the supply or fixtures of other customers.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.22 WATER USAGE DETRIMENTAL TO SYSTEM.
   The village shall have the right to refuse water service, or to discontinue
water service, without notice at any time to any consumer if the village finds
any apparatus or appliances that the operation of which will be detrimental to
the water system of the village, or to any or all of its consumers. Standpipes,
hydrants, gate valves and any other apparatus that cause water hammer or any
danger to the water system or other consumer's plumbing shall be immediately
repaired or removed upon notice from the village, or at its option, the village
may immediately discontinue the service, without notice and without any
liability for direct or resulting damages therefrom.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.23 ELECTRIC GROUND WIRES.
   All persons are strictly forbidden to attach any electric ground wire to any
plumbing or water piping which is or may be connected to any water service
pipe, water meter, or watermain belonging to the village. The village will hold
the owner of the premises responsible and liable for any damage to the property
or injury to the employees of the village caused by such ground wire. All
owners and consumers shall remove any existing ground wires immediately upon
written notice from the village. If not so disconnected after five days'
written notice, the village, through its officials may enter the property and
remove such ground wires and the consumer shall pay all costs.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.24 SHORTAGE AND PURITY OF SUPPLY.
   The village shall not be held responsible for, or in any manner liable to
any person, company, consumer or public body, for any claim or damage either
direct or resultant because any shortage of water supply, any shut-off of water
supply for any reason, any bursting or leakage of either the consumer's or
village's mains, pipes and fixtures, and pollution or impurity in water supply,
or any fire or water damage.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.25 NONCOMPLIANCE WITH RULES.
   If any consumer fails to comply fully with any of the rules and regulations
in force, the village shall notify the consumer of such failure. If the
consumer does not remedy same, as the rules provide, and within a reasonable
time, the village shall have the right to discontinue service. Except in cases
of nonpayment, emergency, necessity, or as otherwise provided, the village will
not discontinue service for violation of any rules until five days after notice
has been given and violation has not been remedied.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.26 FIRE HYDRANTS.
   (A)   All hydrants shall be owned, maintained and used only by the village.
Use of water from fire hydrants by contractors and other shall be only upon
permission by the village after approved application to the village.
   (B)   The village shall not be held liable and will not assume any
responsibility for the condition of any fire hydrant inside or outside the
village limits, or the pressure or amount of water obtainable therefrom, or any
damages, either direct or resultant because of the condition, pressure or
amount of water available at any fire hydrant.
   (C)   All public fire hydrants outside of any city limits owned by the
village will be maintained in as good order as reasonably possible, but the
village will not undertake or assume any responsibility or liability for their
condition, use or abuse. Such public fire hydrants shall be used only for the
purpose of extinguishing fire except when the village may issue a special
permit for their use to contractors who shall then be responsible for the
hydrants and the use of water from them.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.27 RULES TO BECOME PART OF CONTRACT.
   All of the rules and regulations concerning the use of the facilities of the
water plant and the consumption of water shall be adopted and the same shall
become part of the contract with every water consumer and every water consumer
shall be considered to take water from the village, subject thereto and bound
thereby.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.28 TAMPERING WITH WATERWORKS OR SUPPLY SYSTEM.
   It shall be unlawful for any person not authorized by the village to tamper
with, alter or injure any part of the village waterworks or supply system, or
any meter inside or outside the village limits.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.29 RESALE OF WATER.
   No water shall be resold or distributed by the recipient or consumer thereof
from the village supply to any premises other than that for which application
has been made and the meter installed.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89) Penalty, see §
52.99
CONNECTIONS; EXTENSIONS
§ 52.40 POTABLE WATER SERVICE CONNECTION.
   (A)   No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public water main or appurtenance
thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the village.
   (B)   (1)   A permit and inspection fee of $2,000 shall be paid to the
village at the time an application is filed for potable water service. For
larger service pipe or extraordinary work, the village shall charge time and
materials used plus 15% to be paid by the applicant for water service in
addition to the $2,000 permit fee. Furthermore, all applicants shall pay the
fee of $2,000 per service connection installed plus the cost of any and all
appurtenances provided by the village if the service connection is installed by
those other than the village.
      (2)   The rules and regulations stated above shall also apply to
customers outside the corporate limits, except the permit and inspection fee
for customers located outside of the corporate limits of the village shall be
$3,000.
   (C)   In some older areas served by the village water system, water mains
are already installed but the location of said mains is sometimes uncertain. If
application is made for service to property in such areas, it shall be the
responsibility of the village to tap the water main and extend a service line
to the property at the owner's expense. It is the responsibility of the owner
and the builder to provide the meter box, yoke, and lid. The village then will
provide and install a ¾ inch by 5/8 inch meter.
      (1)   If the installation of said service requires a larger service pipe,
larger meter, or extraordinary work, the village shall charge the applicant the
established permit and inspection fee, plus time and materials used, plus 15%
of said time and materials.
      (2)   The applicant by requesting potable water service connection,
indemnifies the village from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be caused by the installation of said connection.
      (3)   It shall remain the responsibility of the property owner to install
and maintain the service connection with tracer wire between the village
provided meter and any building or structure on the property, and to bear all
costs and expense incidental to said installation and connection.
   (D)   In newer areas served by the village water system, the location of
water mains can be more accurately determined. If the application is for
service to property in such areas, the established permit and inspection fee
still applies, but responsibility for tapping the water main, installing a
corporation stop extending the service line with tracer wire to the property
and installing the meter box, yoke and lid shall rest with the property owner
and the builder and the developer. The village shall still have responsibility
for providing the ¾ inch by inch meter and installing same in the meter box
provided by the property owner and the builder and the developer. It shall
remain the responsibility of the property owner and the builder and the
developer to install and maintain the service connection with tracer wire
between the village provided meter and any building or structure on the
property.
   (E)   Service connections made by anyone other than the village shall be
supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information considered
pertinent in the judgment of the village.
   (F)   Old service connections may be reused for new buildings only when they
are found, through examination and testing by the village, to meet all
requirements of this chapter.
   (G)   A permit for a potable water service connection shall not be issued by
the village unless it can be demonstrated that the distribution system has
adequate capacity to service the applicant's anticipated potable water demand.
   (H)   The village in its sole discretion shall determine if an application
for service should be processed under division (C) or (D) of this section.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 696, passed - -96; Am. Ord. 727, passed 9-
15-97; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-17-03; Am. Ord. 943, passed 4-17-06; Am. Ord.
1072, passed 12-20-10) Penalty, see §
52.99
§ 52.41 CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL.
   Rule 890.1510 of the Illinois Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code 890.1510,
requires protection of the potable water system from contamination due to
backflow or back siphonage of contaminants through the water service
connection. Furthermore, the Illinois Pollution Control Board Regulations, 35
Ill. Adm. Code 601, et. seq. requires an active program of cross connection
control which will prevent the contamination of all potable water supply
systems. In order to accomplish these goals it is necessary to introduce
restrictions for cross-connection control.
   (A)   Policy. The consumer shall be responsible for protection of the public
water supply system from the contamination due to backflow or back-siphonage of
contaminants through the consumer's water service connection. If, required by
the village, the consumer shall install an approved backflow prevention device
at each service connection to his premises. The consumer shall immediately
install such approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or
inability on the part of the consumer to install such device or devices
immediately shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the
premises until such device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall
retain records of installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in
division (D) of this section for a period of at least five years.
   (B)   Water system.  
      (1)   The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
      (2)   The public water supply system shall consist of the source
facilities and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities
of the potable water system under the control of the village up to the point
where the consumer's water system begins.
      (3)   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized
in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
      (4)   The public water supply distribution system shall include the
network of conduits used to deliver water from the source of the consumer's
water system.
      (5)   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the
facilities beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public
water supply distribution system to points of use.
   (C)   Cross-connection prohibited. Connections between potable water systems
and other systems or equipment containing water or other substances of unknown
or questionable quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-
connection control devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to
insure proper operation on a continuing basis.
      (1)   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
      (2)   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply.
   (D)   Survey and investigations.
      (1)   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to
the approved cross- connection control device inspector for the inspection of
the presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises,
and testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection control devices within
the consumer's premises.
      (2)   On request by the village's authorized representatives, the
consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or
water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open
at all reasonable times to the village for the verification of information
submitted by the water consumer to the public water supply custodian regarding
cross-connection inspection results.
      (3)   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connections control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1).
      (4)   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow
into the public water system by ensuring that:
         (a)   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
         (b)   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.
         (c)   Cross-connections control devices shall be inspected at the time
of installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
         (d)   Testing and records.
            1.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
            2.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall
be available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with ILCS Ch.
415, Act 5, § 4(e).
            3.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI, and type and date of repairs.
            4.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include: date of
each test; name and approval number of person performing the test; test
results; repairs or servicing required; repairs and date completed; and serving
performed and date completed.
   (E)   Where protection is required.
      (1)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 680. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
a consumer's water system serving the premises, where in the judgement of the
village, actual or potential hazards to the public water supply system exist.
      (2)   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
         (a)   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless such auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the village and the source is
approved by the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
         (b)   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual or potential hazard to the public water supply system. This shall
include premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the village.
         (c)   Premises having internal cross-connections that, in the
judgement of the village and the Cross-connection Control Device Inspector, are
not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to
determine whether or not cross-connections exist.
         (d)   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross-connection survey.
         (e)   Premises have a repeated history of cross-connections being
established or reestablished.
      (3)   An approved backflow device shall be installed on all connections
to the public water supply as described in the Plumbing Code, 77 Ill. Adm. Code
890 and the Agency's regulations 35 Ill. Adm. Code 653. In addition, an
approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each service line to
all consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited to, the
following types of facilities unless the village determines that no actual or
potential hazard to the public water supply system exist:
         (a)   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics, nursing homes.
         (b)   Laboratories.
         (c)   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
         (d)   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
         (e)   Food or beverage processing plants.
         (f)   Chemical plants.
         (g)   Metal plating industries.
         (h)   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
         (i)   Radioactive material processing plants and or nuclear reactors.
         (j)   Car washes.
         (k)   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and truck.
         (l)   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks.
   (F)   Type of protection required.
      (1)   The type of protection required under division (E) of this section
shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists as follows:
         (a)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed
where the public water system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
         (b)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
         (c)   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved
reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be polluted with substances that could cause
a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
      (2)   The type of protection required under division (E) of this section
shall be an approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principle backflow prevention device.
      (3)   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used
for a fire protection system, reduced pressure principle backflow presenters
shall be installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply
when:
         (a)   The fire safety system contains antifreeze, fire retardant or
other chemicals;
         (b)   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
         (c)   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source;
         (d)   There is a connection whereby another source can be connected to
the sprinkler system.
   (G)   Backflow prevention devices.
      (1)   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules
and regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-
Connection Control of the University of Southern California, American Water
Works Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American
National Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation
to be in compliance with applicable industry specifications.
      (2)   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with
35 Ill. Adm. Code 653.802, and only as specified by the Research Foundation for
Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern California or applicable
industry specifications. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of the
device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be available
on- site.
   (H)   Inspection and maintenance.
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which
backflow prevention devices required by the regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance and repair made in accordance with the following
schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are specified in
manufacturer's instructions.
         (a)   Fixed proper air gap separation shall be inspected to document
that a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of
the service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and a least annually thereafter.
         (b)   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at
time of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within 15 days.
         (c)   Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention devices shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five
days.
      (2)   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to serve the device. Proof of approval shall be in writing.
      (3)   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
      (4)   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
         (a)   Date of each test or visual inspection;
         (b)   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
         (c)   Test results;
         (d)   Repairs or servicing required;
         (e)   Repairs and date completed; and
         (f)   Servicing performed and date completed.
      (5)   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations
are found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of
the consumer without delay.
      (6)   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made
inoperative, removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific
authorization by the village.
   (I)   Booster pumps.
      (1)   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut-off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line of the suction side of the pump drops to 20 psi or less.
      (2)   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low
pressure cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the village
at least once a year, that the device is operable.
   (J)   Violations.
      (1)   The village shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice to
the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any backflow
prevention device required by these regulations is not installed, tested,
maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the village, or if it is
found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if
an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a low pressure
cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and maintained in
working order.
      (2)   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the
consumer has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance
with these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent of Water,
and the required reconnection fee is paid.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.42 WATERMAIN EXTENSION.
   (A)   Application. Any person, firm or corporation having an interest in
real estate within the service areas of the village water distribution system
and desiring the extension of watermains to their premises shall make
application therefore to the village and shall include a plat showing the area
to be served by the watermain extension.
   (B)   Design of proposed extension. Detailed construction plans of proposed
watermain extension accompanied by completed IEPA permit applications shall be
submitted by developers of real estate to the village. The size and length of
watermains, plan and profile, location of fire hydrants, water service valves
and other appurtenances shall be included on these plans. Furthermore, the
following general requirements shall apply:
      (1)   All mains shall be a minimum of six inches in diameter but sized so
that fire protection service may be rendered to all lots on premises to be
served by the main and any possible extension thereof.
      (2)   All plastic watermains shall be manufactured in compliance with
AWWA C-900, DR-18 pipe with cast iron pipe equivalent outside diameters and all
fittings shall be ductile iron mechanical joint and cement mortar lined unless
otherwise approved by the village.
      (3)   Fire hydrants shall be so located that no premises will be more
than 400 feet from a fire hydrant.
      (4)   No “dead end” watermain extension shall be permitted unless, as
determined by the village, the construction of a “looped” or interconnected
extension is not feasible.
      (5)   The village may require a proposed extension to be connected to the
distribution system at a point judged by the Village to be adequate in capacity
to serve the applicants property. The village shall not be required to allow
the connection of a proposed extension to the closest point of existing service
if such service is determined to be inadequate for a proposed extension.
      (6)   The village reserves the right to charge a developer that portion
of the construction costs for watermains which the village has installed
directly fronting his property or lot being developed.
      (7)   The village reserves the right to further extend or to allow
service connections to watermains constructed under this chapter.
      (8)   Extensions made under this chapter shall be and, shall remain the
property of the village.
      (9)   All developers shall present construction plans to the village. The
village shall charge the applicant proposing a watermain extension a fee for
the Village Engineer's review of the proposed construction plans. This fee
shall not exceed 1% of the construction cost.
      (10)    Obtaining all IEPA permits and approvals for the construction and
operation of a proposed watermain extension is the responsibility of the
applicant.
      (11)    Requirements regarding water mains as detailed in
Chapter 151 of this Code relating to subdivisions shall also govern the
construction of watermain extensions within the village.
      (12)    A bond shall be executed by the applicant and the contractor,
with sureties acceptable for the village for the faithful performance of the
proposed construction in full compliance with the approved plans and
specifications and in an amount equal to 150% of the estimated cost thereof.
      (13)    Prior to any construction, there shall be filed with the village
a policy of liability insurance, showing the village an insured party, covering
the proposed construction and in principal minimum amounts of $200,000 for
injury to one person, $400,000 for injuries to persons on one occasion, and
$100,000 for property damage for the purpose of protecting the village against
the claim or claims of any person or persons arising out of the construction,
other than those based upon Workman's Compensation.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
FIRE MAINS
§ 52.55 PRIVATE FIRE CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   All private fire connection mains, pipes, fire hydrants, standpipes,
automatic sprinklers and any and all other privately owned fire extinguishing
apparatus connected, shall be installed, maintained and used only by the owner
or consumer. No connection shall be made to any private fire main pipe or
apparatus from which water may be taken for any other purpose than actual fire
use. A sufficient number of gate valves shall be placed in the main fire line
in order that at the time of fire, portions of such line may be cut off if
broken. All fire mains, the construction and kind of hydrants and apparatus
shall be subject to the approval of the village. The owner shall furnish the
village a complete map showing kind, size and location of all private mains,
gates, hydrants and apparatus. No extensions, connections, or additions shall
be made for any purpose without the consent and approval of the village.
   (B)   The village shall have the right to make a small meter bypass test and
inspections of private main and apparatus at any time and in case any leakage
is found, the owner or consumer shall immediately repair or replace any
defective pipe or apparatus. In case any pipe or apparatus is found in
dangerous condition, the village may, at its option, immediately shut off such
private fire main connection and not turn it on until satisfactorily repaired
or replaced. The village, at its option, in case of defective pipe or
apparatus, or in case the village has any reason to believe that water is being
taken for any other purpose than extinguishing fire, may install after five
days' notice, a fire main meter at the sole cost and expense of the owner or
consumer, and charge thereafter for all water used or wasted at meter rates in
addition to the regular fire main connection rate. The village may place seals
on private hydrants and other outlets, and in case the same are found broken,
may install meter as provided above unless the village has been notified in
advance of any test to be made by the consumer.
   (C)   The village shall not be held responsible or liable for any direct or
resultant damages due to the condition, pressure, amount of water available, or
leakage of any private fire mains, hydrants or other apparatus, or because of
any shut-off's for nonpayment, to make tests or to enforce rules, or because of
any fire loss, or damage of any nature.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.56 ISSUANCE OF SPECIAL PERMIT FOR CONNECTION AND EXTENSION OF FIRE MAIN.
   Upon proper application, the Village Board of Trustees, upon vote of a
majority shall issue a special permit for the connection and extension of a
fire main into the applicant's property. All fire connections shall be a
minimum of six inches in diameter and shall not be used for private purposes
other than fire protection.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.57 EXPENSE OF FIRE MAINS.
   The expense of installing fire mains shall be borne by the applicant.
Maintenance of all fire service mains shall be at the expense of the applicant.
Furthermore, all maintenance performed on fire service mains located on public
property shall be done by, and under the direction of the village at the
expense of the owner.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.58 FIRE CONNECTION FEES.
   Annual service connection fees shall be charged as follows:
 
Item                                                                       Annual
                                                                           Fee
Fire hydrants                                                              $150.00/
                                                                           each
Automatic sprinkler connection                                             150.00/
                                                                           each
Automatic sprinkler heads                                                  0.15/
                                                                           each
Hose connection greater than 2½ inch in diameter, other than fire hydrant 75.00/
openings                                                                   each
Hose connection, 2½ inch in diameter, other than fire hydrant openings    40.00/
                                                                           each
Hose connection, 2-inch in diameter or less, other than fire hydrant       15.00/
openings                                                                   each
 
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
CHARGES; BILLINGS
§ 52.70 USER CHARGE.
   Every customer whose premises are served by the Authority shall be charged
for the potable water services provided. A user charge based on the water meter
readings shall be as follows and is hereby levied to defray the cost of
operation and maintenance of the potable water distribution system:
   (A)   Minimum charge. The total minimum charge is $9.74 monthly per
customer, and shall purchase up to a maximum of 1,700 gallons.
   (B)   Basic user charge. For usage in excess of 1,700 gallons monthly, in
addition to the minimum charge above, $6.00 per 1,000 gallons metered shall be
charged.
   (C)   Users residing outside of corporate limits.
      (1)   Minimum charge. The total minimum charge is $15.27 monthly per
customers residing outside of the corporate limits and shall purchase up to a
maximum of 1,700 gallons.
      (2)   Basic user charge. For customers residing outside of the corporate
limits and using in excess of 1,700 gallons monthly, in addition to the minimum
charge above, $9.59 per 1,000 gallons metered shall be charged.
   (D)   The rates and charges prescribed in divisions (A), (B), (C) of this
section and their subdivisions shall increase by 4% on January 1, 2020, and
shall increase by an additional 2% each year thereafter on January 1, with the
final increase to take place on January 1, 2026.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 620, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 648, passed - -
; Am. Ord. 692, passed 10-16-95; Am. Ord. 772, passed 6-5-00; Am. Ord. 943,
passed 4-17-06; Am. Ord. 1154, passed 1-18-17; Am. Ord. 1198, passed 9–9-19)
§ 52.71 BILLING.
   (A)   The rates or charges for service shall be payable bi-monthly depending
on the classification of service for which bills are rendered.
   (B)   A penalty of 10% per month shall be added to all bills not paid by the
due date indicated on the bill.
   (C)   The adequacy of the water service charge shall be reviewed not less
often than annually by certified public accountants for the village in their
annual audit report. The water service charge shall be revised periodically to
reflect a change in local capital costs or operation, maintenance plus
replacement costs.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 759, passed 12-6-99)
§ 52.72 DELINQUENT BILLS; LIEN.
   (A)   Delinquent bills. If the charges for such services are not paid on or
before the due date listed on the rendition of each bill for such services,
water services shall be discontinued subject to division (D) of this section
and shall not be reinstated until all claims are settled. A $25 fee shall be
paid prior to reconnection.
   (B)   Lien notice of delinquency.
      (1)   Whenever a bill for water service remains unpaid for 60 days for
monthly service after it has been rendered, the Village Treasurer shall file
with the County Recorder of Deeds a statement of lien claim. This statement
shall contain the legal description of the premises served, the amount of the
unpaid bill, and a notice that the village claims a lien for this amount as
well as for all charges subsequent to the period covered by the bill.
      (2)   If the user whose bill is unpaid is not the owner of the premises
and the Village Treasurer has notice of this, notice shall be mailed to the
owner of the premises if his address be known to the Treasure, whenever such
bill remains unpaid for the period of 60 days for a monthly bill after it has
been rendered.
      (3)   The failure of the Village Treasurer to record such lien or to mail
such notice or the failure of the owner to receive such notice shall not affect
the right to foreclose the lien for unpaid bills as mentioned in the foregoing
section.
   (C)   Foreclosure of lien. Property subject to a lien for unpaid charges
shall be sold for nonpayment of the same, and the proceeds of the sale shall be
applied to pay the charges, after deducting costs, as is the case in the
foreclosure of statutory liens. The Village Attorney is hereby authorized and
directed to institute such proceedings in the name of the village in any court
having jurisdiction over such matters against any property for which the bill
has remained unpaid 60 days.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
   (D)   Disconnection for late payment.
      (1)   It is the policy of the city to discontinue utility service to
customers by reason of nonpayment of bills only after notice and a meaningful
opportunity to be heard on disputed bills. The city's form for application for
utility service and all bills shall contain, in addition to the title, address,
room number, and telephone number of the official in charge of billing, clearly
visible and easily readable provisions to the effect:
         (a)   That all bills are due and payable on or before the date set
forth on the bill; and
         (b)   That if any bill is not paid by or before that date, a second
bill will be mailed containing a cutoff notice that if the bill is not paid
within ten days of the mailing of the second bill, service will be discontinued
for nonpayment; and
         (c)   That any customer disputing the correctness of his bill shall
have a right to a hearing at which time he may be represented in person and by
counsel or any other person of his choosing and may present orally or in
writing his complain and contentions to the city official in charge of utility
billing. This official shall be authorized to order that the customer's service
not be discontinued and shall have the authority to make a final determination
of the customer's complaint.
      (2)   Requests for delays or waiver of payment will not be entertained;
only questions of proper and correct billing will be considered. In the absence
of payment of the bill rendered or resort to the hearing procedure provided
herein, service will be discontinued at the time specified.
      (3)   (a)   When it becomes necessary for the city to discontinue utility
service to a customer for nonpayment of bills, service will be reinstated only
after all bills for service then due have been paid and any deposit required
has been made. All requests for reinstatement shall be received by 3:00 p.m. on
the day reinstatement is requested to insure that reinstatement will occur that
day. An applicant for reinstatement who submits an application after 3:00 p.m.
on the day reinstatement is requested shall have the option to pay all costs
incurred by the village, including overtime costs paid to village employees, to
obtain reinstatement that day. The village may require a deposit to insure
payment.
         (b)   Also, all requests for either turning on water or turning off
water service shall be received by 3:00 p.m. on the day service is requested to
insure that service will occur that day; a $20 fee shall be paid at the time of
each request. An applicant requesting that water be turned on or turned off who
submits a request after 3:00 p.m. on the day that such service is requested
shall have the option to pay all costs incurred by the village, including
overtime costs paid to the village employees to obtain service that day. The
village may require a deposit to insure payment.
(Am. Ord. 985, passed 11-5-07; Am. Ord. 1017, passed 11-3-08)
§ 52.73 DISPOSITION OF REVENUES.
   (A)   All revenues and moneys derived from the operation of the water system
shall be deposited in the water account of the water fund. All such revenues
and moneys shall be held by the Village Treasurer separate and apart from his
private funds and separate and apart from all other funds of the village and
all of the sum, without any deductions whatever, shall be delivered to the
Village Treasurer not more than ten days after receipt of the same, or at such
more frequent intervals as may from time to time be directed by the Village
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   The Village Treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the water
system and all other funds and moneys incidental to the operation of such
system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the same in the amount
of the fund designated as the Water Fund to the village.
   (C)   The IEPA or USEPA, or its authorized representatives, shall have
access to any books, documents, papers and records of the village which are
applicable to the village system of user charges for the purpose of making
audit, examination, excerpts and transcriptions thereof to insure compliance
with the terms of the Special and General Conditions to any state grant or any
state loan.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 759, passed 12-6-99)
§ 52.74 SPECIAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Duplex or apartments. Where water is supplied to a duplex or apartment
building, where there is only one meter for the entire premises, the service
charge shall be calculated as if the total amount of water metered has been
supplied through separate meters for each side of the duplex and for each
apartment building. This method shall also be utilized where one meter services
more than one business establishment.
   (B)   Trailer courts. Where water is supplied to premises used as a trailer
court, where there is only one meter for the entire premises, the service
charge shall be calculated as if the total amount of water metered has been
supplied through separate meters equal in number to the number of trailer
spaces occupied at the time of each reading of the meter. The minimum service
charge shall apply for each living unit served if less than the minimum amount
of water per unit was used.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.75 WATER SERVICE BILLING DEPOSIT.
   Prior to occupying a residence, business or industry all customers of the
Authority who are renting said residence, business or industry shall pay to the
Village Treasurer a water service billing deposit of $150. The deposit shall be
held by the village until the customers vacate the premises for which the
deposit is paid. The deposit shall not be returned to a vacating customer until
all service charges, including penalties, are paid in full.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 1020, passed 11-17-08)
§ 52.76 METERED CHARGES.
   (A)   Accuracy. The quantity of water recorded by the meter shall be
accepted as correct by both the customer and the Water Department, except when
the meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has been ceased to
register. In either case, the meter will be promptly repaired by the Water
Department and the quantity of water used will be determined by the
registration of the meter during a similar previously metered period of time.
   (B)   Failure of water meter. Whenever, for any cause, a water meter fails
to operate, a reasonable estimate shall be made by the Village Treasurer of the
amount of water supplied during the period such meter fails to operate and the
user shall pay a rate based in whole or in part on the estimated amount of
water supplied.
   (C)   Responsibility of charges. The owner of any lot, parcel of land or
premises receiving any of the services of the utility systems of the village,
the occupant of such premises and the user of the services shall be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of service to such lot, parcel of land or
premises and all services are rendered to the premises by the village only on
the condition that such owner, occupant and user shall be jointly and severally
liable thereof to the village.
   (D)   The owner, occupant and user as herein described shall be jointly and
severally liable for all water that may be billed as a result of leaks existing
between the water meter and the premises.
   (E)   Anyone responsible for the payment of water services may request that
a meter be reread. If it is determined that the original reading was accurate,
there will be a $25 charge to the premises which shall be stated on the next
month's bill. If it is determined that the meter was inaccurate, no additional
charge shall be assessed.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89; Am. Ord. 835, passed 2-17-03)
§ 52.77 APPEALS.
   The method for computation of rates and service charges established for user
charges in this chapter shall be made available to a user within ten days of
receipt of a written request for such. Any disagreement over the method used or
in the computations thereof shall be resolved by a determination of the Village
President within 30 days after receipt of a formal written appeal describing
the disagreement.
(Ord. 759, passed 12-6-99)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 52.85 VILLAGE OR DULY AUTHORIZED EMPLOYEES TO OBSERVE SAFETY RULES.
   While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in §
52.41(D), the village or duly authorized employees of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental Agency shall
observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the private
property owner and the private property owner shall be held harmless for injury
or death to the village employees and they shall indemnify the private property
owner against liability claims and demand for personal injury or property
damage asserted against the private property owner and growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the private property owner to maintain conditions required in this
chapter.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.86 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The village and other duly authorized employees of the village bearing
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private
properties through which the village holds a duly negotiated easement for
purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, repair, and maintenance of any portions of the water works lying
within said easements. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement,
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated easement
pertaining to the private property involved.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.87 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The village may revoke any permit for water service as a result of any
violation of any provision of this chapter.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.88 CIVIL ACTION.
   In the event that it shall become necessary for the village from time to
time to sue the owner, occupant or user of a lot, parcel of land or premises in
a civil action to recover money due for water services furnished hereunder, the
Village Attorney may petition the Court for reasonable attorney fees to be
fixed by such Court pursuant to the provisions of ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-139-
8.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
§ 52.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any section of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and on conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not less
than $25 per day nor more than $500 per day. Each day in which any such
violation shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense.
(Ord. 573, passed 10-25-89)
CHAPTER 53: GENERAL UTILITIES
Section
   
53.01   Tapping on/attaching to city utilities prohibited without pre-
annexation agreement
§ 53.01 TAPPING ON/ATTACHING TO CITY UTILITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PRE-
ANNEXATION AGREEMENT.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the village that no owner of
property located outside of the village limits shall be permitted to tap on or
attach to one or more of the village’s utility systems until said property
owner shall have entered into a pre-annexation agreement with the village
containing such provisions as shall be acceptable to the village.
(Ord. 755, passed 11-1-99)
CHAPTER 54: CONTROL OF STORMWATER DRAINAGE/DETENTION, SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT
CONTROL
Section
   
54.01   Adoption by reference
§ 54.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The village ordinance controlling stormwater drainage and detention, soil
erosion and sediment control, and all amendments thereto, is hereby adopted by
reference and incorporated into this code of ordinances as if fully set forth
herein.
(Ord. 768, passed 4-17-00)
TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE
   Chapter
      
70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
71.   RULES OF OPERATION
      
72.   PARKING REGULATIONS
      
73.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, GOLF CARTS, AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES
      
74.   PEDESTRIANS
      
75.   EQUIPMENT; LOADS
      
76.   MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
      
77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
      
78.   PARKING SCHEDULES
CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
In General
   
70.01   Definitions
Obedience to and Effect of Traffic Laws
   
70.10   Obedience to police officers
   
70.11   Public officers and employees to obey traffic code; exceptions
   
70.12   Traffic laws apply to persons riding animals or driving animal-drawn
vehicles
   
70.13   Fleeing or attempting to elude police officer
Traffic Signs, Signals, and Markings
   
70.30   Obedience to traffic-control devices
   
70.31   Traffic-control signal legend
   
70.32   Pedestrian-control signals
   
70.33   Lane-control signals
   
70.34   Flashing signals
   
70.35   Display of unauthorized signs, signals, markings, or advertising signs
   
70.36   Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad signs or
signals
   
70.37   Unlawful use or damage to highways, appurtenances, and structures
   
70.38   Unlawful possession of highway sign or marker
   
70.39   Zones of quiet
   
70.40   No-turning signs and turning markers
   
70.41   Stop and yield signs
   
70.42   Location of village traffic-control signs
   
70.99   Penalty
IN GENERAL
§ 70.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block, generally giving access to the rear of
lots or buildings, and not used for general traffic circulation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102)
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of village departments or
public service corporations as are designated or authorized by proper state,
county, or local authorities; police vehicles; vehicles of the Fire Department;
vehicles of a Hazmat or technical rescue team authorized by a county board;
ambulances; vehicles of the Illinois Emergency Management Agency; vehicles of
the Office of the Illinois State Fire Marshal; mine rescue and explosives
emergency response vehicles of the Department of Natural resources; vehicles of
the Illinois Department of Public Health; vehicles of the Illinois Department
of Corrections; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Juvenile Justice;
vehicles of the Illinois State Toll Highway Authority with a gross vehicle
weight rating of 9,000 pounds or more and those identified as Highway Emergency
Lane Patrol; vehicles of the Illinois Department of Transportation identified
as Emergency Traffic Patrol; and vehicles of a municipal or county emergency
services and disaster agency, as defined by the Illinois Emergency Management
Agency Act. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105)
   BICYCLE. Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
ride, having two tandem wheels either of which is more than 16 inches in
diameter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106)
   BUS. Every motor vehicle, other than a commuter van, designed for carrying
more than ten persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107)
   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway when
within 600 feet along the highway there are buildings in use for business or
industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks, or office
buildings, railroad stations, and public buildings which occupy at least 300
feet of frontage on one side, or 300 feet collectively on both sides of the
highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108)
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle operated for the transportation of persons
or property in the furtherance of any commercial or industrial enterprise, for-
hire or not-for-hire, but not including, a commuter van, a arrangement when
being used for that purpose, or a recreational vehicle not being used
commercially.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8)
   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every highway, street, or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right of access to or from the same, except at such points only and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the highway, street, or roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112)
   CROSSWALK.
      (1)   That part of a roadway at an intersection included within the
connections of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite sides of the
highway measured from the curbs or, in the absence of curbs, from the edges of
the traversable roadway, and in the absence of a sidewalk on one side of a
highway, that part of the highway included within the extension of the lateral
line of the existing sidewalk to the side of the highway without the sidewalk,
with the extension forming a right angle to the centerline of the highway;
      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface,
placed in accordance with the provisions in the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113)
   DRIVER. Every person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116)
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing wagons, plows, mowing machines, and other implements of
husbandry, and every implement of husbandry which is self-propelled.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120)
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle, whether operated singly or in
combination, without load, plus the weight of load thereon.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125)
   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or located on public school property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126)
   IMPLEMENT OF HUSBANDRY. Every vehicle designed and adapted exclusively for
agricultural, horticultural, or livestock raising operations, including farm
wagons, wagon trailers, or like vehicles used in connection therewith, or for
lifting or carrying an implement of husbandry, provided that no farm wagon,
wagon trailer, or like vehicle having a gross weight of more than 36,000
pounds, shall be included hereunder.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130)
   IMPROVED HIGHWAY. Any roadway of concrete, brick, asphalt, macadam and
crushed stone, or gravel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131)
   INTERSECTION.
      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different roadways
joining at any other angle may come in conflict.
      (2)   Where a highway includes two roadways 40 feet or more apart, then
every crossing of each roadway of the divided highway by an intersecting
highway shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (3)   The junction of an alley with a street or highway does not
constitute an intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132)
   LANE-CONTROL SIGNAL. An official traffic-control device consisting of an
electrically controlled and illuminated signal of a square or rectangular
design, and employing distinctive colors or symbols used to control the
direction of vehicular flow on the particular lane to which the indication
applies.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135)
   LANED ROADWAY. A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136)
   LEASE. A written document vesting exclusive possession, use, control, and
responsibility of the lessee during the periods the vehicle is operated by or
for the lessee for a specific period of time.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137)
   LICENSE TO DRIVE. Any driver’s license or any other license or permit to
operate a motor vehicle issued under the laws of this state including:
      (1)   Any temporary license or instruction permit;
      (2)   The privilege of any person to drive a motor vehicle, whether or
not the person holds a valid license or permit;
      (3)   Any nonresident’s driving privilege as defined herein.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138)
   LIMOUSINE. Any privately owned first division vehicle intended to be used
for the transportation of persons for-hire when the payment is not based on a
meter charge but is prearranged for a designated destination.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1)
   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, village, and other local board or body
having authority to enact laws relating to traffic under the constitution and
laws of this state.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-140)
   MAIL. To deposit in the United States mail properly addressed and with
postage prepaid.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-141)
   MOPED. A moped is a motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power
derived from manually operated pedals, whose speed attainable in one mile is at
least 20 m.p.h. but not greater than 30 m.p.h., and is equipped with a motor
that produces two brake horsepower or less. If an internal combustion engine is
used, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeter displacement and
the power drive system shall not require the operator to shift gears.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is self-propelled, except for vehicles
moved solely by human power, motorized wheelchairs, low-speed electric bicycles
and low-speed gas bicycles. For this section, motor vehicles are divided into
two divisions:
      (1)   First division: motor vehicles designed for carrying not more than
ten persons.
      (2)   Second division: motor vehicles designed for carrying more than ten
persons, those designed or used for living quarters, and those motor vehicles
which are designed for pulling or carrying freight or cargo, and those motor
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as motor vehicles of
the second division.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146)
   MOTOR-DRIVEN CYCLE. Every motorcycle and every motor scooter with less than
150 cubic centimeter piston displacement, including motorized pedalcycles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001)
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the
rider, and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground, but excluding an autocycle or tractor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147)
   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self-propelled vehicle designed for and used by a
handicapped excess of eight m.p.h. on level ground.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3)
   MULTIFUNCTION SCHOOL ACTIVITY BUS (MFSAB). A school bus manufactured for the
purpose of transporting 11 or more persons, including the driver, whose
purposes do not include transporting students to and from home or school bus
stops. A MFSAB is prohibited from meeting the special requirements for school
buses in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-801, 12-803, and 12-805 and ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 12-802(a).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5)
   NONCOMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Any vehicle that is not a commercial vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-151)
   NOT-FOR-HIRE. Operation of a commercial vehicle in furtherance of any
commercial or industrial enterprise, but not-for-hire.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153)
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES. All signs, signals, markings, and devices
which conform with the state manual, and not inconsistent with this title,
placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having
jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning, or guiding traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154)
   OWNER. A person who holds legal title of a motor vehicle, or in the event a
motor vehicle is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in
the agreement, and with an immediate right of possession vested  in the
conditional vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of the motor vehicle
is entitled to possession, then the conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor
shall be deemed the owner for the purpose of this title.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155)
   PARK or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in loading or unloading
merchandise or passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156)
   PASSENGER CAR. A motor vehicle of the first division, including a
multipurpose passenger vehicle, that is designed for carrying not more than ten
persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157)
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person afoot or wearing in-line speed skates, including a
person with a physical, hearing, or visual disability.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158)
   PERSON WITH DISABILITIES. A natural person who, as determined by a licensed
physician, by a licensed physician assistant, or by a licensed advanced
practice nurse, or by a licensed physical therapist: (1) cannot walk without
the use of, or assistance from, a brace, cane, crutch, another person,
prosthetic device, wheelchair, or other assistive device; (2) is restricted by
lung disease to such an extent that his or her forced (respiratory) expiratory
volume for one second, when measured by spirometry, is less than one liter, or
the arterial oxygen tension is less than 60 mm/hg on room air at rest; (3) uses
portable oxygen; (4) has a cardiac condition to the extent that the person's
functional limitations are classified in severity as Class III or Class IV,
according to standards set by the American Heart Association; (5) is severely
limited in the person's ability to walk due to an arthritic, neurological,
oncological, or orthopedic condition; (6) cannot walk 200 feet without stopping
to rest because of one of the above 5 conditions; or (7) is missing a hand or
arm or has permanently lost the use of a hand or arm. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-159.1)
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic, or
to make arrests and issue citations for violations of traffic regulations.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162)
   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF BUSINESS. The place where any person transacts his
principal business, or where he makes up and approves his payroll, maintains a
central file of records, and maintains his principal executive offices. In the
event that not all of these functions are performed in one place, then that
place where a majority of these functions are performed, or the place where the
person does in fact principally transact and control his business affairs shall
be considered as the principal place of business.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5)
   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership, and used
for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, other than streetcars,
operated upon stationary rails.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166)
   RAILROAD-HIGHWAY GRADE CROSSING. The intersection of stationary rails owned
or used in the operation of a railroad corporation across a highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1)
   RAILROAD SIGNS OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device, other than an
official traffic-control signal or device, erected in accordance with the laws
governing the same, and intended to give notice of the presence of railroad
tracks or the approach of a railroad train or railroad track equipment.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167)
   RAILROAD TRACK EQUIPMENT. All vehicles operated upon rails for the purpose
of the maintenance of railroads including, but not limited to, all hi-rail
vehicles and on-track roadway maintenance machines, as defined in 49 CFR, Part
214.7.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5)
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine, electric or other motor, with or without
cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails, except streetcars.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168)
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device designed
to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less, traveling on four or more
non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168.8)
   RECREATIONAL OFF-HIGHWAY VEHICLE. Any motorized off-highway device designed
to travel primarily off-highway, 64 inches or less in width, having a
manufacturer's dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less for gas-powered engines or
3,000 pounds or less for electric-powered engines, traveling on four or more
non-highway tires, designed with a non-straddle seat and a steering wheel for
steering control, except equipment such as lawnmowers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168.8)
   REGISTRATION. The registration certificate or certificates and registration
plates issued under the laws of this state pertaining to the registration of
vehicles. REGISTRATION includes digital registration plates issued by the
Secretary of State under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 3, § 401.5. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-171)
   REGISTRATION STICKER OR STICKERS. A device or devices to be attached to a
registration plate that will renew the registration and registration plate or
plates for a predetermined period, not to exceed one registration year, except
as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 3, § 3-414(l). Should the Secretary of State
determine it is advisable to require a registration sticker to be attached to a
front registration plate, he or she may require such action and provide the
necessary additional sticker. Such determination shall be publicly announced at
least 30 days in advance of a new annual registration year. REGISTRATION
STICKER OR STICKERS includes digital registration stickers issued by the
Secretary of State under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 3, § 401.5. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
1-171)
   REMOVE. Includes removing, defacing, covering, or destroying.
   RESCUE SQUAD. A voluntary association of individuals, or a fire department,
dedicated to saving lives through the rescue of persons entrapped in wrecked
vehicles or other hazardous circumstances, and associated with some unit of
government.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6)
   RESCUE SQUAD VEHICLE. A vehicle specifically designed, configured, and
equipped for the performance of access and extrication from hazardous or life-
endangering situations. However, if such vehicles have emergency medical
transport capability, they must be classified as rescue vehicles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-223)
   RESCUE VEHICLE. Any publicly or privately owned vehicle which is
specifically designed, configured, and equipped for the performance of access
and extrication of persons from hazardous or life- endangering situations, as
well as for the emergency transportation of persons who are sick, injured,
wounded, or otherwise incapacitated or helpless.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8)
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including a highway, not
comprising a business district, when the property on the highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is in the main improved with residences or residences and
buildings in use for business. For purposes of establishing maximum speed
limits, a RESIDENCE DISTRICT shall be at least a quarter of a mile long with
residences or residences and buildings in use for businesses spaced no more
than 500 feet apart.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172)
   RETAIL SALE. The act or attempted act of selling vehicles or otherwise
disposing of a vehicle to a person for use as a consumer.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174)
   REVOCATION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE. The termination by formal action of the
secretary, of a person's license or privilege to operate a motor vehicle on the
public highways, which termination shall not be subject to renewal or
restoration, except that an application for a new license may be presented and
acted upon by the secretary after the expiration of at least one year after the
date of revocation.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176)
   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The right of one vehicle or pedestrian to proceed in a lawful
manner in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching under such
circumstances of direction, speed, and proximity as to give rise to danger of
collision, unless one grants precedence to the other.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177)
   ROAD TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used for drawing other
vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load thereon, either
independently or any part of the weight of a vehicle or load so drawn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178)
   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily used
for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the event a highway
includes two or more separate roadways, the term ROADWAY as used herein shall
refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such roadways
collectively.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179)
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected or is so marked or
indicated by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set
apart as a safety zone.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181)
   SCHOOL BUS.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, except as provided in division (2) below,
owned or operated by or for any of the following entities for the
transportation of persons regularly enrolled as students in grade 12 or below
in connection with any activity of the entity:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school;
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution; or
         (c)   Any public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   This definition does not include the following:
         (a)   A bus operated by a public utility, village corporation, or
common carrier authorized to conduct local or interurban transportation of
passengers when the bus is not traveling a specific school bus route but is:
            1.   On a regularly scheduled route for the transportation of other
fare-paying passengers;
            2.   Furnishing charter service for the transportation of groups on
field trips or other special trips or in connection with special events; or
            3.   Being used for shuttle service between attendance centers or
other educational facilities.
         (b)   A motor vehicle of the First Division.
         (c)   A multifunction school-activity bus.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182)
   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power, other than a pole trailer,
designed for carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor
vehicle, and so constructed its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187)
   SHOULDER. That portion of the highway adjacent to the roadway for
accommodating stopped vehicles or for emergency use.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1)
   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of roadway and the adjacent property lines, intended for use of
pedestrians.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188)
   SPEED-CHANGE LANE. An auxiliary lane, including tapered areas, primarily for
the acceleration or deceleration of vehicles entering or leaving the through
traffic lanes.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193)
   STAND or STANDING. The halting of a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
otherwise than when temporarily and actually engaged in receiving or
discharging passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194)
   STATE. A state, territory, or possession of the United States, the District
of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a province of the Dominion of
Canada.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195)
   STATE HIGHWAYS. Defined in the Illinois Highway Code as the same may from
time to time be amended.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196)
   STATE POLICE. The Illinois state police.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197)
   STOP. The complete cessation from movement.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199)
   STOP or STOPPING. Any halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or
in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control sign
or signal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200)
   STREET. The entire width between boundary lines of every way publicly
maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201)
   SUBURBAN DISTRICT. That portion of any city, village, or incorporated town,
other than the business and residence districts.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203)
   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every highway or portion thereof on which vehicular traffic
is given preferential right-of-way, and at the entrances to which vehicular
traffic from intersecting highways is required by law to yield the right-of-way
to vehicles on the through highway in obedience to either a stop sign or a
yield sign, when those signs are erected as provided in this title.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205)
   TOW TRUCK. Every truck designed or altered and equipped for and used to
push, tow, carry upon, or draw vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, towbar,
towline, or auxiliary axle, or carried upon to render assistance to disabled
vehicles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1)
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars, and
other conveyances either singly or together while using any highway for
purposes of travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207)
   TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL. Any official traffic-control device other than a
railroad sign or signal, whether manually, electrically, or mechanically
operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and permitted to
proceed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208)
   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS. Any provision of this code or other regulatory
ordinance the purpose of which is to directly control or improve traffic and
safety of both vehicles and pedestrians.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle without motive power in operation, other than a pole
trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a
motor vehicle, and so constructed that no part of its weight rests upon the
towing vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209)
   TRAVEL TRAILER. A trailer, not used commercially, designed to provide living
quarters for recreational, camping, or travel use, and of a size or weight not
requiring an over-dimension permit when towed on a highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01)
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used, or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211)
   TRUCK CAMPER. A truck, not used commercially, when equipped with a portable
unit designed to be loaded onto the bed which is constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreational, travel, or camping use.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01)
   TRUCK TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing
other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry a load other than a part of
the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn, or a power unit that carries as
property motor vehicles when operating in combination with a semitrailer in
transporting motor vehicles or any other commodity, including cargo or general
freight, on a backhaul.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212)
   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street which
is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses,
and situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of 1/4 mile or
more.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8)
   URBAN AREA. An urban area is any incorporated or unincorporated area
developed primarily for residential or business purposes.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.1)
   VEHICLE.
      (1)   Every device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, or requiring a certificate of title
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d), except devices moved by human power,
devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, and snowmobiles as
defined in the Snowmobile Registration and Safety Act.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, unless otherwise prescribed, a
device shall be considered to be a vehicle until such time it either comes
within the definition of a “junk vehicle,” as defined under this section, or a
junking certificate is issued for it.
      (3)   For this section vehicles are divided into two divisions:
         (a)   First division: those motor vehicles which are designed for the
carrying of not more than ten persons;
         (b)   Second division: those vehicles which are designed for carrying
more than ten persons; those designed or used for living quarters; those which
are designed for pulling or carrying property, freight, or cargo and those
vehicles of the first division remodeled for use and used as vehicles of the
second division.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217)
OBEDIENCE TO AND EFFECT OF TRAFFIC LAWS
§ 70.10 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE OFFICERS.
   No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer, fireman, person authorized by a local
authority to direct traffic, or school crossing guard invested by law with
authority to direct, control, or regulate traffic. Any person convicted of
violating this section is guilty of a petty offense and shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $150.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.11 PUBLIC OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC CODE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code applicable to the drivers of
vehicles upon the highways shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or
operated by the United States, the state, or any county, city, town, district,
or any other political subdivision of the state, except as provided in this
section, and subject to specific exceptions as set forth in this title with
reference to authorized emergency vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call, or when in the pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of
the law, or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm, may
exercise the privileges set forth in this section, but subject to the
conditions herein stated.
   (C)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this traffic code;
      (2)   Proceed past a red or stop signal or stop sign, but only after
slowing down as may be required and necessary for safe operation;
      (3)   Exceed the maximum speed limits so long as he does not endanger
life or property;
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing the direction of movement or
turning in specified directions.
   (D)   The exceptions herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle,
other than a police vehicle, shall apply only when the vehicle is making use of
either an audible signal when in motion, or visual signals meeting the
requirements of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215.
   (E)   The foregoing provisions do not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of
all persons, nor do these provisions protect the driver from the consequences
of his reckless disregard for the safety of others.
   (F)   Unless specifically made applicable, the provisions of this traffic
code shall not apply to persons, motor vehicles, and equipment while actually
engaged in work upon the highway, but shall apply to such persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.12 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING ANIMALS OR DRIVING ANIMAL-DRAWN
VEHICLES.
   Every person riding an animal or driving an animal-drawn vehicle upon a
roadway shall be granted all of the rights, and shall be subject to all of the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle by this chapter, except those
provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.13 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE POLICE OFFICER.
   It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of a motor vehicle who,
having been given a visual or audible signal by a police officer directing the
driver or operator to bring his vehicle to a stop, willfully fails or refuses
to obey that direction, increases his speed, extinguishes his lights, or
otherwise flees or attempts to elude the officer. The signal given by the
police officer may be by hand, voice, siren, or a red or blue light. However,
the officer giving the signal shall be in police uniform and, if driving a
vehicle, the vehicle shall be marked showing it to be an official police
vehicle.
Penalty, see §
70.99
TRAFFIC SIGNS, SIGNALS, AND MARKINGS
§ 70.30 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey the instructions of any official
traffic-control accordance with this chapter, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer, subject to the exceptions granted the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle in this traffic code.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to leave the roadway and travel across
private property to avoid an official traffic-control device.
   (C)   No provision of this traffic code, for which official traffic-control
devices are required, shall be enforced against an alleged violator if at the
time and place of the alleged violation an official device is not in proper
position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section does not state that official traffic-control
devices are required, the section shall be effective even though no devices are
erected or in place.
   (D)   Whenever any official traffic-control device is placed or held in
position approximately conforming to the requirements of this traffic code, the
device shall be presumed to have been so placed or held by the official act or
direction of lawful authority, and comply with the requirements of this traffic
code, unless the contrary shall be established by competent evidence.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a traffic-control signal on which
no signal light facing the vehicle is illuminated shall stop before entering
the intersection, in accordance with rules applicable in making a stop at a
stop sign. This provision does not apply to the driver of a vehicle approaching
a pedestrian hybrid beacon.
   (F)   Any violation of division (A) that occurs within a designated highway
construction zone or maintenance zone shall result in a fine of no less than
$100 and no more than $1,000.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.31 TRAFFIC-CONTROL SIGNAL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals exhibiting
different colored lights or color lighted arrows, successively one at a time or
in combination, only the colors green, red, and yellow shall be used, except
for special pedestrian signals carrying a word legend, and the lights shall
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians as follows:
   (A)   Green indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits
either such turn. Vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left,
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to pedestrians lawfully
within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk at the time such signal is
exhibited.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal, shown alone or in
combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection only
to make the movement indicated by the arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians lawfully within an adjacent
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal, as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing any green signal, except when the sole green signal
is a turn arrow, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked
crosswalk.
   (B)   (1)   Steady yellow indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal is thereby warned that the related green movement is being
terminated or that a red indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow
signal, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in
§
70.32, are thereby advised that there is insufficient time to cross the roadway
before a red indication is shown, and no pedestrian shall then start to cross
the roadway.
      (2)   Flashing yellow arrow indication.
         (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a flashing yellow arrow indication may
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by the
arrows and shall yield the right-of- way to other vehicles and pedestrians
lawfully within the intersection or any adjacent crosswalk at the time the
signal is exhibited.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a flashing yellow arrow indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as provided in §
70.32, may proceed across the roadway within any marked or unmarked crosswalk
that crosses the lane or lanes used to depart the intersection by traffic
controlled by the flashing yellow arrow indication. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
   (C)   Steady red indication.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section,
vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing
until an indication to proceed is shown.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section,
vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal shall not enter the
intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow and, unless entering
the intersection to make a movement permitted by another signal, shall stop at
a clearly marked stop line, but if there is no such stop line, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if there is no such
crosswalk, then before entering the intersection; and shall remain standing
until an indication permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
shown.
      (3)   Except when a sign is in place prohibiting a turn and the village
authorities by ordinance or state authorities by rule or regulation prohibit
any such turn, vehicular traffic facing any steady red signal may cautiously
enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street
into a one-way street, after stopping as required by division (C)(1) or (C)(2)
of this section. After stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction or roadways. The driver shall yield the
right-of-way to pedestrians within the intersection or an adjacent crosswalk.
      (4)   In municipalities with less than 2,000,000 inhabitants, after
stopping as required by division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, the driver
of a motorcycle or bicycle, facing a steady red signal which fails to change to
a green signal within a reasonable period of time not less than 120 seconds
because of a signal malfunction or because the signal has failed to detect the
arrival of the motorcycle or bicycle due to the vehicle's size or weight, shall
have the right to proceed, after yielding the right-of-way to oncoming traffic
facing a green signal, subject to the rules applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign as required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204.
      (5)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian-control signal as
provided in §
70.32, pedestrians facing a steady circular red or red arrow signal alone shall
not enter the roadway.
   (D)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to provisions which by their nature can
have no application. Any stop required shall be at a traffic sign or a marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made; or, in the absence of
such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.32 PEDESTRIAN-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “Walk” or
“Don't Walk” or the illuminated symbols of a walking person or an upraised palm
are in place, these signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   “Walk” or walking person symbol. Pedestrians facing this signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal, and shall be given
the right-of-way by the drivers of all vehicles.
   (B)   “Don't Walk” or upraised palm signal. No pedestrian shall start to
cross the roadway in the direction of this signal, but any pedestrian who has
partly completed his crossing on the “Walk” signal or upraised palm symbol
shall proceed to a sidewalk or safety island while the “Don't Walk” signal or
upraised palm symbol is illuminated, steady, or flashing.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.33 LANE-CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever lane-control signals are used in conjunction with official signs,
they shall have the following meanings:
   (A)   Downward-pointing green arrow. A driver facing this indication is
permitted to drive in the lane over which the arrow signal is located.
Otherwise, he shall obey all other traffic controls present and follow normal
safe driving practices.
   (B)   Red X symbol. A driver facing this indication shall not drive in the
lane over which the signal is located, and this indication shall modify
accordingly the meaning of all other traffic controls present. Otherwise he
shall obey all other traffic controls, and follow normal safe driving
practices.
   (C)   Yellow X (steady). A driver facing this indication should prepare to
vacate the lane over which the signal is located, in a safe manner to avoid, if
possible, occupying that lane when a steady red X is displayed.
   (D)   Flashing yellow arrow. A driver facing this indication may use the
lane only for the purpose of approaching and making a left turn.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.34 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in conjunction
with a traffic-control device, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic
as follows:
   (A)   Flashing red (stop signal). When a red lens is illuminated with rapid
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or if none, then at a point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be subject to
the rules applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.
   (B)   Flashing yellow (caution signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with rapid intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past the signal only with caution.
   (C)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.35 DISPLAY OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS, OR ADVERTISING SIGNS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be,
or is an imitation of, or resembles an official traffic-control device or
railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic,
or which hides from view or interferes with the movement of traffic or the
effectiveness of an official traffic-control device or any railroad sign or
signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any
commercial advertising.
   (C)   Every such prohibited sign, signal, or marking is hereby declared to
be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway is
hereby empowered to remove the same, or cause it to be removed without notice.
   (D)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any traffic-control device to
be used on any street or highway in this village which does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection upon private
property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful directional information,
and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official signs.
   (F)   This section shall not be deemed to prohibit the erection of Illinois
Adopt-A-Highway signs by the village as provided in the Illinois Adopt-A-
Highway Act, ILCS 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.36 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD SIGNS OR
SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any official traffic-control
device, or any railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield, or insignia
thereon, or any other part thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalties which
may be imposed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311)
§ 70.37 UNLAWFUL USE OR DAMAGE TO HIGHWAYS, APPURTENANCES, AND STRUCTURES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully injure or damage any
public highway or street, or any bridge or culvert, or to willfully damage,
injure, or remove any sign, signpost, or structure upon or used or constructed
in connection with any public highway or street for the protection thereof, or
for the protection or regulation of traffic thereon, by any willfully unusual,
improper, or unreasonable use thereof, or by willfully careless driving or use
of any vehicle thereon, or by willful mutilation, defacing, destruction, or
removal thereof.
   (B)   Every person who is convicted of a violation of this section shall be
punished by a fine of at least $250 in addition to any other penalty which may
be imposed.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.38 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF HIGHWAY SIGN OR MARKER.
   The Village Street Department, with reference to traffic-control signs,
signals, or markers owned by the village, is authorized to indicate the
ownership of the signs, signals, or markers in letters not less than 3/8 inch,
or more than 3/4 inch in height, by use of a metal stamp, etching, or other
permanent means. Except for employees of the Village Street Department, police
officers, contractors and their employees engaged in a highway construction
contract or work on the highway approved by the village, it is unlawful for any
person to possess a sign, signal, or marker so identified.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.39 ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a motor vehicle within the zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device except in an emergency.
§ 70.40 NO-TURNING SIGNS AND TURNING MARKERS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left or U-
turn is permitted no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of the
sign. When authorized marks, buttons, or other indications are placed within an
intersection indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles, no driver of a
vehicle shall disobey the directions of the indications.
§ 70.41 STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
signs or yield signs as authorized in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle and every motorman of a streetcar approaching
a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no
crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the
point nearest the intersection roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign if required for
safety to stop shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the
driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 70.42 LOCATION OF VILLAGE PARKING-CONTROL SIGNS.
   The locations of authorized traffic-control signs in the village are set
forth in Title XVII of this code.
§ 70.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Traffic violations. Whoever violates any provision of this traffic
code for which another penalty is not already otherwise provided by ordinance
or by appropriate statutory penalty as generally set forth in ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, §§ 16-101 et seq. shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more
than $500.
   (B)   Parking violations. Any person accused of a violation of any provision
of this traffic code prohibiting parking a vehicle in a designated area, or
restricting the length of time a vehicle may be there parked, or parking in a
metered area without putting a coin in the meter to cover the required time,
may settle and compromise the claim against him for such illegal parking by
paying to the village $25 for each such offense if paid within five days, or
$50 if paid within 21 days.
(Am. Ord. 816, passed 3-18-02)
CHAPTER 71: RULES OF OPERATION
Section
Speed Restrictions
   
71.001   Speed limits
   
71.002   Special speed limits
   
71.003   Maximum attainable operating speed
   
71.004   Minimum speed regulation
Turning and Starting; Signals
   
71.020   Required position and method of turning at intersections
   
71.021   Limitations on U-turns
   
71.022   Starting parked vehicle
   
71.023   When signal required
   
71.024   Signal by hand and arm or signal device
   
71.025   Method of giving hand and arm signals
Overtaking and Passing
   
71.040   Driving on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
71.041   Passing vehicles proceeding in opposite directions
   
71.042   Overtaking vehicles on the left
   
71.043   When overtaking on the right is permitted
   
71.044   Limitations on overtaking on the left
   
71.045   Meeting or overtaking school bus
   
71.046   One-way roadways and rotary traffic islands
   
71.047   No-passing zones
   
71.048   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
Right-of-Way
   
71.060   Vehicles approaching or entering intersection
   
71.061   Vehicle turning left
   
71.062   Vehicles entering stop crosswalk
   
71.063   Vehicle entering stop or yield intersection
   
71.064   Merging traffic
   
71.065   Vehicle entering highway from private road or driveway
   
71.066   Operation of vehicles on approach of authorized emergency vehicles
   
71.067   Funeral processions
Special Stops Required
   
71.080   Obedience to signal indicating approach of train or railroad track
equipment
   
71.081   Certain vehicles must stop at all railroad grade crossings
   
71.082   Emerging from alley, building, private road, or driveway
   
71.083   Stop when traffic obstructed
Prohibitions
   
71.095   Backing
   
71.096   Following vehicle too closely
   
71.097   Obstruction of driver's view or driving mechanism
   
71.098   Opening vehicle doors
   
71.099   Coasting
   
71.100   Following fire apparatus; driving over fire hose
   
71.101   Driving upon sidewalk
   
71.102   Use of roller skates, coasters, or similar devices
   
71.103   Putting glass or other hazardous materials on highway prohibited
   
71.104   Obstructing person in highways
   
71.105   Farm tractor operation
   
71.106   Driving on controlled-access highway
   
71.107   Operating unlicensed motor vehicles
   
71.108   Riding on outside of vehicle
   
71.109   Idling of truck motors
   
71.110   Non-skid devices
Parades
   
71.120   Definitions
   
71.121   Permit required
   
71.122   Application for permit
   
71.123   Standards for issuance of permit
   
71.124   Notice of rejection of permit application
   
71.125   Appeal procedure when permit denied
   
71.126   Alternative permit
   
71.127   Notice to village and other officials when permit issued
   
71.128   Contents of permit
   
71.129   Duties of permittee
   
71.130   Public conduct during parades
   
71.131   Revocation of permit
SPEED RESTRICTIONS
§ 71.001 SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   No vehicle may be driven upon any highway of this village at a speed
which is greater than is reasonable and proper with regard to traffic
conditions and the use of the highway, or which endangers the safety of any
person or property. The fact that the speed of a vehicle does not exceed the
applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver from the duty to
decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection, when approaching
and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any
narrow or winding roadway, or when a special hazard exists with respect to
pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway conditions.
Speed must be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding with any person
or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal requirements and
the duty of all persons to use due care.
   (B)   No person may drive a vehicle upon any street at a speed which is
greater than the applicable statutory maximum speed limit established by
divisions (C) and (D) below, by §
71.002, or by a regulation or ordinance made under this chapter.
   (C)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in an urban district (as defined in §
70.01) for all vehicles is:
      (1)   Thirty miles per hour; and
      (2)   Fifteen miles per hour in an alley.
   (D)   Unless some other speed restriction is established under this chapter,
the maximum speed limit in a non-urban district is 55 miles per hour.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601) Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to regulate speed, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1 and Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-604
§ 71.002 SPECIAL SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   Passing schools.  
      (1)   For the purposes of this section, SCHOOL means the following
entities:
         (a)   A public or private primary or secondary school.
         (b)   A primary or secondary school operated by a religious
institution.
         (c)   A public, private, or religious nursery school.
      (2)   For the purpose of this section, a SCHOOL DAY begins at 6:30 a.m.
and concludes at 4:00 p.m.
      (3)   On a school day when school children are present and so close
thereto that a potential hazard exists because of the close proximity of the
motorized traffic, no person shall drive a motor vehicle at a speed in excess
of 20 miles per hour while passing a school zone, or while traveling on a
local, county, or state roadway on public school property upon any public
thoroughfare where children pass going to and from school.
      (4)   This section shall not be applicable unless appropriate signs are
posted upon streets wherein the school zone is located. With regard to the
special speed limit while passing schools, such signs shall give proper due
warning that a school zone is being approached, and shall indicate the school
zone and the maximum speed limit in effect during school days when school
children are present.
      (5)   Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the use of electronic speed-
detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a special school speed zone
indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence obtained
thereby be inadmissible in any prosecution for speed, provided the use of the
device shall apply only to the enforcement of the speed limit in the special
school speed zone.
      (6)   Except as provided in division (A)(7), a person who violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of a petty offense. Violations of
division (A) of this section are punishable with a minimum fine of $150 for the
first violation, a minimum fine of $300 for the second or subsequent violation,
and community service in an amount determined by court.
      (7)   A person committing a violation of division (A) of this section is
guilty of aggravated special speed limit while passing schools when he or she
drives a motor vehicle at a speed that is:
         (a)   Twenty-six miles per hour or more but less than thirty-five
miles per hour in excess of the applicable special speed limit established
under this section and is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
         (b)   Thirty-five miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable
special speed limit established under this section and is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605)
   (B)   Through a highway construction or maintenance speed zone.
      (1)   (a)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or
maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit when
workers are present.
         (b)   A person may not operate a motor vehicle in a construction or
maintenance speed zone at a speed in excess of the posted speed limit when
workers are not present.
      (2)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the use of electronic speed-
detecting devices within 500 feet of signs within a construction or maintenance
speed zone indicating the zone, as defined in this section, nor shall evidence
obtained by use of those devices be inadmissible in any prosecution for
speeding, provided the use of the device shall apply only to the enforcement of
the speed limit in the construction or maintenance speed zone.
      (3)   (a)   As used in this section, a CONSTRUCTION OR MAINTENANCE SPEED
ZONE is an area in which the Department, toll highway authority, a local
agency, or the village has posted signage advising drivers that a construction
or maintenance speed zone is being approached, or in which the Department,
authority, or local agency has posted a lower speed limit with a highway
construction or maintenance speed zone special speed limit sign after
determining that the preexisting established speed limit through a highway
construction or maintenance project is greater than is reasonable or safe with
respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or maintenance
speed zone. If it is determined that the preexisting established speed limit is
safe with respect to the conditions expected to exist in the construction or
maintenance speed zone, additional speed limit signs which conform to the
requirements of this division (3) shall be posted.
         (b)   Highway construction or maintenance speed zone special speed
limit signs shall be of a design approved by the Department. The signs must
give proper due warning that a construction or maintenance speed zone is being
approached and must indicate the maximum speed limit in effect. The signs must
also state the amount of the minimum fine for a violation.
      (4)   Except as provided under division (5) below of this section, a
person who violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a petty offense.
Violations of division (B) of this section are punishable with a minimum fine
of $250 for the first violation and a minimum fine of $750 for the second or
subsequent violation.
      (5)   A person committing a violation of division (B) of this section is
guilty of aggravated special speed limit while traveling through a highway
construction or maintenance speed zone when he or she drives a motor vehicle at
a speed that is:
         (a)   Twenty-six miles per hour or more but less than thirty-five
miles per hour in excess of the applicable special speed limit established
under this section and is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
         (b)   Thirty-five miles per hour or more in excess of the applicable
special speed limit established under this section and is guilty of a Class A
misdemeanor.
      (6)   The Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund shall continue to
be a special fund in the State Treasury. Subject to appropriation by the
general assembly and approval by the secretary, the Secretary of Transportation
shall use all moneys in the Transportation Safety Highway Hire-back Fund to
hire off-duty Illinois State Police Officers to monitor construction or
maintenance zones.
      (7)   For a second or subsequent violation of division (B) of this
section within two years of the date of the previous violation, the Secretary
of State shall suspend the driver’s license of the violator for a period of 90
days. This suspension shall only be imposed if the current violation of
division (B) and at least one prior violation of division (B) occurred during a
period when workers were present in the construction or maintenance zone.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.003 MAXIMUM ATTAINABLE OPERATING SPEED.
   No person shall drive or operate any motor vehicle on any street or highway
in this village where the minimum allowable speed on that street or highway, as
posted, is greater than the maximum attainable operating speed of the vehicle.
Maximum attainable operating speed shall be determined by the manufacturer of
the vehicle and clearly published in the manual of specifications and
operation, or it shall be determined by applicable rule and regulation
promulgated by the Secretary of State.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.004 MINIMUM SPEED REGULATION.
   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede or
block the normal and regular movement of traffic except when reduced speed is
necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)) Penalty, see §
70.99
TURNING AND STARTING; SIGNALS
§ 71.020 REQUIRED POSITION AND METHOD OF TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall do
so as follows:
      (1)   Both the approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practical to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand lane lawfully
available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such vehicle, and
after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so as to leave the
intersection in a lane lawfully available to traffic moving in such direction
upon the roadway being entered. Whenever practicable the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   The state Department of Transportation and local authorities in
their respective jurisdictions may cause official traffic-control devices to be
placed within or adjacent to intersections and thereby require and direct that
a different course from that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles
turning at an intersection, and when such devices are so placed no driver of a
vehicle shall turn a vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and
required by such devices.
   (B)   Two-way left turn lanes. Where a special lane for making left turns by
drivers proceeding in opposite directions has been indicated by official
traffic-control devices:
      (1)   A left turn shall not be made from any other lane.
      (2)   A vehicle shall not be driven in the lane except when preparing for
or making a left turn from or into the roadway or when preparing for or making
a U-turn when otherwise permitted by law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.021 LIMITATIONS ON U-TURNS.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall not turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction unless the movement can be made in safety and without
interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction
upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, where the
vehicle cannot be seen by the driver of any other vehicle approaching from
either direction within 500 feet.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.022 STARTING PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked,
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.023 WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may turn a vehicle at an intersection unless the vehicle is
in proper position upon the highway as required in §
71.020, or turn a vehicle to enter a private road or driveway, or otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway
unless and until the movement can be made with reasonable safety. No person may
so turn any vehicle without giving an appropriate signal in the manner
hereinafter provided.
   (B)   A signal of intention to turn right or left, change lanes, otherwise
turn a vehicle from a direct course, move right or left upon a highway, or when
required must be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet
traveled by the vehicle within a business or residence district, and the signal
must be given continuously during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by
the vehicle outside a business or residence district.
   (C)   No person may stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle without
first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided in this chapter to
the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
   (D)   The electric turn signal device required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-
208 must be used and operated as prescribed in division (B) above to indicate
an intention to turn, change lanes, turn a vehicle from a direct course, move
right or left upon a highway, or start from a parallel parked position. Unless
the conditions of division (B) above are met, an electric turn signal device
required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208 shall not be left in the on position
and must not be flashed on one side only on a parked or disabled vehicle, or
flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to operators of other vehicles
approaching from the rear. However, signal devices may be flashed
simultaneously on both sides of a motor vehicle to indicate the presence of a
vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, overtaking, and
passing.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.024 SIGNAL BY HAND AND ARM OR SIGNAL DEVICE.
   Any stop or turn signal, when required herein, shall be given either by
means of the hand and arm or by an electric turn signal device conforming to
the requirements provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.025 METHOD OF GIVING HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   All signals given by hand and arm shall be given from the left side of the
vehicle in the following manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:
   (A)   Left turn. Hand and arm extended horizontally.
   (B)   Right turn. Hand and arm extended upward, except that a person
operating a bicycle may extend the right arm and hand horizontally and to the
right side of the bicycle.
   (C)   Stop or decrease of speed. Hand and arm extended downward.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806) Penalty, see §
70.99
OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 71.040 DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing those movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the roadway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the roadway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under
the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   Upon a roadway restricted to one-way traffic;
      (5)   Whenever there is a single-track paved road on one side of the
public highway and two vehicles meet thereon, the driver on whose right is the
wider shoulder shall give the right-of-way on the pavement to the other
vehicle.
   (B)   Upon a two lane roadway, providing for two-way movement of traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven in the right-hand lane available for traffic, or as
close as practicable to the right hand curb or edge of the roadway, except when
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction or when
preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private road or
driveway.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic, and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left side of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2). However, this division
shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center line in making
a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.041 PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least ½ of
the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.042 OVERTAKING VEHICLES ON THE LEFT.
   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding
in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions, and special
rules otherwise stated in this chapter:
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle. In no event shall the movement be made by driving off the
pavement or the main traveled portion of the roadway.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal, and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   (C)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not, in passing upon the left
of any vehicle proceeding in the same direction, pass upon the right of any
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is an unobstructed lane
of traffic available to permit the passing maneuver safely.
   (D)   The operator of a motor vehicle overtaking a bicycle or individual
proceeding in the same direction on a highway shall leave a safe distance, but
not less than three feet, when passing the bicycle or individual and shall
maintain that distance until safely past the overtaken bicycle or individual.
   (E)   A person driving a motor vehicle shall not, in a reckless manner,
drive the motor vehicle unnecessarily close to, toward, or near a bicyclist,
pedestrian, or a person riding a horse or driving an animal drawn vehicle.
   (F)   Every person convicted of division (E) of this section shall be guilty
of a Class A misdemeanor if the violation does not result in great bodily harm
or permanent disability or disfigurement to another. If the violation results
in great bodily harm or permanent disability or disfigurement to another, the
person shall be guilty of a Class 3 felony, to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.043 WHEN OVERTAKING ON THE RIGHT IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle with three or more wheels may overtake and
pass upon the right of another vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle;
      (3)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lines of moving vehicles.
   (B)   The driver of a two-wheeled vehicle may not pass upon the right of any
other vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless the unobstructed pavement
to the right of the vehicle being passed is of a width of not less than eight
feet. This division does not apply to devices propelled by human power.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle upon the
right only under conditions permitting the movement in safety. Such movement
shall not be made by driving off the roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.044 LIMITATIONS ON OVERTAKING ON THE LEFT.
   (A)   Passing on the left.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless authorized by the provisions of this chapter, and unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction, or any vehicle overtaken.
      (2)   In every event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized
lane of travel as soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement
involves the use of a lane authorized for vehicles approaching from the
opposite direction, before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle approaching
from the opposite direction.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705)
   (B)   Conditions where passing on the left is prohibited.
      (1)   No vehicle shall be driven on the left side of the roadway under
the following conditions:
         (a)   When approaching or upon the crest of a grade or a curve in the
highway where the driver's view is obstructed within a distance as to create a
hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite direction.
         (b)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.
         (c)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of
any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel.
      (2)   The limitations in division (B)(1) above do not apply upon a one-
way roadway, nor upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width
for two or more lanes of moving traffic in each direction, nor to the driver of
a vehicle turning left into or from an alley, private road, or driveway when
the movements can be made with safety.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.045 MEETING OR OVERTAKING SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall stop the vehicle before meeting or
overtaking, from either direction, any school bus stopped on a highway,
roadway, private road, parking lot, school property, or at any other location,
including, without limitation, a location that is not a highway or roadway for
the purpose of receiving or discharging pupils. The stop is required before
reaching the school bus when there is in operation on the school bus the visual
signals as specified in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-803 and 12-805. The driver
of the vehicle shall not proceed until the school bus resumes motion or the
driver of the vehicle is signaled by the school bus driver to proceed or the
visual signals are no longer actuated.
   (B)   The stop signal arm required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803 shall be
extended after the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of
loading or discharging pupils and shall be closed before the school bus is
placed in motion again. The stop signal arm shall not be extended at any other
time.
   (C)   The alternately flashing red signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing
signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be actuated after
the school bus has come to a complete stop for the purpose of loading or
discharging pupils and shall be turned off before the school bus is placed in
motion again. The red signal lamps shall not be actuated at any other time
except as provided in division (D) below.
   (D)   The alternately flashing amber signal lamps of an eight-lamp flashing
signal system required by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805 shall be actuated
continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by the school bus
before stopping for the purpose of loading or discharging pupils within an
urban area, and during not less than the last 200 feet traveled by the school
bus outside an urban area. The amber signal lamps shall remain actuated until
the school bus is stopped. The amber signal lamps shall not be actuated at any
other time.
   (E)   The driver of a vehicle upon a highway having four or more lanes which
permits at least two lanes of traffic to travel in opposite directions need not
stop the vehicle upon meeting a school bus which is stopped in the opposing
roadway; and need not stop the vehicle when driving upon a controlled access
highway when passing a school bus traveling in either direction that is stopped
in a loading zone adjacent to the surfaced or improved part of the controlled
access highway where pedestrians are not permitted to cross.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414(a) - (e)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.046 ONE-WAY ROADWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated for one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be
driven only in the direction designated at all or such times as shall be
indicated by official traffic-control devices.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island must be driven only
to the right of the island.
   (C)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two or more roadways by
leaving an intervening space or by a physical barrier or a clearly indicated
dividing section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle
must be driven only upon the right-hand roadway unless directed or permitted to
use another roadway by official traffic-control devices or police officers. No
vehicle may be driven over, across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or
section except through an opening in the physical barrier, or dividing section,
or space, or at a cross-over or intersection as established by public
authority.
   (D)   The driver of a vehicle may turn left across a paved noncurbed
dividing space unless prohibited by an official traffic-control device.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.047 NO-PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees is authorized to determine those portions of any
highway within the village where overtaking and passing or driving on the left
of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and may by appropriate signs or
markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of the zones, and when
signs or markings are in place and clearly visible to an ordinarily observant
person, every driver of a vehicle shall obey the directions thereof.
   (B)   Where signs or markings are in place to define a no-passing zone as
set forth in division (A) no driver may at any time drive on the left side of
the roadway within the no-passing zone or on the left side of any pavement
striping designed to mark the no-passing zone throughout its length.
   (C)   This section does not apply under the conditions described in §
71.040 (A)(2), nor to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an
alley, private road, or driveway. The pavement striping designed to mark the
no-passing zone may be crossed from the left-hand lane for the purpose of
completing a pass that was begun prior to the beginning of the zone in the
driver's direction of travel.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.048 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic the following rules in addition to all others consistent herewith
shall apply.
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until the driver has first
ascertained that such movement can be made with safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for two-
way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle traveling in the same
direction when such center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or
in preparation for making a left turn or where such center lane is at the time
allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the same direction that the vehicle
is proceeding and such allocation is designated by official traffic-control
devices.
   (C)   Official traffic-control devices may be erected directing specific
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of the
roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.
Drivers must obey lane designation signing except when it is necessary to use a
different lane to make a turning maneuver.
   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of every such device.
   (E)   A person is not in violation of this section if he or she is complying
with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 11-907, 11-907.5 or 11-908.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709)  Penalty, see §
70.99
RIGHT-OF-WAY
§ 71.060 VEHICLES APPROACHING OR ENTERING INTERSECTION.
   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different roadways
at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left must
yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right. This rule may be modified
at through highways or streets and where otherwise inconsistent with the
provisions of this traffic code.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.061 VEHICLE TURNING LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an intersection
or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard, but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed
as soon as a safe interval occurs.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902) Penalty, see §
70.99  
§ 71.062 VEHICLES ENTERING STOP CROSSWALK.
   Where stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an intersection, or
flashing red signals are in place at a plainly marked crosswalk between
intersections, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the nearest
crosswalk, and pedestrians within or entering the crosswalk at either edge of
the roadway shall have the right-of-way over vehicles so stopped. Drivers of
vehicles having so yielded the right-of- way to pedestrians entering or within
the nearest crosswalk at an intersection shall also yield the right-of- way to
pedestrians within any other crosswalk at the intersection.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.063 VEHICLE ENTERING STOP OR YIELD INTERSECTION.
   (A)   Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop
or yield signs.
   (B)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control
signal, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop line but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to
any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another roadway, or which
is approaching so closely on the roadway as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when the driver is moving across or within the intersection,
but the driver, having so yielded, may proceed as soon as a safe interval
occurs.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall, in obedience
to the sign, slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and,
if required for safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but
if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, of
if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver
has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. After slowing or
stopping, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
   (D)   If a driver is involved in a collision at an intersection or
interferes with the movement of other vehicles after driving past a yield
right-of-way sign, the collision or interference shall be deemed prima facie
evidence of the driver's failure to yield right-of-way.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.064 MERGING TRAFFIC.
   Notwithstanding the right-of-way provision in §
71.060, at an intersection where traffic lanes are provided for merging
traffic, the driver of each vehicle on the converging roadways is required to
adjust his vehicular speed and lateral position so as to avoid a collision with
another vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.065 VEHICLE ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley,
building, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-of-way to all
vehicles approaching on the highway to be entered.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.066 OPERATION OF VEHICLES ON APPROACH OF AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making
use of audible and visual signals meeting the requirements of this chapter, or
a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an audible or visual
signal, the driver of every other vehicle shall yield the right-of-way and
shall immediately drive to a position parallel to, and as close as possible to,
the right-hand edge or curb of the highway clear of any intersection, and
shall, if necessary to permit the safe passage of the emergency vehicle, stop
and remain in that position until the authorized emergency vehicle has passed,
unless otherwise directed by a police officer.
   (B)   This section shall not operate to relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons using the highway.
   (C)   (1)   Upon approaching a stationary authorized emergency vehicle, when
the authorized emergency vehicle is giving a signal by displaying alternately
flashing red, red and white, blue, or red and blue lights or amber or yellow
warning lights, a person who drives an approaching vehicle shall:
         (a)   Proceeding with due caution, yield the right-of-way by making a
lane change into a lane not adjacent to that of the authorized emergency
vehicle, if possible with due regard to safety and traffic conditions, if on a
highway having at least four lanes with not less than two lanes proceeding in
the same direction as the approaching vehicle; or
         (c)   If changing lanes would be impossible or unsafe, proceeding with
due caution, reduce the speed of the vehicle, maintaining a safe speed for road
conditions and leaving a safe distance until safely past the stationary
emergency vehicles.
      (2)   The visual signal specified under this division (C) given by an
authorized emergency vehicle is an indication to drivers of approaching
vehicles that a hazardous condition is present when circumstances are not
immediately clear. Drivers of vehicles approaching a stationary emergency
vehicle in any lane shall heed the warning of the signal, reduce the speed of
the vehicle, proceed with due caution, maintain a safe speed for road
conditions, be prepared to stop, and leave a safe distance until safely passed
the stationary emergency vehicle.
   (D)   As used in division (C), AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE includes any
vehicle authorized by law to be equipped with oscillating, rotating, or
flashing lights under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215, while the owner or
operator of the vehicle is engaged in his or her official duties.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a), (b), (c))  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.067 FUNERAL PROCESSIONS.
   (A)   Funeral processions have the right-of-way at intersections when
vehicles comprising the procession have their headlights and hazard lights
lighted, subject to the following conditions and exceptions:
      (1)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle giving an
audible or visible signal;
      (2)   Operators of vehicles in a funeral procession shall yield the
right-of-way when directed to do so by a traffic officer;
      (3)   The operator of the leading vehicle in a funeral procession shall
comply with stop signs and traffic-control signals but when the leading vehicle
has proceeded across an intersection in accordance with the signal or after
stopping as required by the stop sign, all vehicles in the procession may
proceed without stopping, regardless of the sign or signal, and the leading
vehicle and the vehicles in procession shall proceed with due caution.
   (B)   The operator of a vehicle not in the funeral procession shall not
drive his vehicle in the funeral procession except when authorized to do so by
a traffic officer or when such vehicle is an authorized emergency vehicle
giving audible or visible signal.
   (C)   Operators of vehicles not a part of a funeral procession may not form
a procession or convoy and have their headlights or hazard lights or both
lighted for the purpose of securing the right-of-way granted by this section to
funeral processions.
   (D)   The operator of a vehicle not in a funeral procession may overtake and
pass the vehicles in such procession if such overtaking and passing can be
accomplished without causing a traffic hazard or interfering with such
procession.
   (E)   The lead vehicle in the funeral procession may be equipped with a
flashing amber light which may be used only when such vehicle is used as a lead
vehicle in such procession. Vehicles comprising a funeral procession may
utilize funeral pennants or flags or windshield stickers or flashing hazard
warning signal flashers to identify the individual vehicles in such a
procession.
   (F)   In the absence of law enforcement traffic control assistance for a
funeral procession, a funeral director or his or her designee may direct
traffic during a funeral procession.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420) Penalty, see §
70.99
SPECIAL STOPS REQUIRED
§ 71.080 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL INDICATING APPROACH OF TRAIN OR RAILROAD TRACK
EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing, where the driver is not always required to stop, the person must
exercise due care and caution as the existence of a railroad track across a
highway is a warning of danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in
this section, the driver shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad, and shall not proceed until the tracks
are clear and he or she can do so safely. The foregoing requirements shall
apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or a human flagman gives or continues to
give a signal of the approach or passage of a railroad train or railroad track
equipment;
      (3)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment approaching a highway
crossing emits a warning signal and the train or railroad track equipment, by
reason of its speed or nearness to the crossing, is an immediate hazard;
      (4)   An approaching railroad train or railroad track equipment is
plainly visible and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing;
      (5)   A railroad train or railroad track equipment is approaching so
closely that an immediate hazard is created. Whenever a person driving a
vehicle approaches a railroad grade crossing where the driver is not always
required to stop but must slow down, the person must exercise due care and
caution as the existence of a railroad track across a highway is a warning of
danger, and under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver
shall slow down within 50 feet but not less that 15 feet from the nearest rail
of the railroad and shall not proceed until he or she checks that the tracks
are clear of an approaching train or railroad track equipment.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   Local authorities are authorized to designate dangerous highway grade
crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs thereat. When stop signs are
erected at railroad grade crossings, the driver of any vehicle shall stop
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad,
and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
   (D)   No person shall, while driving a commercial motor vehicle, fail to
negotiate a railroad-highway grade railroad crossing because of insufficient
undercarriage clearance.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201(a), (b), (c), (d-1)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.081 CERTAIN VEHICLES MUST STOP AT ALL RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The driver of any of the following vehicles shall, before crossing a
railroad track or tracks at grade, stop that vehicle within 50 feet but not
less than 15 feet from the nearest rail, and while so stopped, shall listen and
look for the approach of a train or railroad track equipment, and shall not
proceed until that movement can be made with safety:
      (1)   Any second division vehicle carrying passengers for hire;
      (2)   Any bus that meets all of the special requirements for school buses
in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 12, § 801; ILCS Ch. 625, Act 12, § 803 and ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 12, § 805. The driver of the bus, in addition to complying with all other
applicable requirements of this division (A), must also (i) turn off all noise
producing accessories, including heater blowers, defroster fans, auxiliary
fans, and radios, and (ii) open the service door and driver’s window, before
crossing a railroad track or tracks.
      (3)   Any other vehicle which is required by federal or state law to be
placarded when carrying as a cargo or part of a cargo “hazardous material” as
defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 700-1 et seq. After stopping as required in
this section, the driver shall proceed only in a gear not requiring a change of
gears during the crossing, and the driver shall not shift gears while crossing
the track or tracks.
   (B)   This section shall not apply:
      (1)   At any railroad grade crossing where traffic is controlled by a
police officer or flagperson;
      (2)   At any railroad grade crossing controlled by a functioning traffic-
control signal transmitting a green indication which under law, permits the
vehicle to proceed across the railroad tracks without slowing or stopping,
except that division (A) of this section shall apply to any school bus;
      (3)   At any streetcar grade crossing within a business or residence
district; or
      (4)   At any abandoned industrial or spur track railroad grade crossing
designated as exempt by the Illinois Commerce Commission and marked with an
official sign as authorized in the state Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices for Streets and Highways.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.082 EMERGING FROM ALLEY, BUILDING, PRIVATE ROAD, OR DRIVEWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building, private road, or
driveway within an urban area shall stop the vehicle immediately prior to
driving into the sidewalk area extending across the alley, building entrance,
road, or driveway, or in the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the
point nearest the street to be entered where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic thereon, and shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrians as may be necessary to avoid collision, and upon entering the
roadway, shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on the
roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.083 STOP WHEN TRAFFIC OBSTRUCTED.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or railroad grade crossing to accommodate
the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles,
pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control signal
indication to proceed.
   (B)   No driver shall enter a highway rail grade crossing unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the highway rail grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of a
train or other railroad equipment using the rails, notwithstanding any traffic-
control signal indication to proceed.
   (C)   The Secretary of State shall suspend for a period of one month the
driving privileges of any person convicted of a violation of division (B) or a
similar provision of a local ordinance; the Secretary shall suspend for a
period of three months the driving privileges of any person convicted of a
second or subsequent violation of division (B) or a similar provision of a
local ordinance if the second or subsequent violation occurs within five years
of a prior conviction for the same offense. In addition to the suspensions
authorized by this section, any person convicted of violating division (B) or a
similar provision of a local ordinance shall be subject to a mandatory fine of
$500 or 50 hours of community service. Any person given a disposition of court
supervision for violating division (B) or a similar provision of a local
ordinance shall also be subject to a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of
community service. Upon a second or subsequent violation, in addition to the
suspensions authorized by this section, the person shall be subject to a
mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours community service. The Secretary may also
grant, for the duration of any suspension issued under this division, a
restricted driving permit granting the privilege of driving a motor vehicle
between the driver’s residence and place of employment or within other proper
limits that the Secretary of State shall find necessary to avoid any undue
hardship. A restricted driving permit issued hereunder shall be subject to
cancellation, revocation and suspension by the Secretary of State in like
manner and for like cause as a driver’s license may be cancelled, revoked or
suspended; except that a conviction upon one or more offenses against laws or
ordinances regulating the movement of traffic shall be deemed sufficient cause
for the revocation, suspension or cancellation of the restricted driving
permit. The Secretary of State may, as a condition to the issuance of a
restricted driving permit, require the applicant to participate in a designated
driver remedial or rehabilitative program. Any conviction for a violation of
this division shall be included as an offense for the purposes of determining
suspension action under any other provision of this code, provided however,
that the penalties provided under this division shall be imposed unless those
penalties imposed under other applicable provisions are greater.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425) Penalty, see §
70.99
PROHIBITIONS
§ 71.095 BACKING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same unless the movement
can be made with safety and without interfering with other traffic.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back the same upon any shoulder or
roadway of any controlled-access highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.096 FOLLOWING VEHICLE TOO CLOSELY.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the vehicles
and the traffic upon and conditions of the street or highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.097 OBSTRUCTION OF DRIVER'S VIEW OR DRIVING MECHANISM.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct
the view of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or as to interfere
with the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle or streetcar shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver's or motorman's view ahead or to the sides, or to
interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle or
streetcar.
   (C)   No passenger on a school bus may ride or stand in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the side or to the rear, or to
interfere with his control of the driving mechanism of the bus.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.098 OPENING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.099 COASTING.
   (A)   The driver of any motor vehicle when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the gears or transmission of the vehicle in neutral.
   (B)   The driver of a truck or bus when traveling upon a down grade shall
not coast with the clutch disengaged.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.100 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS; DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall
not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than
500 feet or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in
answer to a fire alarm.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411)
   (B)   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the Fire
Department when laid down on any street, private road, or driveway to be used
at any fire or alarm of fire, without the consent of the Fire Department
official in command.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.101 DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   No person shall drive any vehicle upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any vehicle moved exclusively by human
power, to any electric personal assistive mobility device, nor to any motorized
wheelchair. Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit or preempt the
authority of any home rule or non-home rule unit of local government from
regulating or prohibiting the use of electric personal assistive mobility
devices.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.102 USE OF ROLLER SKATES, COASTERS, OR SIMILAR DEVICES.
   No person upon roller skates or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle, skateboard, or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while
crossing a street on a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play
streets when authorized by the traffic authority.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.103 PUTTING GLASS OR OTHER HAZARDOUS MATERIALS ON HIGHWAY PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall throw, spill or deposit upon any highway any bottle,
glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, or any litter, as defined in the Litter
Control Act, ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3.
   (B)   Any person who violates division (A) upon any highway shall
immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed.
   (C)   Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a highway shall
remove any glass or other debris, except any hazardous substance as defined in
ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215, hazardous waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act
5, § 3.220, and potentially infectious medical waste as defined in ILCS Ch.
415, Act 5, § 3.360, dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.104 OBSTRUCTING PERSON IN HIGHWAYS.
   No person shall willfully and unnecessarily hinder, obstruct, or delay, or
willfully and unnecessarily attempt to delay, hinder, or obstruct any other
person in lawfully driving or traveling along or upon any highway within this
village, or offer for barter or sale merchandise on the highway so as to
interfere with the effective movement of traffic.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.105 FARM TRACTOR OPERATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a farm tractor on a highway in this village
unless the tractor is being used as an implement of husbandry in connection
with farming operations.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, the use of a farm tractor as an
implement of husbandry in connection with farming operations shall be deemed to
include use of the tractor in connection with the transportation of
agricultural products and of farm machinery, equipment, and supplies, as well
as the transportation of the implement of husbandry from its place of purchase
to its place of storage, in connection with the obtaining of repairs of the
implement of husbandry, and the towing of a registered truck of not more than
8,000 pounds for use as return transportation after the tractor is left at the
place of work or repair.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.106 DRIVING ON CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person may drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at entrances and exits established by public authority.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.107 OPERATING UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   It shall be unlawful for anyone except a member of the Police Department or
Fire Department in the performance of their duties to operate an unlicensed
motor vehicle upon any street or alley of the village.
(Am. Ord. 1003, passed 7-7-08) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.108 RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride upon the fenders, running board
or outside step of any vehicle in the village.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.109 IDLING OF TRUCK MOTORS.
   No motor on any truck shall be permitted to run while said truck is parked
or stopped along the curb of any street, whether or not said truck is then
attended or unattended excepting only a motor connected to a refrigeration
device for refrigerated freight on the truck and then only the truck containing
refrigerated freight is making deliveries or picking up freight at a place or
places within the village, or when the motor provides power for the loading and
unloading.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.110 NON-SKID DEVICES.
   It shall be unlawful to operate upon any street any motor vehicle equipped
with any non-skid device so constructed that any rigid or non-flexible portion
thereof comes into contact with the pavement or roadway.
Penalty, see §
70.99
PARADES
§ 71.120 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRUISING. The repeated operation of two or more vehicles in a continuous or
nearly continuous flow through a parking lot.
   PARADE. Any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant, or
procession of any kind, or any similar display in or on any street, sidewalk,
park, or other public place in the village, or CRUISING as defined above.
   PARADE PERMIT. A permit required by this subchapter.
   PARKING LOT. Any paved or unpaved area used by a place of business or
shopping center for the parking of vehicles of their customers, but shall not
include those operated for hire.
§ 71.121 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person or persons shall engage or participate in, aid, form, or
start any parade unless a parade permit has been obtained from the Chief of
Police or other authorized village official.
   (B)   This subchapter shall not apply to:
      (1)   Funeral processions;
      (2)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in
educational activities, provided the conduct is under the immediate direction
and supervision of the proper school authorities;
      (3)   A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.122 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with
the Chief of Police or other authorized village official on forms provided by
such officer.
   (A)   Filing period. The application for a parade permit shall be filed not
less than five days or not more than 60 days before the date on which it is
proposed to conduct the parade.
   (B)   The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person seeking to
conduct the parade;
      (2)   If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by
an organization, the name, address, and telephone number of the headquarters of
the organization and of the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
      (3)   The name, address, and telephone number of the person who will be
the parade chairperson and who will be responsible for its conduct;
      (4)   The date when the parade is to be conducted;
      (5)   The route to be traveled, the starting point, and the termination
point;
      (6)   The approximate number of persons, animals, and vehicles which will
constitute the parade, the type of animals, if any, and the description of the
vehicles;
      (7)   The hours when the parade will start and terminate;
      (8)   A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a
portion of the width of the streets, sidewalk, park, or other public place
proposed to be traversed;
      (9)   The location by street of any assembly area for the parade;
      (10)    The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at
any such assembly area or areas;
      (11)    The interval of space to be maintained between units of the
parade;
      (12)    If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for,
any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file a
communication in writing from the person authorizing the applicant to apply for
the permit on his behalf;
      (13)    Any additional information reasonably necessary to a fair
determination as to whether a permit should be issued.
   (C)   There shall be paid at the time of filing an application for a parade
permit a fee in an amount as established by the Board of Trustees as set forth
in Title XVII of this code.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.123 STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall issue a
permit when, from a consideration of the application and from other information
obtained, he finds that:
   (A)   The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe
and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route;
   (B)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of police officers of the village to properly police the line of
movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police
protection to the village;
   (C)   The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a
number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the
village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas
contiguous thereto;
   (D)   The concentration of persons, animals, and vehicles at assembly points
of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection
of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to the assembly areas;
   (E)   The conduct of the parade will not interfere with the movement of
firefighting equipment en route to a fire;
   (F)   The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point
of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;
   (G)   The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any
product, goods, or event, and is not designated to be held purely for private
profit;
   (H)   The parade, if it takes the form of cruising, has the approval in
writing of the owner or an authorized agent of the owner for the use of the
parking lot which is the site of the parade.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.124 NOTICE OF REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized village official shall act on the
application for a parade permit within three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after filing thereof. If he disapproves the application, he
shall mail to the applicant within the three days, Saturdays, Sundays, and
holidays excepted, after the date on which the application was filed, a notice
of his action stating the reasons for his denial of the permit.
§ 71.125 APPEAL PROCEDURE WHEN PERMIT DENIED.
   Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade
permit to the Board of Trustees. The appeal shall be taken within 30 days after
notice of denial. The Board of Trustees shall act on the appeal within 30 days
after its receipt.
§ 71.126 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   The Chief of Police or other authorized village official, in denying an
application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of
the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different than that named by
the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall file a
written notice of his acceptance. An alternate parade permit shall conform to
the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade permit under this
subchapter.
§ 71.127 NOTICE TO VILLAGE AND OTHER OFFICIALS WHEN PERMIT ISSUED.
   Immediately on the issuance of a parade permit, a copy thereof shall be sent
to the President and the Fire Chief.
§ 71.128 CONTENTS OF PERMIT.
   Each parade permit shall state the following information:
   (A)   Starting time;
   (B)   Minimum speed;
   (C)   Maximum speed;
   (D)   Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the
parade;
   (E)   The portions of the street, sidewalk, park, or other public place to
be traversed that may be occupied by the parade;
   (F)   The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;
   (G)   Such other information as is reasonably necessary to the enforcement
of this subchapter.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.129 DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions
and with all applicable laws and ordinances. The parade chairperson or other
person heading or leading the activity shall carry the parade permit on his
person during the conduct of the parade.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.130 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING PARADES.
   (A)   Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct, impede,
or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle, or
animal participating or used in a parade.
   (B)   Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle except a police car or
other emergency vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising
a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously
designated as a parade.
   (C)   Parking on parade route. The Chief of Police or other authorized
village official shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to
prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street or other public
thoroughfare or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade.
Signs shall be posted to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person
to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall
be liable for parking on a street or other public thoroughfare unless signs
have been posted in accordance with this section.
Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 71.131 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The village shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued
hereunder on application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth.
CHAPTER 72: PARKING REGULATIONS
Section
Method of Parking
   
72.01   General parking regulations
   
72.02   Unattended motor vehicles
Restrictions on Stopping, Standing, and Parking
   
72.10   Stopping, standing, or parking prohibited in specified places
   
72.11   Stopping, standing, or parking outside business or residence district
   
72.12   Unauthorized use of parking spaces reserved for handicapped
Snow Emergencies
   
72.25   Announcement of snow emergency
   
72.26   Termination of emergency
   
72.27   Snow emergency routes
Violations
   
72.40   Officers authorized to remove vehicles
   
72.41   Duty of lessor of vehicle on notice of violation of this chapter
   
72.99   Penalty
METHOD OF PARKING
§ 72.01 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every vehicle stopped or
parked upon a two-way roadway shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand
wheels parallel to and within 12 inches of the right-hand curb or as close as
practicable to the right edge of the right-hand shoulder.
   (B)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a one-way roadway shall be so
stopped or parked parallel to the curb or edge of the roadway, in the direction
of authorized traffic movement, with its right-hand wheels within 12 inches of
the right-hand curb or as close as practicable to the right edge of the right-
hand shoulder, or with its left-hand wheels within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb or as close as practicable to the left edge of the left-hand shoulder.
   (C)   No angle parking shall be permitted except as set forth in Title XVII
of this code.
   (D)   No person shall park in violation of signs placed by and under the
jurisdiction of the state Department of Transportation which prohibit, limit,
or restrict the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304)
   (E)   Parking of trucks. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to park any motor vehicle having a gross weight of more than three
tons or having a width of more than seven feet upon, along or over any street
or thoroughfare located within a residential zoning district of the village
except for any motor vehicle in the process of loading or unloading and except
for any municipal vehicle owned or used by the village in the performance of
municipal functions. For the purpose of this division, a residential zoning
district shall be those districts identified as R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and R-5 of
the village's Zoning Code.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.02 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit it to stand
unattended without stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key
from the ignition, effectively setting the brake thereon and, when standing
upon any perceptible grade, turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the
highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401) Penalty, see §
72.99
RESTRICTIONS ON STOPPING, STANDING, AND PARKING
§ 72.10 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING PROHIBITED IN SPECIFIED PLACES.
   (A)   Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police officer, or an official
traffic-control device, no person shall:
      (1)   Stop, stand, or park a vehicle:
         (a)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street;
         (b)   On a sidewalk;
         (c)   Within an intersection;
         (d)   On a crosswalk;
         (e)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by signs or markings;
         (f)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
         (g)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure, upon a highway, or
within a highway tunnel;
         (h)   On any railroad tracks. A violation of any part of this division
(A)(1)(h) shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 or 50 hours of community
service.
         (i)   At any place where official signs prohibit stopping;
         (j)   On any controlled-access highway;
         (k)   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers;
         (l)   In a public parking area if the vehicle does not display a
current annual registration sticker or digital registration sticker or current
temporary permit pending registration.
      (2)   Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
momentarily to pick up or discharge passengers:
         (a)   In front of a public or private driveway;
         (b)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant;
         (c)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
         (d)   Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop
sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
         (e)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and
on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75
feet of the entrance (when properly sign-posted);
         (f)   At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
      (3)   Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
         (a)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
         (b)   At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
   (B)   No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any
prohibited area or away from a curb a distance as is unlawful.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.11 STOPPING, STANDING, OR PARKING OUTSIDE BUSINESS OR RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   Outside a business or residence district, no person shall stop, park,
or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the roadway
when it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave the vehicle off the roadway,
but in every event an unobstructed width of the highway opposite a standing
vehicle shall be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view
of the stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon the highway.
   (B)   The village, with respect to highways under its jurisdiction or for
the maintenance of which it is responsible, may place signs prohibiting or
restricting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles on any highway where
in its opinion stopping, standing, or parking is dangerous to those using the
highway, or where stopping, standing, or parking vehicles would unduly
interfere with the free movement of traffic thereon. Any regulations adopted by
the village regarding the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles upon any
specific street, streets, or highways become effective at the time of the
erection of appropriate signs indicating the regulations. Such regulations
shall be set forth in Title XVII of this code.
   (C)   This section, and §
72.10 and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304 shall not apply to the driver of any
vehicle which is disabled in such manner and to such extent that it is
impossible to avoid stopping and temporarily leaving the vehicle in such
position.
   (D)   Any second division vehicle used exclusively for the collection of
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material may stop or stand on the road in a
business, rural, or residential district for the sole purpose of collecting
garbage, refuse, or recyclable material. The vehicle, in addition, to having
its hazard lights lighted at all times that it is engaged in stopping or
standing, shall also use its amber oscillating, rotating, or flashing light or
lights as authorized under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215(b), if so equipped.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301) Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.12 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PARKING SPACES RESERVED FOR HANDICAPPED.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle which is not
properly displaying registration plates or decals issued to a person with
disabilities, as defined by § 70.01, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616,
11-1301.1 or 11-1301.2, or to aveteran with a disability pursuant to ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 3-609, as evidence that the vehicle is operated by or for a
person with disabilities or a veteran with a disability, in any parking place,
including any private or public off-street parking facility, specifically
reserved, by the posting of an official sign as designated under ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-301, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates. It
shall be prohibited to park any motor vehicle in a designated access aisle
adjacent to any parking place specifically reserved for persons with
disabilities, by the posting of an official sign as designated under ILCS Ch.
625, Act 5, § 11-301, for motor vehicles displaying such registration plates.
When using the parking privileges for persons with disabilities, the parking
decal or device must be displayed properly in the vehicle where it is clearly
visible to law enforcement personnel, either hanging from the rearview mirror
or placed on the dashboard of the vehicle in clear view. Disability license
plates and parking decals and devices are not transferable from person to
person. Proper usage of the disability license plate or parking decal or device
requires the authorized holder to be present and enter or exit the vehicle at
the time the parking privileges are being used. It is a violation of this
section to park in a space reserved for a person with disabilities if the
authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking decal or device
does not enter or exit the vehicle at the time the parking privileges are being
used. Any motor vehicle properly displaying a disability license plate or a
parking decal or device containing the International symbol of access issued to
persons with disabilities by any local authority, state, district, territory or
foreign country shall be recognized by state and local authorities as a valid
license plate or device and receive the same parking privileges as residents of
this state.
      (2)   An individual with a vehicle displaying disability license plates
or a parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or to a veteran
with a disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 is in violation of this
section if the person using the disability license plate or parking decal or
device is not the authorized holder of the disability license plate or parking
decal or device or is not transporting the authorized holder of the disability
license plate or parking decal or device to or from the parking location and
the person uses the disability license plate or parking decal or device to
exercise any privileges granted through the disability license plate or parking
decals or devices under this code.
      (3)   A driver of a vehicle displaying disability license plates or a
parking decal or device issued to a qualified person with a disability under
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 3-616, 11-1301.1, or 11-1301.2 or to a veteran with a
disability under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609 is in violation of this section
if (i) the person to whom the disability license plate or parking decal or
device was issued is deceased and (ii) the driver uses the disability license
plate or parking decal or device to exercise any privileges granted through a
disability license plate or parking decal or device under this code.
   (B)   Any person or local authority owning or operating any public or
private off-street parking facility may, after notifying the Police Department,
remove or cause to be removed to the nearest garage or other place of safety
any vehicle parked within a stall or space reserved for use by a person with
disabilities which does not display person with disabilities registration
plates or a special decal or device as required under this section.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3(a), (b)) Penalty, see §
72.99
SNOW EMERGENCIES
§ 72.25 ANNOUNCEMENT OF SNOW EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Village President finds that falling snow, sleet, or freezing
rain will create a condition which makes it necessary that the parking of motor
vehicles on snow emergency routes be prohibited, or whenever he finds on the
basis of a firm forecast of snow, sleet, or freezing rain that the weather
conditions so forecasted may create a condition making it necessary that such
parking be prohibited, he is authorized to announce such prohibition, to become
effective at a time specified by him. After the effective time of such
prohibition no person shall park any vehicle or permit any vehicle to remain
parked on a snow emergency route. However, if a fall of snow, sleet, or
freezing rain occurs after 11:00 p.m. and prior to 6:00 a.m., and the Village
President has not announced prior to 11:00 p.m. that parking on snow emergency
routes is to be prohibited after a specified time, a vehicle parked on a snow
emergency route may remain so parked until 7:00 a.m. following such fall. The
prohibition of parking announced by the Village President under the authority
of this section shall remain in effect until he announces the termination of
the snow emergency, in part or in whole, after which the prohibition of parking
authorized by this section shall no longer be in effect.
Penalty, see §
72.99
§ 72.26 TERMINATION OF EMERGENCY.
   Whenever the Village President shall find that some or all of the conditions
which gave rise to the snow emergency prohibition no longer exist, he is
authorized to declare the termination of the emergency, in part or in whole,
effective immediately on announcement. If such announcement is made other than
between 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., it shall be repeated between those hours.
§ 72.27 SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTES.
   The term SNOW EMERGENCY ROUTE shall mean any route designated by the Village
President. On such street or highway designated as a snow emergency route,
special signs shall be posted to this effect.
VIOLATIONS
§ 72.40 OFFICERS AUTHORIZED TO REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle in violation of any of the
provisions of §
72.11 or any other applicable section of this traffic code or ordinance of the
village, the officer is authorized to move the vehicle, or require the driver
or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off
the roadway.
   (B)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to a
place of safety any unattended vehicle illegally left standing upon any
highway, bridge, causeway, or in a tunnel, or in a position or under
circumstances as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic.
   (C)   Any police officer is authorized to remove or cause to be removed to
the nearest garage or other place of safety any vehicle found upon a highway
when:
      (1)   Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner;
      (2)   The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are unable to
provide for its custody or removal;
      (3)   The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the person
arrested before a proper magistrate without unnecessary delay; or
      (4)   The registration of the vehicle has been suspended, cancelled, or
revoked.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302)
§ 72.41 DUTY OF LESSOR OF VEHICLE ON NOTICE OF VIOLATION OF THIS CHAPTER.
   Every person in whose name a vehicle is registered pursuant to law and who
leases such vehicle to others, after receiving written notice of a violation of
this chapter involving such vehicle, shall upon request provide such police
officers as have authority of the offense, and the court having jurisdiction
thereof, with a written statement of the name and address of the lessee at the
time of such offense and the identifying number upon the registration plates or
digital registration plates and registration sticker or stickers or digital
registration sticker or stickers of such vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305)
§ 72.99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no specific
penalties are otherwise provided shall be fined not less than $50 or more than
$500 for each and every violation. Every day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. 817, passed 3-18-02)
   (B)   (1)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of §
72.12(A)(1) shall be fined $250 in addition to any costs or charges connected
with the removal or storage of any motor vehicle authorized under this section;
but municipalities by ordinance may impose a fine up to $350 and shall display
signs indicating the fine imposed. If the amount of the fine is subsequently
changed, the municipality shall change the sign to indicate the current amount
of the fine. It shall not be a defense to a charge under this section that
either the sign posted pursuant to this section or the intended accessible
parking place does not comply with the technical requirements of ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 11-301, Department regulations, or local ordinance if a reasonable
person would be made aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place
that the place is reserved for a person with disabilities.
      (2)   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of §
72.12(A)(2) a first time shall be fined $600. Any person found guilty of
violating division §
72.12(A)(2) a second or subsequent time shall be fined $1,000. Any person who
violates §
72.12(A)(3) is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor and shall be fined $2,500. The
circuit clerk shall distribute 50% of the fine imposed on any person who is
found guilty of or pleads guilty to violating this section, including any
person placed on court supervision for violating this section, to the law
enforcement agency that issued the citation or made the arrest. If more than
one law enforcement agency is responsible for issuing the citation or making
the arrest, the 50% of the fine imposed shall be shared equally. If an officer
of the Secretary of State Department of Police arrested a person for a
violation of this section, 50% of the fine imposed shall be deposited into the
Secretary of State Police Services Fund.
   (C)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in division (B) of
this section for violations of §
72.12.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3(c), (d))
CHAPTER 73: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, GOLF CARTS, AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES
Section
Bicycles
   
73.01   Traffic laws apply to persons riding bicycles
   
73.02   Riding on bicycles
   
73.03   Clinging to vehicles
   
73.04   Riding on roadways and bicycle paths
   
73.05   Carrying articles
   
73.06   Lamps and other equipment on bicycles
   
73.07   Lamps on mopeds
   
73.08   Riding on mopeds
Motorcycles
   
73.20   Riding on motorcycles
   
73.21   Special equipment for persons riding motorcycles
   
73.22   Required equipment on motorcycles
   
73.23   Operating motorcycle on one wheel
Golf Carts and Utility-Terrain Vehicles
   
73.30   Operating golf carts and utility-terrain vehicles
BICYCLES
§ 73.01 TRAFFIC LAWS APPLY TO PERSONS RIDING BICYCLES.
   Every person riding a bicycle upon a highway shall be granted all of the
rights, and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of a
vehicle by this traffic code, except as to special regulations in this traffic
code, and except as to those provisions of this traffic code which by their
nature can have no application.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.02 RIDING ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   A person propelling a bicycle shall not ride other than upon or
astride a permanent and regular seat attached thereto.
   (B)   No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped, except that an adult rider may
carry a child securely attached to his person in a back pack or sling.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.03 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy
vehicle shall attach the same or himself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.04 RIDING ON ROADWAYS AND BICYCLE PATHS.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a roadway
at less than the normal speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall ride as close as practicable and safe to the
right-hand curb or edge of the roadway except under the following situations:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another bicycle, motorized pedalcycle,
or vehicle proceeding in the same direction; or
      (2)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway; or
      (3)   When reasonably necessary to avoid conditions including, but not
limited to, fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles, bicycles,
motorized pedalcycles, pedestrians, animals, surface hazards, or substandard
width lanes that make it unsafe to continue along the right-hand curb or edge.
For purposes of this subsection, a “substandard width lane” means a lane that
is too narrow for a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle and a vehicle to travel
safely side by side within the lane; or
      (4)   When approaching a place where a right turn is authorized.
   (B)   Any person operating a bicycle or motorized pedalcycle upon a one-way
highway with two or more marked traffic lanes may ride as near the left-hand
curb or edge of the roadway as practicable.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505)
   (C)   Persons riding bicycles or motorized pedalcycles upon a roadway shall
not ride more than two abreast, except on paths or parts of roadways set aside
for their exclusive use. Persons riding two abreast shall not impede the normal
and reasonable movement of traffic and, on a laned roadway, shall ride within a
single lane subject to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) above.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.05 CARRYING ARTICLES.
   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle, or article
which prevents the use of both hands in the control and operation of the
bicycle. A person operating a bicycle shall keep at least one hand on the
handlebars at all times.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.06 LAMPS AND OTHER EQUIPMENT ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at nighttime shall be equipped with a lamp
on the front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved
by the department which shall be visible from all distances from 100 feet to
600 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps
on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light visible from a distance of 500
feet to the rear may be used in addition to the red reflector.
   (B)   A bicycle shall not be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon a
bicycle, any siren. This division (B) does not apply to a bicycle that is a
police vehicle or Fire Department vehicle.
   (C)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with a brake which will adequately
control movement of and stop and hold the bicycle.
   (D)   No person shall sell a new bicycle or pedal for use on a bicycle that
is not equipped with a reflex reflector conforming to specifications prescribed
by the state Department of Transportation, on each pedal, visible from the
front and rear of the bicycle during darkness from a distance of 200 feet.
   (E)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with side reflectors. The reflectors shall be visible from each side
of the bicycle from a distance of 500 feet, and shall be essentially colorless
or red to the rear of the center of the bicycle and essentially colorless or
amber to the front of the center of the bicycle. The requirements of this
division may be met by reflective materials which shall be at least 3/16 inch
wide on each side of each tire or rim to indicate as clearly as possible the
continuous circular shape and size of the tires or rims of the bicycle, and
which reflective materials may be of the same color on both the front and rear
tire or rim. The reflectors shall conform to specifications prescribed by the
state Department of Transportation.
   (F)   No person shall sell or offer for sale a new bicycle that is not
equipped with an essentially colorless front-facing reflector.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.07 LAMPS ON MOPEDS.
   Every moped, when in use at nighttime, shall be equipped with a lamp on the
front which shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the front, and with a red reflector on the rear of a type approved by
the state Department of Transportation which shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when in front of lawful, low-
powered beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle. A lamp emitting a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to the
red reflector.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.08 RIDING ON MOPEDS.
   (A)   The operator of a moped shall ride only astride the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and shall not permit two persons to ride thereon
at the same time, unless the moped is designed to carry two persons. Any moped
designed for two persons must be equipped with a passenger seat and footrests
for use of a passenger.
   (B)   The provisions of §§
73.01 through
73.07 shall be applicable to the operation of mopeds, except for those
provisions which by their nature can have no application to mopeds.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
MOTORCYCLES
§ 73.20 RIDING ON MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the permanent and
regular seat attached thereto, and the operator shall not carry any other
person nor shall any other person ride on a motorcycle unless the motorcycle is
designed to carry more than one person, in which event a passenger may ride
upon the permanent and regular seat if designed for two persons, or upon
another seat firmly attached to the motorcycle at the rear or side of the
operator.
   (B)   A person shall ride upon a motorcycle only while sitting astride the
seat, facing forward, with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.
   (C)   No person shall operate any motorcycle with handlebar grips higher
than the height of the head of the operator when the operator is seated in the
normal driving position astride that portion of the seat or saddle occupied by
the operator.
   (D)   The operator of any motorcycle shall keep at least one hand on a
handlebar grip at all times the motorcycle is in motion.
   (E)   The operator of a motorcycle may not transport a passenger unless the
passenger is capable of resting a foot on the footrest while the motorcycle is
in motion.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.21 SPECIAL EQUIPMENT FOR PERSONS RIDING MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   The operator and every passenger of a motorcycle shall be protected by
glasses, goggles, or a transparent shield.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, glasses, goggles, and transparent
shields are defined as follows:
      (1)   GLASSES. Ordinary eye pieces such as spectacles or sunglasses worn
before the eye, made of shatter-resistant material. Shatter-resistant material,
as used in this section, means material so manufactured, fabricated, or created
that it substantially prevents shattering or flying when struck or broken.
      (2)   GOGGLES. A device worn before the eyes, the predominant function of
which is protecting the eyes without obstructing peripheral vision. Goggles
shall provide protection from the front and sides, and may or may not form a
complete seal with the face.
      (3)   TRANSPARENT SHIELD. A windshield attached to the front of a
motorcycle that extends above the eyes when an operator is seated in the
normal, upright riding position, made of shatter-resistant material, or a
shatter-resistant protective face shield that covers the wearer's eyes and face
at least to a point approximately to the tip of the nose.
   (C)   Contact lenses are not acceptable eye protection devices.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.22 REQUIRED EQUIPMENT ON MOTORCYCLES.
   Any motorcycle carrying a passenger, other than in a sidecar or enclosed
cab, shall be equipped with footrests for the passenger.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 73.23 OPERATING MOTORCYCLE ON ONE WHEEL.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on
one wheel
   (B)   Aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor driven cycle, or moped on one
wheel. A person commits aggravated operating a motorcycle, motor driven cycle,
or moped on one wheel when he or she violates division (A) of this section
while committing a violation of §
71.001(B). A violation of this division is a petty offense with a minimum fine
of $100, except a second conviction of a violation of this division is a Class
B misdemeanor and a third or subsequent conviction of a violation of this
division is a Class A misdemeanor.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2) Penalty, see §
70.99
GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES
§ 73.30 OPERATING GOLF CARTS AND UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLES.
   (A)   Golf carts and utility-terrain vehicles (not intended for 4 wheelers),
as defined and qualified herein shall be allowed on village streets under the
conditions stated herein.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   GOLF CART. A motorized vehicle with three or four wheels that is
not designated to be operated at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour whose
purpose can include, but is not limited to, the playing of golf and is
generally designed to carry persons including the driver.
      (2)   UTILITY-TERRAIN VEHICLE. Not intended for 4 wheelers, a self-
propelled, electrically powered four-wheel motor vehicle or a self-propelled
gasoline or diesel powered four-wheel motor vehicle.
      (3)   VILLAGE STREETS. Any of the streets within the boundaries of the
Village of Millstadt, Illinois.
   (C)   Requirements. All persons wishing to operate a golf cart or a utility-
terrain vehicle on the village streets must ensure compliance with the
following requirements:
      (1)   Proof of current liability insurance.
      (2)   Must be certified with the village and have the vehicles certified
with the village by inspection by a village designated representative.
      (3)   Must comply with the published "Rules Concerning Alternative
Transportation For the Village of Millstadt" as periodically updated.
      (4)   Must have city decal on the rear of vehicle.
      (5)   Must have current, valid Illinois driver license.
      (6)   Golf carts must be equipped as follows:
         (a)   Brakes and brake lights;
         (b)   Turn signals;
         (c)   Steering wheel apparatus;
         (d)   Tires;
         (e)   Rearview mirror;
         (f)   Approved "Slow Moving Vehicle" emblem on the rear of the vehicle
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709);
         (g)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of
300 feet to the front which will illuminate when in operation;
         (h)   Tail lamp that emits red light visible from at least 100 feet
from the rear which must illuminate when in operation; and
         (i)   Any additional requirements which may be amended to ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 11-1428 or the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      (7)   Utility-terrain vehicles must be equipped as follows:
         (a)   Brakes and brake lights;
         (b)   Turn signals on the front and rear;
         (c)   Steering wheel apparatus;
         (d)   Tires;
         (e)   Rearview mirror;
         (f)   Approved "Slow Moving Vehicle" emblem on the rear of the vehicle
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709);
         (g)   Headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of
300 feet to the front which will illuminate when in operation;
         (h)   Tail lamp that emits red light visible from at least 100 feet
from the rear which must illuminate when in operation; and
         (i)   Any additional requirements which may be amended to ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 11-1426 or the Illinois Vehicle Code.
      (8)   Must obey all traffic laws of the State of Illinois and the Village
of Millstadt.
      (9)   Must be 21 years of age.
      (10)   Must be operated only on village streets, except where prohibited.
      (11)   May not be operated on U.S. Highway 158 or 163 except to cross
highway at any intersection.
      (12)   Must not be operated in excess of a posted speed limit and may not
exceed 25 miles per hour.
      (13)   A person operating or that is in physical control of a golf cart
or utility-terrain vehicle as described herein on a roadway while under the
influence is subject to ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-500 through 11-502.
      (14)   Golf carts and utility-terrain vehicle shall not be operated on
sidewalks or in village parks other than parking areas.
      (15)   Golf carts and utility-terrain vehicles may not be operated on
streets and highways and roads under the jurisdiction of the Illinois
Department of Transportation (U.S. Highway 158 and U.S. Highway 163).
   (D)   Permits.
      (1)   No person shall operate a qualified golf cart or utility-terrain
vehicle without first obtaining a permit from the village as provided herein.
Permits shall be granted for a period of one year and renewed annually. The
cost of the permit is $50. Insurance coverage to be verified when obtaining or
renewing a permit.
      (2)   Every application for a permit shall be on a form supplied by the
village and shall contain the following:
         (a)   Name and address of applicant;
         (b)   Name and address of liability insurance carrier;
         (c)   Serial number, make, model and description of golf cart or
utility-terrain vehicle;
         (d)   Signed waiver of liability by applicant releasing the village
and agreeing to indemnify and hold the village harmless from any and all future
claims resulting from the operation of their golf cart or utility-terrain
vehicle on the village streets;
         (e)   Photocopy of applicable liability insurance coverage card
specifically for the vehicle to be operated pursuant to the permit; and
         (f)   Other information as the village may require.
      (3)   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
         (a)   The vehicle must be inspected by the village designee to insure
that the vehicle is safe to operate on village streets and is in compliance
with this section and with the State of Illinois Motor Vehicle Code.
         (b)   A physically handicapped applicant must submit a certificate
signed by a physician certifying the applicant is competent to safely operate a
qualified golf cart or utility-terrain vehicle on village streets.
         (c)   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance
with the provision of Illinois Statutes regarding minimum liability insurance
for passenger motor vehicle to operate on the roads of the State of Illinois.
      (4)   The village may suspend or revoke a permit granted hereunder upon
finding the holder has violated any provisions of this section or there is
evidence the holder cannot safely operate a qualified golf cart or utility-
terrain vehicle on designated roadways.
   (E)   Penalty. Any person who violates any provisions of this section shall
be punished by a fine of not less than $75 nor more than $500 for each offense.
Any second or subsequent offense shall result in a revocation of the permit for
a period of not less than three years or more than five years.
(Ord. 1078, passed 3-21-11)
CHAPTER 74: PEDESTRIANS
Section
   
74.01   Pedestrian obedience to traffic control devices and traffic regulations
   
74.02   Pedestrian right-of-way at crosswalks
   
74.03   Crossing at other than crosswalks
   
74.04   Drivers to avoid colliding with pedestrians
   
74.05   Blind, hearing impaired, or physically handicapped pedestrian right-of-
way
   
74.06   Pedestrians to use right half of crosswalks
   
74.07   Pedestrians soliciting rides or business
   
74.08   Pedestrians walking on highways
   
74.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
   
74.10   Pedestrians yield to authorized emergency vehicles
   
74.11   Pedestrians under influence of alcohol or drugs
   
74.12   Bridge and railroad signals
   
74.13   Motorized wheelchairs
§ 74.01 PEDESTRIAN OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES AND TRAFFIC
REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A pedestrian shall obey the instructions of any official traffic-
control device specifically applicable to him, unless otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic and pedestrian-control signals
provided in §§
70.31 and
70.32 of this traffic code; but at all other places, pedestrians shall be
accorded the privileges and shall be subject to the restrictions stated in this
chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001)
§ 74.02 PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, or not in operation,
the driver of a vehicle shall stop and yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian
crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the pedestrian is upon the half of
the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the pedestrian is
approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety,
and walk or run into the path of a moving vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) shall not apply under the condition stated in §
74.03 (B).
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   Whenever stop signs or flashing red signals are in place at an
intersection or at a plainly marked crosswalk between intersections, drivers
shall yield right-of-way to pedestrians as set forth in §
71.062.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.03 CROSSING AT OTHER THAN CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk, or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices; and, when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to the crossing movements.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.04 DRIVERS TO AVOID COLLIDING WITH PEDESTRIANS.
   Notwithstanding other provisions of this chapter, every driver of a vehicle
shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian, or any person
operating a bicycle or other device propelled by human power and shall give
warning by sounding the horn when necessary, and shall exercise proper
precaution upon observing any child or any obviously confused, incapacitated,
or intoxicated person.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.05 BLIND, HEARING-IMPAIRED, OR PHYSICALLY HANDICAPPED PEDESTRIAN RIGHT-OF-
WAY.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any blind, hearing-
impaired, or physically handicapped pedestrian carrying a clearly visible white
cane or accompanied by a support or guide dog.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.06 PEDESTRIANS TO USE RIGHT HALF OF CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.07 PEDESTRIANS SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS.
   (A)   No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment or business from the occupant of any vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle, unless expressly permitted by
this code. Solicitation on highways within this village shall be allowed only
at intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop. Any
person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be 16 years of age or more and
shall be wearing a high visibility vest. The soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization
as provided by the Solicitation for Charity Act.
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity.
      (3)   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent.
   (D)   No person shall stand on or in the proximity of a roadway for the
purpose of soliciting the watching or guarding of any vehicle while parked or
about to be parked on a street or highway.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.08 PEDESTRIANS WALKING ON HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, where a sidewalk
is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be unlawful for any pedestrian
to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, where a sidewalk
is not available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk
only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, where neither a
sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian walking along and upon a
highway shall walk as near as practicable to an outside edge of a roadway, and,
if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (E)   In municipalities with a population of under 2,000,000 inhabitants,
upon highways where the maximum posted speed limit is 45 miles per hour or
less, and during the period from sunrise to sunset, a pedestrian who is 18
years of age or older and wearing in-line speed skates may travel upon the
roadway as near as practicable to an outside edge of the roadway. Pedestrians
wearing in-line speed skates upon a roadway may not impede or obstruct other
vehicular traffic. Pedestrians wearing in-line speed skates shall be subject to
all other rights and duties under this code. Nothing in this code shall be
construed to prevent a pedestrian wearing in-line speed skates from using a
lane designated for bicycles.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.09 RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrians on a
sidewalk.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.10 PEDESTRIANS YIELD TO AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the immediate approach of an authorized emergency vehicle making use of
an audible signal and visual signals meeting the requirements of ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 12-601, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully making use of an
audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the
authorized emergency vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.11 PEDESTRIANS UNDER INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol or any drug to a degree
which renders himself a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway, except on a
sidewalk.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.12 BRIDGE AND RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
   (C)   No pedestrian shall enter, remain upon or traverse over a railroad
grade crossing or pedestrian walkway crossing a railroad track when an audible
bell or clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device is operational,
giving warning of the presence, approach, passage, or departure of a railroad
train or railroad track equipment.
   (D)   A violation of any part of this section is a petty offense for which a
$250 fine shall be imposed for a first violation, and a $500 fine shall be
imposed for a second or subsequent violation. The court may impose 25 hours of
community service in place of the $250 fine for a first violation.
   (E)   Local authorities shall impose fines as established in division (D) of
this section for pedestrians who fail to obey signals indicating the presence,
approach, passage, or departure of a train or railroad track equipment.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 74.13 MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIRS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair upon a sidewalk or roadway
shall be granted all the rights and shall be subject to all the duties
applicable to a pedestrian.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1)
CHAPTER 75: EQUIPMENT; LOADS
Section
Equipment
   
75.01   Scope and effect of equipment requirements
Loads
   
75.10   Scope and effect of size, weight, and load regulations
   
75.11   Projecting loads on passenger vehicles
   
75.12   Protruding members of vehicles
   
75.13   Spilling loads prohibited
   
75.14   Pushing of disabled vehicles
EQUIPMENT
§ 75.01 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF EQUIPMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move, or for the owner to
cause or knowingly permit to be driven or moved on any highway any vehicle or
combination of vehicles which is in an unsafe condition as to endanger any
person or property, or which does not contain those parts or is not at all
times equipped with the lamps and other equipment in proper condition and
adjustment as required in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq., or which is
equipped in any manner in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq.,
or for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq., with respect
to equipment on vehicles shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road
machinery, road rollers, or farm tractors, or to farm- wagon type trailers
having a fertilizer spreader attachment permanently mounted thereon, having a
gross weight of not to exceed 36,000 pounds and used only for the
transportation of bulk fertilizer, or to farm-wagon type tank trailers of not
to exceed 2,000 gallons capacity, used during the liquid fertilizer season as
field-storage “nurse tanks,” supplying the fertilizer to a field applicator and
highways only for bringing the fertilizer to a field applicator from a local
source of supply to the farm or field or from one farm or field to another.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101) Penalty, see §
70.99
LOADS
§ 75.10 SCOPE AND EFFECT OF SIZE, WEIGHT, AND LOAD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to drive or move on, upon, or across, or
for the owner to cause to knowingly permit to be driven or moved on, upon, or
across any highway any vehicle or vehicles of a size and weight exceeding the
limitations stated in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq., or otherwise in
violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.
   (B)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq. governing
size, weight, and load do not apply to equipment for snow and ice removal
operations owned or operated by the village, or to implements of husbandry
temporarily operated or towed in a combination upon a highway provided such
combination does not consist of more than three vehicles or, in the case of
hauling fresh, perishable fruits or vegetables from farm to the point of first
processing, not more than three wagons being towed by an implement of
husbandry, or to a vehicle operated under the terms of a special permit. The
provisions of ILCS Ch. 625 governing size and load do not apply to fire
apparatus.
   (C)   The provisions of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq. governing
size, weight and load do not apply to any snow and ice removal equipment that
is no more than 12 feet in width, if the equipment displays flags at least 18
inches square mounted on the driver's side of the snow plow.
   (D)   These vehicles must be equipped with an illuminated rotating,
oscillating or flashing amber light or lights, or a flashing amber strobe light
or lights, mounted on the top of the cab and of sufficient intensity to be
visible at 500 feet in normal sunlight. If the load on the transport vehicle
blocks the visibility of the amber lighting from the rear of the vehicle, the
vehicle must also be equipped with an illuminated rotating, oscillating or
flashing amber light or lights or a flashing amber stroke light or lights,
mounted on the rear of the load and of sufficient intensity to be visible at
500 feet in normal sunlight.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101)
   (E)   No person shall use the highways under the jurisdiction of the village
in violation of weight and location restrictions and commercial vehicle
restrictions set forth in Title XVII of this code.
Penalty, see §
70.99
Statutory reference:
   Power of village to regulate loads, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1
§ 75.11 PROJECTING LOADS ON PASSENGER VEHICLES.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on any street with any load
carried thereon extending beyond the line of the fenders on the left side of
the vehicle, nor extending more than six inches beyond the line of the fenders
on the right side thereof.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.12 PROTRUDING MEMBERS OF VEHICLES.
   No vehicle with boom, arm, drill rig, or other protruding component shall be
operated upon any highway in this state unless the protruding component is
fastened so as to prevent shifting, bouncing, or moving in any manner.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.13 SPILLING LOADS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any street unless the vehicle
is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any of its load from dropping,
shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water or other substance may
be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
   (B)   No person shall operate on any highway any vehicle with any load
unless the load and any covering thereon is securely fastened so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard
to other users of the highway.
   (C)   The state Department of Transportation shall adopt those rules and
regulations it deems appropriate which require the securing of steel rolls and
other objects on flatbed trucks so as to prevent injury to users of highways
and damage to property. Any person who operates a flatbed truck on any highway
in violation of the rules and regulations promulgated by the state Department
of Transportation under this division shall be punished as provided in §
70.99.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 75.14 PUSHING OF DISABLED VEHICLES.
   It is unlawful under any circumstances for any vehicle to push any other
vehicle on or along any highway outside an urban area in this village, except
in an extreme emergency, and then the vehicle shall not be pushed farther than
is reasonably necessary to remove it from the roadway or from the immediate
hazard that exists.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114) Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 76: MOTOR VEHICLE OFFENSES
Section
   
76.01   Reckless driving
   
76.02   (Reserved)
   
76.03   Accidents involving death or personal injuries
   
76.04   Duty to give information and render aid
   
76.05   Crash involving damage to vehicle
   
76.06   Duty upon damaging unattended vehicle or other property
   
76.07   Duty to report accident
   
76.08   False reports
   
76.09   When driver fails to report
Statutory reference:
   For provisions regarding street racing, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506
§ 76.01 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle with a willful or wanton disregard for the
safety of persons or property.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.02 (RESERVED).
§ 76.03 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURIES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
in personal injury to or death of any person shall immediately stop the vehicle
at the scene of the crash, or as close thereto as possible, and shall then
forthwith return to, and in every event shall remain at the scene of the crash
until the requirements of § 76.09 have been fulfilled. Every such stop shall be
made without obstructing traffic more than is necessary.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who has failed to stop or to comply with the
requirements of division (A) shall, as soon as possible but in no case later
than one-half hour after the motor vehicle crash, or, if hospitalized and
incapacitated from reporting at any time during the period, as soon as possible
but in no case later than one-half hour after being discharged from the
hospital, report the place of the crash, the date, the approximate time, the
driver's name and address, the registration number of the vehicle driven, and
the names of all other occupants of the vehicle, at the police station or
sheriff's office near where the crash occurred. No report made as required
under this division shall be used, directly or indirectly, as a basis for the
prosecution of any violation of division (A).
      (2)   Any person arrested for violating this section is subject to
chemical testing of his or her blood, breath or urine for the presence of
alcohol, other drugs or drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds, or any
combination thereof, as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1, if the
testing occurs within 12 hours of the time of the occurrence of the crash that
led to his or her arrest. The person's driving privileges are subject to
statutory summary suspension under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1 if he or she
fails testing or statutory summary revocation under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-
501.1 if he or she refuses to undergo the testing.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, PERSONAL INJURY shall mean any injury
requiring immediate professional treatment in a medical facility or doctor's
office.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401)  Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.04 DUTY TO GIVE INFORMATION AND RENDER AID.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
in injury to or death of any person or damage to any vehicle which is driven or
attended by any person shall give the driver's name, address, registration
number, and owner of the vehicle the driver is operating, and shall upon
request and if available, exhibit the driver's license to the person struck or
the driver or occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with, and
shall render to any person injured in the crash reasonable assistance,
including the carrying or the making of arrangements for the carrying of the
person to a physician, surgeon, or hospital for medical or surgical treatment,
if it is apparent that such treatment is necessary or if such carrying is
requested by the injured person.
   (B)   If none of the persons entitled to information pursuant to this
section is in condition to receive and understand the information and no police
officer is present, the driver, after rendering reasonable assistance, shall
forthwith report the crash at the Police Department, disclosing the information
required by this section.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.05 CRASH INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle involved in a motor vehicle crash resulting
only in damage to a vehicle which is driven or attended by any person shall
immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the motor vehicle crash or as
close thereto as possible, but shall forthwith return to and in every event
shall remain at the scene of the motor vehicle crash until the requirements of
this chapter have been fulfilled. A driver does not violate this section if the
driver moves the vehicle as soon as possible off the highway to the nearest
safe location on an exit ramp shoulder, a frontage road, the nearest suitable
cross street, or other suitable location that does not obstruct traffic and
remains at that location until the driver has fulfilled the requirements of §
76.04. Every stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the
vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved
so as not to block the traffic lanes.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of this section, the court shall make a
finding as to whether the damage to a vehicle is in excess of $1,000, and in
such case a statement of this finding shall be reported to the Secretary of
State with the report of conviction.
   (C)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds (i) a vehicle
standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition,
limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking imposed under this
code or (ii) a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a highway or toll
highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is authorized to move
the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to move the vehicle to
the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is permitted, or to
public parking or storage premises. The removal may be performed by, or under
the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority official or may be
contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has been removed, the
peace officer or highway authority official shall follow appropriate
procedures, as provided in §
90.03.
   (D)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not liable for
loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as the result
of the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (C), as provided in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.06 DUTY UPON DAMAGING UNATTENDED VEHICLE OR OTHER PROPERTY.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle which collides with or is involved in a
motor vehicle crash with any vehicle which is unattended, or other property,
resulting in any damage to such other vehicle or property shall immediately
stop and shall then and there either locate and notify the operator or owner of
such vehicle or other property of the driver's name, address, registration
number, and owner of the vehicle the driver was operating or shall attach
securely in a conspicuous place on or in the vehicle or other property struck a
written notice giving the driver's name, address, registration number, and
owner of the vehicle the driver was driving and shall without unnecessary delay
notify the Police Department and shall make a written report of such crash when
and as required in §
76.07. Every such stop shall be made without obstructing traffic more than is
necessary. If a damaged vehicle is obstructing traffic lanes, the driver of the
vehicle must make every reasonable effort to move the vehicle or have it moved
so as not to block the traffic lanes.
   (B)   If any peace officer or highway authority official finds (i) a vehicle
standing upon a highway or toll highway in violation of a prohibition,
limitation, or restriction on stopping, standing, or parking imposed under this
code or (ii) a disabled vehicle that obstructs the roadway of a highway or toll
highway, the peace officer or highway authority official is authorized to move
the vehicle or to require the operator of the vehicle to move the vehicle to
the shoulder of the road, to a position where parking is permitted, or to
public parking or storage premises. The removal may be performed by, or under
the direction of, the peace officer or highway authority official or may be
contracted for by local authorities. After the vehicle has been removed, the
peace officer or highway authority official shall follow appropriate
procedures, as provided in §
90.03.
   (C)   A towing service, its officers, and its employees are not liable for
loss of or damages to any real or personal property that occurs as the result
of the removal or towing of any vehicle under division (B), as provided in ILCS
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404) Penalty, see §
70.99
§ 76.07 DUTY TO REPORT ACCIDENT.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle which is in any manner involved in an accident
within this village, resulting in injury to or death of any person or in which
damage to the property of any one person, including himself, in excess of
$1,500 (or $500 if any of the vehicles involved in the accident is subject to
ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601 but is not covered by a liability insurance policy
in accordance with ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601) is sustained shall, as soon as
possible but not later than ten days after the accident, file with the Police
Department a copy of the written report required to be filed with the state
under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a).
   (B)   Whenever a school bus is involved in an accident in this village,
caused by a collision, a sudden stop, or otherwise, resulting in any property
damage, personal injury, or death, and whenever an accident occurs within 50
feet of a school bus in this village resulting in personal injury to or the
death of any person while awaiting or preparing to board the bus or immediately
after exiting the bus, the driver shall as soon as possible, but not later than
ten days after the accident, file with the Police Department a copy of the
written report required to be filed with the state under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-406(b). If a report is also required under division (A) above, that report
and the report required by this division (B) shall be submitted on a single
form.
   (C)   The Chief of Police may require any driver, occupant, or owner of a
vehicle involved in an accident of which report must be made as provided in
this section or §
76.09 to file supplemental reports whenever the original report is insufficient
in the opinion of the Chief of Police and may require witnesses of the accident
to submit written reports. The report may include photographs, charts,
sketches, and graphs.
   (D)   Should the Police Department learn through other reports of accidents
required by law of the occurrence of an accident reportable under this chapter
and the driver, owner, or witness has not reported as required under (A)
through (C) above or §
76.09 within the time specified, the person is not relieved of the
responsibility and the Police Department shall notify the person by first class
mail directed to his last known address of his legal obligation. However, the
notification is not a condition precedent to impose the penalty for failure to
report as provided in (E) below.
   (E)   The Secretary of State shall suspend the driver's license or any
nonresident's driving privilege of any person who fails or neglects to make
report of a traffic accident as herein required or as required by any other law
of this state.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406)
Editor’s note:
   ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406 was repealed by P.A. 102-560 on August 20,
2021
Statutory reference:
   Authorization for village to require accident reports, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 11-415
§ 76.08 FALSE REPORTS.
   Any person who provides information in an oral or written report required by
this code with knowledge or reason to believe that the information is false
shall be fined as provided in §
70.99.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409)
§ 76.09 WHEN DRIVER FAILS TO REPORT.
   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of making a
required written accident report and if there was another occupant in the
vehicle at the time of the motor vehicle accident capable of making a written
report, the occupant shall make or cause the written report to be made. If the
driver fails for any reason to make the report the owner of the vehicle
involved in the motor vehicle accident shall, as soon as practicable, make the
report to the Police Department.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410)
Editor’s note:
   ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410 was repealed by P.A. 102-560 on August 20,
2021
CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Speed limits
   
II.   Through streets
   
III.   Stop intersections
   
IV.   Yield intersections
   
V.   Weight limitations
   
VI.   One-way streets and alleys
SCHEDULE I. SPEED LIMITS.
   When signs are erected giving notice thereof the following speed limits
shall apply:
Street Description MPH Ord. No. Date Passed
Street             Description                         MPH Ord. No. Date Passed
Any other street                                      25  734      1-5-98
                   Between its intersection with East
East Laurel        Madison and its intersection with   15  1093     7-16-12
                   South Kossuth
                   Between its western corporate
Illinois Street    limits line and its intersection    35  734      1-5-98
                   with Coachlite Drive
                   Between its intersection with
Illinois Street    Coachlite Drive and its             30  734      1-5-98
                   intersection with Polk Street
                   Between its northerly corporate
Jefferson Street   limits line and its southerly       30  734      1-5-98
                   corporate limits line
                   Between its intersections with
M & O Station Road Veterans Drive and Illinois Street  20  734      1-5-98
                   (State Route #158)
                   Between its intersection with
Mueller Lane       Douglass Road and its intersection  30  997      4-21-08
                   with Saxtown Road
                   Between its western corporate
Washington Street  limits and its intersection with    35  734      1-5-98
                   Landau
                   Between its intersection with
Washington Street  Landau and its intersection with    30  734      1-5-98
                   Wheatridge Lane
                   Between its eastern corporate
Washington Street  limits line and its intersection    35  734      1-5-98
                   with Wheatridge Lane
                   Between its eastern corporate
Madison Street     limits and its intersection with E. 35  734      1-5-98
                   Laurel
('73 Code, § 41.05)
SCHEDULE II. THROUGH STREETS.
   Streets listed in this schedule are designated as through streets.
 
Street            Ord. No. Date Passed
Jefferson Street           
Illinois Street            
Washington Street          
 
('73 Code, § 41.06, Sch. A)
SCHEDULE III. STOP INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   Stop intersections. All intersections set forth in this division (A)
are designated as stop intersections. When stop signs are erected at the
entrance to stop intersections, it shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle into
any stop intersection from the inferior street without first bringing such
vehicle to a stop as required by law.
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Superior Street  Inferior Street                          Ord. No. Date Passed
Adams            Lafayette                                927      8-1-05
Blackburn Manor  Birch Street                             986      11-5-07
Breese           East Laurel                              860      11-19-03
Breese           Elm                                      359      - -
South Breese     East Adams                               814      2-4-02
South Breese     East Laurel                              814      2-4-02
South Breese     East Oak                                 814      2-4-02
South Breese     East Van Buren                           814      2-4-02
Cedar Street     Blackburn Manor                          740      9-21-98
West Elm Street  Monroe Street                            1068     11-1-10
Harrison         Tyler                                    389      - -
Harrison         Polk and Royal Court                     438      - -
Harrison         Lexington Drive                          389      - -
Jefferson        Elm                                      359      - -
South Jefferson  Commercial                               489      1-6-85
South Jefferson  Mulberry                                 459      - -
South Jefferson  Morgan Lake Drive                        457      - -
South Kossuth    East Laurel                              1137     1-4-16
Laurel Street    Main Street                              1068     11-1-10
Laurel           Mulberry                                          
Laurel           Dallas                                            
Laurel           Lafayette                                         
Laurel           Jackson                                           
E. Laurel Street Kossuth Street (north bound traffic only          
                 stops)
Legion Drive     Westerly extension of North Main Street  452      - -
                 Rhineland Place (being the intersection
Leiderkranz Lane where Rhineland Place does not cross     824      9-3-02
                 Leiderkranz Lane and becomes Steinberg
                 Circle)
 
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Superior Street       Inferior Street             Ord. No. Date Passed
Liederkranz Lane      Danube Drive                715      3-17-97
Madison               Tyler                       438      - -
Madison               Lafayette                            
Madison               Jackson                              
Madison               Lafayette                   548      10-3-88
Madison               Monroe                               
Madison               Tyler                       548      10-3-88
East Madison          Danube Drive                715      3-17-97
East Madison          Leiderkranz Lane            715      3-17-97
East Madison          South Mulberry Street       1105     1-22-13
Manor Lane            Veranda Court               986      11-5-07
Mill                  Lafayette                            
Mill                  Main                                 
South Mulberry        Commercial                  489      1-6-85
North Polk            Blackburn                   409      - -
North Polk            Manor Lane                  860      11-19-03
North Polk            South Admiral Wendt Parkway 860      11-19-03
Polk Street           Admiral Wendt Parkway       998      4-21-08
Polk                  Mill                        438      - -
Polk                  Gooding                     438      - -
Polk                  Parkview                    438      - -
Rhineland Place       Mannheim Circle             743      3-5-99
Urbana Road           Pine Street                 460      - -
West Van Buren Street South Lafayette Street      1097     10-1-12
Veterans Drive        Adams                       927      8-1-05
Veterans Drive        Elm                         927      8-1-05
Veterans Drive        Van Buren                   927      8-1-05
Veterans Drive        M&O Station Road            1040     11-4-09
W. Washington         Victoria Drive              370      - -
W. Washington         Landau Drive                370      - -
White                 Tyler                                
 
 
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
White           Monroe                   
White           Mulberry                 
White           Main                     
 
('73 Code, § 41.07(a))
   (B)   Multiple-stop intersections. All intersections set forth in this
division (B) are designated as multiple-stop intersections. When signs are
erected to the entrance to a stop intersection, it shall be unlawful for the
driver of any vehicle to enter such intersections without first bringing his
vehicle to a stop as required by law.
Intersection Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                                               Ord. No. Date Passed
West Adams Street and South Jackson Street                 998      4-21-08
Adderly Lane and Briarfest Drive                           986      11-5-07
Adderly and East Madison                                   927      8-1-05
Admiral Wendt Parkway and Village Green Court              986      11-5-07
Breese and East Laurel                                     860      11-19-03
West Gooding and North Main Streets                                 
West Harrison Street and South Tyler Street                998      4-21-08
Jackson and Oak Streets                                    337      - -
Jackson and Elm Streets                                             
Jackson and Mill Streets                                            
South Kossuth and East Madison Streets                     426      - -
Lafayette and Oak Streets                                           
Lafayette and Elm Streets                                           
North Lafayette and West Mill                              650        
South Lafayette and West Elm                               815      2-4-02
East Laurel and East Madison                               927      8-1-05
West Laurel and South Lafayette                            610      4-20-92
Legion Drive and North Main Streets                        343      - -
Leiderkranz Lane and Rhineland Place (which extends across 824      9-3-02
Leiderkranz Lane and becomes Steinberg Circle)
Madison and Lafayette Streets                              548      10-3-88
Madison and Tyler Streets                                  548      10-3-88
East Madison and South Breese                              610      4-20-92
East Madison Street and Danube Drive                       998      4-21-08
 
Intersection Ord. No. Date Passed
Intersection                                               Ord. No. Date Passed
West Madison and South Jackson                             756      11-1-99
West Madison and South Monroe Street                       1023     12-15-08
West Mill Street and North Tyler Street                    795      4-2-01
Monroe and Mill Streets                                             
North Mulberry and East Mill                               587      7-16-90
South Mulberry Street and E. Van Buren (which extends
across S. Mulberry St. to an undedicated street leading to 489      1-6-85
the Little League Park)
West Parkview Drive and North Tyler Street                 795      4-2-01
Polk Street and Parkview Drive                             998      4-21-08
Traver Tine Circle and Bach Drive                          1023     12-15-08
Veterans Drive and West Harrison Street                    1040     11-4-09
Veterans Drive and West Elm Street                         1040     11-4-09
Washington and Jefferson Streets                                    
West White and Monroe                                      578      12-19-89
West White and Tyler                                       578      12-19-89
 
('73 Code, § 41.08, Sch. F) (Am. Ord. 1023, passed 12-15-08)
SCHEDULE IV. YIELD INTERSECTIONS.
   All intersections set forth in this schedule are designated as yield
intersections. When yield signs are erected at the entrances to yield
intersections it shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to enter any yield
intersection from the inferior street without yielding the right-of-way to a
vehicle approaching the intersection on the superior streets as required by
law.
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Adams           Jackson                  
Adams           Lafayette                
Adams           Main                     
Adams           Tyler                    
Adams           Polk                     
Adams           Monroe                   
Elm             Tyler                    
Elm             Polk                     
Elm             Main                     
Gooding         Monroe                   
Gooding         Breese                   
East Gooding    North Mulberry  558      3-20-89
Harrison        Monroe                   
Harrison        Lafayette                
Harrison        Jackson                  
Harrison        Tyler                    
Harrison        Main                     
 
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Jackson         Elm                      
Jackson         Oak                      
Kossuth         White                    
Lafayette       Oak                      
Laurel          Monroe                   
Laurel          Polk                     
Laurel          Tyler                    
Madison         Polk                     
Madison         Main                     
Madison         Kossuth                  
Madison         Dallas                   
Main            Gooding                  
Mill            Mulberry                 
Mill            Kossuth                  
Mill            Breese                   
Mulberry        Madison                  
Mulberry        Gooding                  
Oak             Monroe                   
Oak             Tyler                    
Oak             Main                     
Polk            Harrison                 
Polk            Oak                      
Tyler           Gooding                  
Van Buren       Monroe                   
Van Buren       Tyler                    
 
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Superior Street Inferior Street Ord. No. Date Passed
Van Buren       Polk                     
Van Buren       Main                     
Van Buren       Jackson                  
Veterans        Laurel                   
Veterans        Adams                    
Veterans        Elm                      
White           Dallas                   
White           Polk                     
White           Jackson                  
White           Lafayette                
 
('73 Code, § 41.07(b), Sch. C) (Am. Ord. 794, passed 4-2-01; Am. Ord. 814,
passed 2-4-02; Am. Ord. 1068, passed 11-1-10; Am. Ord. 1137, passed 1-4-16)
SCHEDULE V. WEIGHT LIMITATIONS.
   No vehicle or combination of vehicles shall be operated unladen or with load
on the following streets when the gross weight exceeds the amount set forth.
Vehicles operated by the village or with the approval of the village, or to
vehicles operated by a public utility when transporting equipment required for
emergency repair of public utility facilities or properties are exempt from
this schedule.
 
Street              Description               Weight Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
                    Between the intersections
East Madison Street of Kossuth Street and     10,000 lbs.  631      3-3-93
                    Mulberry Street
 
SCHEDULE VI. ONE-WAY STREETS AND ALLEYS.
   The streets described in this schedule are hereby designated one-way
streets. It shall be unlawful to operate any vehicle on any streets or alleys
designated as one-way streets or alleys by ordinance in any direction other
than that so designated.
 
Street         Direction  Location                        Ord. No. Date Passed
Jackson Street Southbound From Mill Street to Washington  647       
                          Street
Mill Street    Westbound  From Monroe Street to Lafayette 647       
                          Street
 
Penalty, see §
70.99
CHAPTER 78: PARKING SCHEDULES
Schedule
   
I.   Parking prohibited
   
II.   No parking during certain times
   
III.   Parking time limited
   
IV.   Loading zones
SCHEDULE I. PARKING PROHIBITED.
   Parking shall be prohibited on the following streets.
Street Side Description Ord. No. Date Passed
Street               Side          Description            Ord. No. Date Passed
                                   Between South Jackson
West Adams Street    South         Street and South       341      - -
                                   Lafayette Street
                                   For a distance of 20
Breese Street        West          feet south from the             
                                   south line of
                                   Washington Street
                                   Between Washington
Jefferson Street     West and East Street and Harrison    762      3-6-00
                                   Street
North Jefferson                    Between Washington
Street               West and East Street and Legion      1059     5-17-10
                                   Drive
                                   Between East Madison
South Kossuth Street East          Street and East        1201     10-4-19
                                   Washington Street
                                   For distances of 30
Lafayette            East and West feet north from the             
                                   north line of Laurel
                                   Street
South Lafayette      East          Between Oak Street and 845      4-21-03
                                   Adams Street
Laurel Street and                  For a distance of 30
Lafayette Street,                 feet east from the              
intersection of                    northeast corner of
                                   the intersection
 
Street Side Description Ord. No. Date Passed
Street              Side            Description           Ord. No. Date Passed
                                    For distances of 20
Madison Street and                  feet and 20 feet
Monroe Street,                     north and west                 
intersection of                     respectively from the
                                    northwest corner of
                                    the intersection
                                    For distances of 20
Madison Street and                  feet and 20 feet east
Jackson Street,                    and south                      
intersection of                     respectively from the
                                    southeast corner of
                                    the intersection
                                    For a distance of 15
                                    feet north from the
Main Street         East            northeast corner of            
                                    Washington Street and
                                    Main Street
                                    From West Mill Street
North Monroe Street Both            to West Gooding       721      5-6-96
                                    Street
                                    Between intersections
                                    of Commercial Street
South Mulberry      East            and the undedicated   489      1-6-85
Street                              street which extends
                                    to the Little League
                                    Park
                                    All of West Parkview
West Parkview Drive South           Drive located within  1060     6-7-10
                                    the Village Park
                                    That portion of West
                                    Parkview Drive
                                    located directly in
West Parkview Drive North           front of the village  1060     6-7-10
                                    swimming pool between
                                    the "No Parking"
                                    signs
                                    Between West Elm
Veterans Drive      East            Street and West       345      - -
                                    Laurel Street
                                    From the southwest
Washington Avenue   Both            village limits        567      9-5-89
                                    northeasterly to Polk
                                    Street
                                    From Kossuth Street
Washington Avenue   Both            easterly to the       567      9-5-89
                                    easterly village
                                    limits
                                    From Polk Street
Washington Street   North and South easterly to Kossuth   1059     5-17-10
                                    Street
                                    For a distance of 35
                                    feet east from the
White Street        South           south-east corner of           
                                    White Street and Main
                                    Street
                                    For distances of 20
White Street and                    feet and 30 feet
Monroe Street,                     respectively east and          
intersection of                     south, from the
                                    southeast corner of
                                    the intersection
 
('73 Code, § 41.09(a), Sch. D)
SCHEDULE II. NO PARKING DURING CERTAIN TIMES.
   It shall be unlawful to permit any vehicle to stand or park on the following
streets during the time specified.
Street Side Description Time Prohibited Ord. No. Date Passed
Street         Side      Description     Time Prohibited Ord. No. Date Passed
                                         Between the
                                         hours of 8:00
East Van Buren                           a.m. and 5:00
Street         South                    p.m., Monday    646      9-20-93
                                         through Friday,
                                         excepting legal
                                         holidays
                                         Between the
                                         hours of 8:00
                                         a.m. and 9:00
                         From Mill to    a.m. and 3:00
Jackson Street West      Washington      p.m. and 4:00            
                         Streets         p.m., Monday
                                         through Friday,
                                         excepting legal
                                         holidays
                         Between West
                         Washington      Between the
South                    Street and West hours of 7:30
Lafayette      West      Madison Street, a.m. and 4:00   634      4-5-93
Street                   on school or    p.m.
                         school function
                         days
                         Commencing at   Between the
                         Lafayette       hours of 8:00
                         Street and      a.m. and 9:00
                         running west    a.m. and 3:00
Madison Street North     from Lafayette  p.m. and 4:00            
                         Street on North p.m., Monday
                         Madison Street  through Friday,
                         for a distance, excepting legal
                         of 130 feet     holidays
                                         Between the
                         Between South   hours of 7:30
West Madison             Tyler Street    a.m. and 8:30
Street         North     and South       a.m. and 2:00   1113     10-21-13
                         Lafayette       p.m. and 3:30
                         Street          p.m. on school
                                         days
                         Between North   Between the
                         Monroe Street   hours of 7:30
                         and North       a.m. to 8:30
West Mill                Lafayette, on   a.m. and 2:30
Street         North     school or       p.m. to 3:30    802      8-6-01
                         school function p.m., unless
                         days, other     the vehicle is
                         than school     attended by its
                         buses           driver
                         Between North
                         Lafayette
                         Street and      Between the
                         North Jackson   hours of 7:30
West Mill      North and Street, on      a.m. to 8:30    604      11-4-91
Street         South     school or       a.m. and 2:30
                         school function p.m. to 3:30
                         days, other     p.m.
                         than school
                         buses
 
('73 Code, § 41.09(b), Sch. E)
SCHEDULE III. PARKING TIME LIMITED.
   Parking shall be limited to the time specified on the following streets.
 
Street          Side  Description           Time Limit Ord. No. Date Passed
                      For a distance of 118
Main Street     West  feet south of         15 min.             
                      Washington Street
                      For a distance of 117
North Monroe    East  feet north of West    1 hour     1045     3-1-10
                      Washington Street
West Washington      Between Main and      30 min.             
Street                Monroe Streets
White Street    South Between Monroe Street 15 min.             
                      and Main Street
 
('73 Code, § 41.09, Sch. E)
SCHEDULE IV. LOADING ZONES.
   It shall be unlawful to park or stop any vehicle within any of the loading
zones set forth in this schedule, except for mechanical reasons beyond the
control of the operator thereof or for the discharge or pickup of freight from
the premises adjoining the curb thereof.
 
Street            Side  Description                       Ord. No. Date Passed
                        For a distance of 118 feet north
Lafayette Street  West  from the north line of Washington          
                        Street
Washington Avenue South Between Breese and Mulberry       364      - -
                        Streets
 
('73 Code, § 41.11, Sch. G)
TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
90.   ABANDONED VEHICLES
      
91.   ANIMALS
      
92.   CEMETERIES
      
93.   HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION
      
94.   NOISE
      
95.   NUISANCES
      
96.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
98.   WEEDS
      
99.   FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
CHAPTER 90: ABANDONED VEHICLES
Section
   
90.01   Abandonment of vehicles prohibited
   
90.02   Authority to declare inoperable vehicle a nuisance
   
90.03   Authority to impound; procedure
   
90.04   Notice to be given to registered owner, state police
   
90.05   Reclaiming of vehicle by owner
   
90.06   Disposal of unclaimed vehicle
   
90.07   Police department to keep records of reclamation or disposal of vehicle
   
90.08   Disposition of proceeds of sale
   
90.09   Liability
   
90.10   Vehicle abandoned in public garage or parking area; operator to notify
police
   
90.99   Penalty
§ 90.01 ABANDONMENT OF VEHICLES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The abandonment of a vehicle as described in division (B) of this
section or in §
90.03, or any part thereof, on any highway in this village is unlawful.
   (B)   The abandonment of a vehicle or any part thereof on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, anywhere in this
village is unlawful except on property of the owner or bailee of the abandoned
vehicle. A vehicle or any part thereof so abandoned on private property shall
be authorized for removal by the police department after a waiting period of
seven days or more.
   (C)   A towing service may begin to process an unclaimed vehicle as
abandoned by requesting a record search by the Secretary of State up to ten
days after the date of the tow, or any later date acceptable to the Secretary
of State. This division does not apply to vehicles towed by order or
authorization of a law enforcement agency.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-201) Penalty, see §
90.99
§ 90.02 AUTHORITY TO DECLARE INOPERABLE VEHICLE A NUISANCE.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this section the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.  
      (1)   Shall mean any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at least
seven days, the engine, wheels, or other parts have been removed, or on which
the engine, wheels, or other parts have been altered, damaged, or otherwise so
treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor.
      (2)   Shall not include a motor vehicle which has been rendered
temporarily incapable of being driven under its own power in order to perform
ordinary service or repair operations nor to any motor vehicle that is kept
within a building when not in use, to historic vehicles over 25 years of age,
or to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in
wrecking or junking of motor vehicles.
   (B)   Leaving of wrecked, non-operating vehicles on street. No person shall
leave any partially dismantled, non-operating, wrecked, or junked vehicle on
any street or highway in the village.
   (C)   Inoperable vehicles declared to be a nuisance. Inoperable motor
vehicles, as defined herein, whether on public or private property, are hereby
declared to be a nuisance.  
   (D)   Written notice. All persons are required to dispose of any inoperable
motor vehicles under their control upon written notice received from the Board
of Trustees or from the Chief of Police or any member of the police department
designated by him commanding such disposition of said inoperable motor vehicle.
   (E)   Impoundment. If the owner of any inoperable vehicle fails to dispose
of it after seven days from the issuance of notice, the Chief of Police or any
member of the police department designated by him may authorize a towing
service to remove and take possession of said inoperable vehicle or parts
thereof. Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of
in accordance with §§
90.03 through
90.09. The Chief of Police or any member of the police department designated by
him may enter upon private property at all reasonable hours for the purpose of
inspecting such vehicle, posting notice thereon, and removing and impounding
such vehicle, and it shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the Chief of
Police or his designee from entering on private property for purposes of
carrying out his duties hereunder or to interfere with him in the lawful
performance of his duties under the provisions of this section.
(Am. Ord. 737, passed 2-16-98) Penalty, see §
90.99
Statutory reference:
   Authority to declare inoperable motor vehicles as nuisance, see ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 11-40-3
   Authority to impound hazardous dilapidated motor vehicles, see ILCS Ch. 65,
Act 5, § 11-40-3.1
§ 90.03 AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND; PROCEDURE.
   (A)   When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on that part of a toll
highway, interstate highway, or expressway within the village for two hours or
more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the police
department.
   (B)   When a vehicle is abandoned on a highway in an urban district for ten
hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the police
department.
   (C)   When a vehicle is abandoned or left unattended on a highway other than
a toll highway, interstate highway, or expressway, outside of an urban district
for 24 hours or more, its removal by a towing service may be authorized by the
police department.
   (D)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned, or partially
dismantled vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in
relation to the highway or its physical appearance is causing the impeding of
traffic, its immediate removal from the highway or private property adjacent to
the highway by a towing service may be authorized by the police department.
   (E)   (1)   Whenever a peace officer reasonably believes that a person under
arrest for a violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501 or a similar provision
of a local ordinance is likely, upon release, to commit a subsequent violation
of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501, or a similar provision of a local ordinance,
the arresting officer shall have the vehicle which the person was operating at
the time of the arrest impounded for a period of not more than 12 hours after
the time of arrest. However, such vehicle may be released by the arresting law
enforcement agency prior to the end of the impoundment period if:
         (a)   The vehicle was not owned by the person under arrest, and the
lawful owner : requesting such release possesses a valid operator's license,
proof of ownership, and, would not, as determined by the arresting law
enforcement agency, indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a
safe manner, or who would otherwise, by operating such motor vehicle, be in
violation of this Code; or
         (b)   The vehicle is owned by the person under arrest, and the person
under arrest gives permission to another person to operate such vehicle,
provided however, that the other person possesses a valid operator's license
and would not, as determined by the arresting law enforcement agency, indicate
a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a safe manner or who would
otherwise, by operating such motor vehicle, be in violation of this Code.
      (2)   Whenever a registered owner of a vehicle is taken into custody for
operating the vehicle in violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501 or a
similar provision of a local ordinance or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303, a law
enforcement officer may have the vehicle immediately impounded for a period not
less than:
         (a)   Twenty-four hours for a second violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 11-501 or a similar provision of a local ordinance or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-303 of this Code or a combination of these offenses; or
         (b)   Forty-eight hours for a third violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§11-501 or a similar provision of a local ordinance or ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
6-303 or a combination of these offenses.
         (c)   The vehicle may be released sooner if the vehicle is owned by
the person under arrest and the person under arrest gives permission to another
person to operate the vehicle and that other person possesses a valid
operator's license and would not, as determined by the arresting law
enforcement agency, indicate a lack of ability to operate a motor vehicle in a
safe manner or would otherwise, by operating the motor vehicle, be in violation
of this Code.
   (F)   Except as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 18a-100 et seq., the
owner or lessor of privately owned real property within this village, or any
person authorized by such owner or lessor, or the police department in the case
of publicly owned real property may cause any motor vehicle abandoned or left
unattended upon such property without permission to be removed by a towing
service without liability for the costs of removal, transportation, or storage
or damage caused by such removal, transportation, or storage. The towing or
removal of any vehicle from private property without the consent of the
registered owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle
is subject to compliance with the following conditions and restrictions:
      (1)   Any towed or removed vehicle must be stored at the site of the
towing service's place of business. The site must be open during business
hours, and for the purpose of redemption of vehicles, during the time that the
person or firm towing such vehicle is open for towing purposes.
      (2)   The towing service shall within 30 minutes of completion of such
towing or removal, notify the police department of such towing or removal, and
the make, model, color, and license plate number of the vehicle, and shall
obtain and record the name of the person at the police department.
      (3)   If the registered owner or legally authorized person entitled to
possession of the vehicle shall arrive at the scene prior to actual removal or
towing of the vehicle, the vehicle shall be disconnected from the tow truck and
that person shall be allowed to remove the vehicle without interference, upon
the payment of a reasonable service fee of not more than one-half the posted
rate of the towing service as provided in division (6) below, for which a
receipt shall be given.
      (4)   The rebate or payment of money or any other valuable consideration
from the towing service or its owners, managers, or employees to the owners or
operators of the premises from which the vehicles are towed or removed, for the
privilege of removing or towing those vehicles, is prohibited.
      (5)   Except for property appurtenant to and obviously a part of a
single-family residence, and except for instances where notice is personally
given to the owner or other legally authorized person in control of the vehicle
that the area in which that vehicle is parked is reserved or otherwise
unavailable to unauthorized vehicles and they are subject to being removed at
the owner or operator's expense, any property owner or lessor, prior to towing
or removing any vehicle from private property without the consent of the owner
or other legally authorized person in control of that vehicle, must post a
notice meeting the following requirements:
         (a)   The notice must be prominently placed at each driveway access or
curb cut allowing vehicular access to the property within five feet from the
public right-of-way line. If there are no curbs or access barriers, the sign
must be posted not less than one sign each 100 feet of lot frontage.
         (b)   The notice must indicate clearly, in not less than two-inch high
light-reflective letters on a contrasting background, that unauthorized
vehicles will be towed away at the owner's expense.
         (c)   The notice must also provide the name and current telephone
number of the towing service towing or removing the vehicle.
         (d)   The sign structure containing the required notices must be
permanently installed with the bottom of the sign not less than four feet above
ground level, and must be continuously maintained on the property for not less
than 24 hours prior to the towing or removing of any vehicle.
      (6)   Any towing service that tows or removes vehicles and proposes to
require the owner, operator, or person in control of the vehicle to pay the
costs of towing and storage prior to redemption of the vehicle must file and
keep on record with the police department a complete copy of the current rates
to be charged for such services, and post at the storage site an identical rate
schedule and any written contracts with property owners, lessors, or persons in
control of property which authorize them to remove vehicles as provided in this
section. The towing and storage charges, however, shall not exceed the maximum
allowed by the Illinois Commerce Commission under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18a-
200.
      (7)   No person shall engage in the removal of vehicles from private
property as described in this section without filing a notice of intent in the
village, and such notice shall be filed at least seven days before commencing
such towing.
      (8)   No removal of a vehicle from private property shall be done except
upon express written instructions of the owners or persons in charge of the
private property upon which the vehicle is said to be trespassing.
      (9)   (a)   Vehicle entry for the purpose of removal shall be allowed
with reasonable care on the part of the person or firm towing the vehicle. Such
person or firm shall be liable for any damages occasioned to the vehicle if
such entry is not in accordance with the standards of reasonable care.
         (b)   Except as authorized by a law enforcement officer, no towing
service shall engage in the removal of a commercial motor vehicle that requires
a commercial driver’s license to operate by operating the vehicle under its own
power on a highway.
      (10)   When a vehicle has been towed or removed pursuant to this section,
it must be released to its owner or custodian within one-half hour after
requested, if such request is made during business hours. Any vehicle owner or
custodian or agent shall have the right to inspect the vehicle before accepting
its return, and no release or waiver of any kind which would release the towing
service from liability for damages incurred during the towing and storage may
be required from any vehicle owner or other legally authorized person as a
condition of release of the vehicle. A detailed, signed receipt showing the
legal name of the towing service must be given to the person paying towing or
storage charges at the time of payment, whether requested or not.
         (a)   This section shall not apply to law enforcement, firefighting,
rescue, ambulance, or other emergency vehicles which are marked as such or to
property owned by any governmental entity.
         (b)   When an authorized person improperly causes a motor vehicle to
be removed, such person shall be liable to the owner or lessee of the vehicle
for the cost of removal, transportation, and storage, any damages resulting
from the removal, transportation, and storage, attorney's fee, and court costs.
         (c)   Any towing or storage charges accrued shall be payable by the
use of any major credit card, in addition to being payable in cash.
      (11)   Towing companies shall also provide insurance coverage for areas
where vehicles towed under the provisions of this chapter will be impounded or
otherwise stored, and shall adequately cover loss by fire, theft, or other
risks. Any person or company who violates this requirement shall be fined not
less than $100 nor more than $500.
   (G)   (1)   When a vehicle is determined to be a hazardous dilapidated motor
vehicle pursuant to ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3.1, its removal and
impoundment by a towing service may be authorized by the police department.
      (2)   When a vehicle removal from either public or private property is
authorized by a law enforcement agency, the owner of the vehicle shall be
responsible for all towing and storage charges.
      (3)   Vehicles removed from public or private property and stored by a
commercial vehicle relocator or any other towing service authorized by a law
enforcement agency in compliance with this section and ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§
4-201 and 4-202, or at the request of the vehicle owner or operator, shall be
subject to a possessor lien for services pursuant to the Labor and Storage Lien
(Small Amount) Act. The provisions of Section 1 of that Act relating to notice
and implied consent shall be deemed satisfied by compliance with ILCS Ch. 625,
Act 5, § 18a-302 and § 18a-300 (6). In no event shall such lien be greater than
the rate or rates established in accordance with § 18a-200 (6). In no event
shall such lien be increased or altered to reflect any charge for services or
materials rendered in addition to those authorized by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5.
Every such lien shall be payable by use of any major credit card, in addition
to being payable in cash.
      (4)   Any personal property belonging to the vehicle owner in a vehicle
subject to a lien under this division (F) shall likewise be subject to that
lien, excepting only: child restraint systems as defined in Section 4 of the
Child Passenger Protection Act and other child booster seats; eyeglasses; food;
medicine; perishable property; any operator's licenses; any cash, credit cards,
or checks or checkbooks; any wallet, purse, or other property containing any
operator's license or other identifying documents or materials, cash, credit
cards, checks, or checkbooks; and any personal property belonging to a person
other than the vehicle owner if that person provides adequate proof that the
personal property belongs to that person. The spouse, child, mother, father,
brother, or sister of the vehicle owner may claim personal property excepted
under this division (F)(4) if the person claiming the personal property
provides the commercial vehicle relocator or towing service with the
authorization of the vehicle owner.
      (5)   This division (F)(5) applies only in the case of a vehicle that is
towed as a result of being involved in a crash. In addition to the personal
property excepted under division (F)(4) of this section, all other personal
property in a vehicle subject to a lien under this division (F) is exempt from
that lien and may be claimed by the vehicle owner if the vehicle owner provides
the commercial vehicle relocator or towing service with proof that the vehicle
owner has an insurance policy covering towing and storage fees. The spouse,
child, mother, father, brother, or sister of the vehicle owner may claim
personal property in a vehicle subject to a lien under this division (F) if the
person claiming the personal property provides the commercial vehicle relocator
or towing service with the authorization of the vehicle owner and proof that
the vehicle owner has an insurance policy covering towing and storage fees. The
regulation of liens on personal property and exceptions to those liens in the
case of vehicles towed as a result of being involved in a crash are exclusive
powers and functions of the state. A home rule unit may not regulate liens on
personal property and exceptions to those liens in the case of vehicles towed
as a result of being involved in a crash. This division (F)(5) is a denial and
limitation of home rule powers and functions under subsection (h) of Section 6
of Article VII of the Illinois Constitution.
      (6)   No lien under this division (F) shall: exceed $2,000 in its total
amount; or be increased or altered to reflect any charge for services or
materials rendered in addition to those authorized by ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5.
   (H)   Whenever a peace officer issues a citation to a driver for a violation
of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506(a), the arresting officer may have the vehicle
which the person was operating at the time of the arrest impounded for a period
of five days after the time of arrest. An impounding agency shall release a
motor vehicle impounded under this division (G) to the registered owner of the
vehicle under any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   If the vehicle is a stolen vehicle;
      (2)   If the person ticketed for a violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §
11-506(a) was not authorized by the registered owner of the vehicle to operate
the vehicle at the time of the violation;
      (3)   If the registered owner of the vehicle was neither the driver nor a
passenger in the vehicle at the time of the violation or was unaware that the
driver was using the vehicle to engage in street racing;
      (4)   If the legal owner or registered owner of the vehicle is a rental
car agency; or
      (5)   If, prior to the expiration of the impoundment period specified
above, the citation is dismissed or the defendant is found not guilty of the
offense.
   (I)   Except for vehicles exempted under subsection (b) of ILCS Ch. 625, Act
5, § 7-601, whenever a law enforcement officer issues a citation to a driver
for a violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-707, and the driver has a prior
conviction for a violation of ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-707 in the past 12
months, the arresting officer shall authorize the removal and impoundment of
the vehicle by a towing service.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203)
   (J)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle comes into the
temporary possession or custody of a person in this village not the owner of
the vehicle, that person shall immediately notify the police department. Upon
receipt of such notification, the police will authorize a towing service to
remove and take possession of the abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed
vehicle. The towing service will safely keep the towed vehicle and its
contents, and maintain a record of the tow as set forth in division(K) below
until the vehicle is claimed by the owner or other person legally entitled to
possession thereof or until it is disposed of as provided in this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-202)
   (K)   When a vehicle is authorized to be towed away, the police department
shall keep and maintain a record of the vehicle towed, listing the color, year
of manufacture, manufacturer's trade name, manufacturer's series name, body
style, vehicle identification number, license plate or digital license plate
year and number, and registration sticker or digital registration sticker year
and number displayed on the vehicle. The record shall also include the date and
hour of tow, location towed from, location towed to, reason for towing, and the
name of the officer authorizing the tow. (ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-204)
Statutory reference:
   Impoundment of vehicle driven by person arrested for driving under the
influence of alcohol, drugs or the like, see ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203(e)
§ 90.04 NOTICE TO BE GIVEN TO REGISTERED OWNER, STATE POLICE.
   (A)   When the police department authorizing the impounding of a vehicle
does not know the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other
legally-entitled person, it will cause the vehicle registration records of the
state to be searched by the Secretary of State for the purpose of obtaining the
required ownership information.
      (1)   The police department will cause the stolen motor vehicle files of
the state police to be searched by a directed communication to the state police
for stolen or wanted information on the vehicle. When the state police files
are searched with negative results, the information contained in the National
Crime Information Center (NCIC) files will be searched by the state police. The
information determined from these record searches will be returned to the
police department for use in sending notice by certified mail to the registered
owner, lienholder, or other legally-entitled person advising where the vehicle
is held, requesting a disposition be made, and setting forth public sale
information.
      (2)   Notification shall be sent no later than ten days after the date
the police department impounds or authorizes the impounding of a vehicle,
provided that if the police department is unable to determine the identity of
the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally-entitled to ownership
of the impounded vehicle within a ten-day period after impoundment, then
notification shall be sent no later than two days after the date the identity
of the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to
ownership of the impounded vehicle is determined. Exceptions to a notification
by certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder, or other legally-
entitled persons are as set forth in §
90.06(B).
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-205)
   (B)   When the registered owner, lienholder, or other person legally
entitled to the possession of a vehicle cannot be identified from the
registration files of this state or other state, if applicable, the police
department shall notify the Illinois State Police for the purpose of
identifying the vehicle owner or other person legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. The information obtained by the Illinois State
Police will be immediately forwarded to the police department for notification
purposes as set forth in division (A) above.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-206)
§ 90.05 RECLAIMING OF VEHICLE BY OWNER.
   Any time before a vehicle is sold at public sale or disposed of as provided
in §
90.06(A), the owner, lienholder, or other person legally entitled to its
possession may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the police department proof
of ownership or proof of the right to possession of the vehicle. No vehicle
shall be released to the owner, lienholder, or other person under this section
until all towing and storage charges have been paid.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-207)
§ 90.06 DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles with notice.
      (1)   When an abandoned, lost, stolen, or unclaimed vehicle seven years
of age or newer remains unclaimed by the registered owner, lienholder, or other
person legally entitled to its possession for a period of 30 days after notice
has been given as required by §
90.04, the police department or towing service having possession of the vehicle
shall cause it to be sold at public auction to a person licensed as an
automotive parts recycler, rebuilder, or scrap processor under state law.
Notice of the time and place of the sale shall be posted in a conspicuous place
for at least ten days prior to the sale on the premises where the vehicle has
been impounded. At least ten days prior to the sale, the police department
where the vehicle is impounded, or the towing service where the vehicle is
impounded, shall cause a notice of the time and place of the sale to be sent by
certified mail to the registered owner, lienholder, and other persons known by
the police department or towing service to be legally entitled to the
possession of the vehicle. Notice as provided in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 4-205
and 4-206 and as provided in this subdivision shall state the time and place of
sale and shall contain a complete description of the vehicle to be sold and
what steps must be taken by any legally-entitled person to reclaim the vehicle.
      (2)   In those instances where the certified notification specified in §
90.04 has been returned by the postal authorities to the police department or
towing service, the sending of a second certified notice will not be required.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208)
   (B)   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles without notice.
      (1)   When the identity of the registered owner, lienholder, or other
person legally entitled to the possession of an abandoned, lost, or unclaimed
vehicle of seven years of age or newer cannot be determined by any means
provided for in this chapter, the vehicle may be sold as provided in §
90.06(A) without notice to any person whose identity cannot be determined.
      (2)   When an abandoned vehicle of more than seven years of age is
impounded as specified by this chapter, it will be kept in custody for a
minimum of ten days for the purpose of determining the identity of the
registered owner and lienholder; contacting the registered owner and lienholder
by the U.S. Mail, public service, or in person for a determination of
disposition; and for an examination of the Illinois State Police stolen vehicle
files for theft and wanted information. At the expiration of the ten-day
period, without the benefit of disposition information being received from the
registered owner or the lienholder, the police department will authorize the
disposal of the vehicle as junk.
      (3)   An exception to the above is provided for if in the opinion of the
police officer processing the vehicle, it has value of $200 or more and can be
restored to safe operating condition. In this event, the police department may
authorize its purchase as salvage and the Secretary of State may issue a
salvage certificate.
      (4)   A vehicle classified as an antique vehicle, expanded-use antique
vehicle, custom vehicle, or street rod may, however, be sold to a person
desiring to restore it.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-209)
   (C)   Titling vehicles after public sale; removal of liens. When an
applicant for a certificate of title under this chapter presents to the
Secretary of State proof that he has purchased or acquired a vehicle at a
public sale as authorized by this chapter and such fact is certified to by the
police department of this village, the Secretary of State shall issue a
certificate of title for the vehicle upon receipt of the statutory fee and a
properly executed application for a certificate of title. The title issued by
the Secretary of State under this division shall be free of any lien that
existed against the vehicle prior to the time the vehicle was acquired by the
applicant under this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-212)
§ 90.07 POLICE DEPARTMENT TO KEEP RECORDS OF RECLAMATION OR DISPOSAL OF
VEHICLE.
   When a vehicle in the custody of the police department is reclaimed by the
registered owner, lienholder, or other legally-entitled person, or when the
vehicle is sold at public sale or otherwise disposed of as provided in this
chapter, a report of the transaction will be maintained by the police
department for a period of one year from the date of the sale or disposal.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-210)
§ 90.08 DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF SALE.
   When a vehicle located within the village is authorized to be towed away by
the police department and disposed of as set forth in this chapter, the
proceeds of the public sale or disposition after the deduction of towing,
storage, and processing charges shall be deposited in the Treasury of the
village.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-211)
§ 90.09 LIABILITY.
   A police officer or the police department, or the towing service owner,
operator, or employee shall not be held to answer or be liable for damages in
any action brought by the registered owner, former registered owner, or his
legal representative; lienholder; or any other person legally entitled to the
possession of a vehicle when the vehicle was processed and sold or disposed of
as provided by this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(a))
§ 90.10 VEHICLE ABANDONED IN PUBLIC GARAGE OR PARKING AREA; OPERATOR TO NOTIFY
POLICE.
   An operator of a place of business for garaging, repairing, parking, or
storing vehicles for the public in which a vehicle remains unclaimed after
being left for the purpose of garaging, repairing, parking, or storage for a
period of 15 days shall, within five days after the expiration of that period,
report the vehicle as unclaimed to the village police department. This section
does not apply to any vehicle removed to a place of storage by the village
police department in accordance with §§
90.01 and
90.03. Failure to comply with this section will result in the forfeiture of
storage fees for that vehicle involved.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-107(c))
§ 90.99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates or aids and abets in the violation of §§
90.01 or
90.02 shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $100, and shall be required
by the court to make a disposition on the abandoned, unclaimed, or inoperable
vehicle.
(ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-214)
CHAPTER 91: ANIMALS
Section
General Provisions
   
91.01   Definitions
   
91.02   Keeping of animals creating nuisance prohibited
Regulations Concerning Animals
   
91.15   Inoculation for rabies
   
91.16   Running at-large; Animal waste to be disposed of by owner
   
91.17   Disturbing the peace prohibited; creation of nuisance
   
91.18   Vicious dogs, cats or domestic animals
   
91.19   Keeping vicious, dangerous animals prohibited
   
91.20   Procedure when person is bitten
   
91.21   Exemption from liability
   
91.22   Cruelty to animals prohibited
   
91.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 91.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DOG. Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age and description of the
canine species which is more than two months old.
   CAT. Any animal, male or female, of any kind, age and description of the
feline species which is more than two months old.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any animal, male or female, of any kind, and description
which is normally kept or referred to as a household pet.
   ANIMAL. The reference to animal shall include dog, cat and domestic animal
as defined in this section.
   OWNER/KEEPER. Any person who shall harbor or suffer or permit any dog, cat
or domestic animal to remain on any premises within this village under his
charge or control.
   AT LARGE.    Any dog, cat or other domestic animal off the premises of the
owner and not under the control by a leash or other means of the owner or his
authorized agent.
   WILD ANIMAL. Any member of a species not customarily used as an ordinary
household pet, but which would ordinarily be confined to a zoo or one which
could ordinarily be found in the wilderness of this or any other country, or
one which otherwise causes a reasonable person to be fearful of bodily harm or
property damages. A WILD ANIMAL shall include, but not be limited to, any
poisonous reptile or any other dangerous or carnivorous wild animal or reptile,
except fish in an aquarium or captive-bred species of common cage birds.
(Am. Ord. 1236, passed 5-24-21; Am. Ord. 1239, passed 6-14-21)
§ 91.02 KEEPING OF ANIMALS CREATING NUISANCE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Keeping of wild animals.
      (1)   No person shall own, possess or have custody of any wild animal for
display, training or exhibition purposes, whether gratuitously or for a fee.
      (2)   No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild animal as a pet.
      (3)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to licenses to pet
shops and circuses, if:
         (a)   The location conforms to the provisions of the zoning ordinances
of the village;
         (b)   All animals and animal quarters are kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, well-ventilated conditions that allow the animal room to exercise,
and so maintained as to eliminate objectionable odors; and
         (c)   No person lives or resides within 150 feet of the quarters in
which the animals are kept.
      (4)   The provisions of division (A) above shall not apply to the
agricultural zoning district.
   (B)   Keeping of farm animals. No person shall keep any goats, pigs, sheep,
cattle or other farm animals of any kind anywhere in the village. No person
shall raise, maintain, or have upon any property within the village any
chickens, ducks, geese, guinea hens, pigeons and other similar fowl. This
limitation shall not apply to any person or persons within the village limits
who, on the date of the enactment of this subchapter, owns farm animals which
is at least 150 feet of any residence other than the residence of the person so
keeping or having such animals. This limitation shall not apply to those
premises annexed to the village; and, provided that, the farm animals were kept
on the premises on the date of such annexation and continuously thereafter;
and, provided further that, such premises have remained the same size as when
first annexed to the village. However, this shall not be construed to allow
such person or persons to replace farm animals upon the death or loss of such
animal with a like number of farm animals.
      (1)   The provisions of this division (B) shall not apply to the
agricultural zoning district.
(Am. Ord. 1236, passed 5-24-21; Am. Ord. 1239. passed 6-14-21) Penalty, see §
91.99
REGULATIONS CONCERNING ANIMALS
§ 91.15 INOCULATION FOR RABIES.
   No animal shall be permitted to remain in the village that shall not have
been within 12 months prior thereto inoculated for rabies by a competent and
licensed veterinarian. Each keeper shall keep proof of such inoculation in the
form of a certificate and shall upon request by the proper authorities, exhibit
the certificate for the purpose of showing the fact of inoculation.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.16 RUNNING AT-LARGE; ANIMAL WASTE TO BE DISPOSED OF BY OWNER/KEEPER.
   (A)   Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a dog, cat or other domestic
animal, or other animal shall not cause or permit such dog, cat or other
domestic animal to run at-large, within the village, at any time during the
year other than within the confines of the owner's premises or while on a
leash. Any dog, cat, domestic animal, or other animal found running at-large is
in violation hereof, or that shall menace the public welfare is declared to be
a public nuisance.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the police authorities of this village and
such other person as the Village President may designate from time to time to
abate the nuisance forthwith by destroying such animal.
   (C)   All persons walking their dogs or other domestic animals on the public
property of the village or any private property not owned by the person walking
the animal shall carry a receptacle necessary for the placing of any dropping,
to-wit: feces, while the animal is on the public or private property other than
his own. The owner or keeper of the animal shall place the dropping in the
receptacle to be disposed of in a proper garbage container or lavatory. Any
person walking a dog or other domestic animal found in violation of not
properly disposing of animal dropping, shall be issued a nontraffic ticket
stating the violation.
Penalty, see §
91.99)
§ 91.17 DISTURBING THE PEACE PROHIBITED; CREATION OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, have in his
possession or harbor any dog, cat, domestic or other animal which, by frequent
or habitual barking, howling, yelping or by other loud noise, shall cause
annoyance of any family or person, or shall disturb the peace or quiet of any
neighborhood or place within the village. Such annoyance of any family or
person or the disturbance of the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or place
within the village by any dog, cat, domestic or other animal is declared to be
a public nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit
such nuisance to exist.
   (B)   On complaint being made to the Village President of any animal within
the village which shall by barking, biting, howling, yelping or other loud
noises, or in any other way or manner disturb the peace and quiet of any
person, which is hereby declared a nuisance, the Village President on being
satisfied of the truth of such complaint shall direct the Chief of Police to
give notice thereof to the person keeping and permitting such dog, cat,
domestic, or other animal to remain on his premises. In case such person shall
not, within 24 hours thereafter, cause such animal to be removed or quieted so
as to prevent the disturbance, the person shall forfeit and pay a sum not less
the $75 for every day which shall elapse until such dog is removed or quieted
as aforesaid.
§ 91.18 VICIOUS DOGS, CATS OR DOMESTIC ANIMALS.
   No person shall own, keep or harbor a vicious, fierce or dangerous dog, cat
or other domestic animal within the village, unless such person shall keep such
dog, cat or other domestic animal safely and securely confined so as to protect
from injury any person who shall come upon the premises where such dog, cat or
other domestic animal is located. All persons maintaining premises upon which a
vicious, fierce or dangerous dog, cat or other domestic animal is confined,
shall provide suitable and adequate warning of the presence of such dog, cat or
other domestic animal by appropriate signs or other means so as to advise all
persons lawfully entering upon such premises that a vicious, fierce or
dangerous dog, cat, or other domestic animal is confined thereon.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.19 KEEPING VICIOUS, DANGEROUS ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   Other than specifically provided in §
91.18, no person shall keep or suffer to be kept any type of vicious or
dangerous dog, cat, or other domestic animal or reptile in the village which
shall cause injury or fright any person.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.20 PROCEDURE WHEN PERSON IS BITTEN.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog, cat domestic
animal, or other animal, when notified by the Village Chief of Police, or his
authorized agent, that such dog, cat, domestic animal or other animal has
bitten any person, to sell or give away such dog, cat, domestic animal or other
animal or allow such dog, cat, domestic or other animal to be taken beyond the
limits of the village, except for confinement with a licensed veterinarian. It
shall be the duty of such owner or keeper, upon receiving notice from the
Village Chief of Police, or his authorized agent of the circumstance aforesaid,
to deliver such dog, cat, domestic or other animal within 24 hours to a
licensed veterinarian for examination, confinement, and observation, at the
expense of the owner. Where there is a failure to comply within 24 hours with
the order from the Village Chief of Police, or his authorized agent to have
such dog, cat, domestic or other animal examined, confined and observed as
provided herein, the Village Chief of Police, or his authorized agent, upon a
showing of reasonable evidence that such dog, cat, domestic or other animal has
bitten a person, may seek a court order to have such dog, cat, domestic or
other animal confined and observed. Within 24 hours after the dog, cat,
domestic or other animal is examined and confined, the veterinarian shall
report (as required by Section 12 of the Illinois Rabies Control Act) to the
Village Chief of Police, the owner's name, address and the date of confinement,
the breed, description, age, and sex of the dog, cat, domestic or other animal.
Such dog, cat, domestic or other animal shall be confined for a period of ten
days. At the termination of the period of confinement, the veterinarian shall
notify the Village Chief of Police in writing of the final disposition of the
animal.
   (B)   If, however, the dog, cat, domestic or other animal is examined by a
licensed veterinarian within 24 hours after notification by the Village Chief
of Police and found to be free of any signs of rabies and the Village Chief of
Police or the licensed veterinarian is presented evidence that such dog, cat,
domestic or other animal has been inoculated against rabies for more than 30
days prior to the biting and less than one year, if a one-year immunity vaccine
is used, or less than three years if a three-year vaccine is used, such dog,
cat, domestic or other animal shall be confined in the house of its owner or in
a manner that will prohibit such dog, cat, domestic or other animal from
escaping and from biting any person or animal for the ten-day period, unless in
the judgment of the Village Chief of Police or the licensed veterinarian,
circumstances are such that the dog, cat, domestic or other animal should be
confined elsewhere. At the end of the ten-day period, it shall be the duty of
the owner to present the dog, cat, domestic or other animal to a licensed
veterinarian for an examination. The licensed veterinarian shall then notify
the Village Chief of Police, in writing, within 24 hours the results of the
examination.
      (C)   If the dog, cat, domestic or other animal escapes from the house of
its owner, or from such other place of confinement provided by its owner,
during the ten-day confinement period, or if the owner fails to deliver the
dog, cat, domestic or other animal to a licensed veterinarian for reexamination
within 24 hours of the completion of the ten-day confinement period, the owner
is declared in violation of this section of this chapter and is subject to the
penalties elsewhere in this chapter. In addition, the owner of an escaped dog,
cat, domestic or other animal shall apprehend it and deliver it to a licensed
veterinarian for confinement, at the owner's expense, for the remainder of the
ten-day period.
      (D)   The owner of a dog, cat, domestic or other animal, four months of
age or older, not currently inoculated against rabies, as provided elsewhere in
this chapter, must have the dog, cat, domestic or other animal inoculated
against rabies at the time of release from confinement.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.21 EXEMPTION FROM LIABILITY.
   Village law enforcement officials or other persons authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter shall not be held liable for the injury, death or
disease which may occur to any dog, cat, domestic or other animal as a
consequence of the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.
§ 91.22 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall be cruel to any animal in any of the following ways:
   (A)   By overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or knowingly
allowing the same to be done;
   (B)   By cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal,
or causing, or knowingly allowing the same to be done;
   (C)   By unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or
custody, as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink and shelter;
   (D)   By abandoning any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal or by
abandoning any animal on any highway or public way or in any other place where
it may suffer injury, hunger or exposure or become a public charge; or
   (E)   By carrying or driving, causing to be carried or driven or kept, any
animal in an unnecessarily cruel manner.
Penalty, see §
91.99
§ 91.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not less than
$10 nor more than $500 for each offense. Each day's violation shall constitute
a separate offense.
CHAPTER 92: CEMETERIES
Section
General Provisions
   
92.01   Old Millstadt Cemetery
   
92.02   Mt. Evergreen Cemetery
   
92.03   Establishment of other cemeteries prohibited
   
92.04   Administration of cemeteries
   
92.05   Conduct in cemeteries
   
92.06   Endowed Care Fund
Cemetery Lots
   
92.15   Burial deeds
   
92.16   Maintenance of grave lots
   
92.17   Graves, grave openings, and columbarium
   
92.18   Disinterments and removals
   
92.19   Markers and monuments
   
92.20   Boxes and vaults
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 92.01 OLD MILLSTADT CEMETERY.
   The premises heretofore conveyed to the village by the Millstadt Cemetery
Association, and being described as:
      Lots Nos. 198, 199 and 200 of Randleman's 4th Addition to the Town of
Centerville, now Village of Millstadt; reference being had to the plat thereof
recorded in the Recorder's office of St. Clair County, Illinois, in Book of
Deeds “Q” on page 273; also
      A tract or parcel of land containing 1 acres, more or less, commencing
the survey thereof at the Northeast corner of Section No. 16, running thence
south 300 feet, thence west 207 feet, thence north 300 feet, thence east 207
feet to the place of beginning, being a part of the northeast quarter of the
northeast quarter of Section No. 16, T. 1 S., R. 9 W., situated in the Village
of Millstadt, St. Clair County, Illinois, shall be hereafter known as Old
Millstadt Cemetery.
('73 Code, § 15.01)
§ 92.02 MT. EVERGREEN CEMETERY.
   (A)   Establishment. The cemetery heretofore established on premises
described as:
      Part of Lots No. 17 and 24 of Section No. 9, T.1 S., R.9 W. as the same
are platted in the records of the Recorder's office of St. Clair County,
Illinois, more particularly described as follows:
      Commencing at a stone marking the Northwest corner of the Corporation
limits of the Village of Millstadt (which stone is set at the Southeast corner
of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest Quarter of
Section No. 9; thence east along the north line of the Corporation limits of
the village, 409 feet to the middle of the County Road running along the
easterly line of the above mentioned Lot No. 17; thence north 270 west along
the easterly line of Lot No. 17, 399½ feet; thence west parallel to the
Corporation limits line 397 feet; thence south at right angles to the last
mentioned line, 360 feet to a point on the extension westwardly of the above
mentioned Corporation limits line; thence east 162 feet to the point of
beginning, and containing 4 acres, situated in the Town of Millstadt, County of
St. Clair and State of Illinois, the plat of which is recorded in Book “M” at
page 56 in the Recorder's office of St. Clair County, Illinois, shall be known
as Mt. Evergreen Cemetery.
   (B)   First addition to Mt. Evergreen Cemetery. The cemetery heretofore
established on premises described as:
      Part of Lots numbered 17 and 24, being part of the North one-half,
Section numbered 9, T.1 S., R.9 W. of the Third P.M., more particularly
described as follows:
      Commencing the survey thereof at the stone which marks the Southeast
corner of the Northeast Quarter of the Southeast Quarter of the Northwest
Quarter; thence westerly along the Southerly line of the Quarter section, a
distance of 162 feet to a point; thence southerly at right angles to the last
described course a distance of 147 feet to a point; thence easterly at right
angles to the last described course a distance of 635.5 feet to a point; thence
northwesterly along a line making an interior angle with the last described
course of 590.23 feet, a distance of 170.8 feet to a point, the point being
also a point in the north corporate limits line of the village; thence westerly
along the northerly corporate limits line making an interior angle with the
last described course of 1200.37 feet a distance of 386.5 feet to the point of
beginning, situated in the Town of Millstadt, County of St. Clair and State of
Illinois, the original plat of which is recorded in Plat Book 43 on page 24,
and the amended plat thereof recorded in Plat Book 56 on page 78 of the
Recorder's office of St. Clair County, Illinois, shall be known as First
Addition to Mt. Evergreen Cemetery, the premises having been acquired by deed
recorded in Book 862 on page 638, by the following description:
      Beginning at a stone which marks the N. W. corner, S E. 1/4 S. E. 1/
4 Sec. 9, T. 1 S. R 9 W., thence W. along the N. line of the S. ½ SE 1/4 NW 1/
4 Sec. 9, 162 feet to a stone; thence S. 147 feet to a pipe; thence E. 635.5
feet to a pipe in the S.W. line of Saeger Rd., thence N. 300.36 feet W. along
S. W. line Saeger Rd., 170.3 feet to a stone, thence W. along the N. line of
the S. ½, S. E. 1/4 N. W. 1/4 Sec. 9, 473.5 feet to point of beginning. 2.00
acres more or less.
   (C)   Second Addition to Mt. Evergreen Cemetery. There is hereby established
an addition to Mt. Evergreen Cemetery on the premises described as:
      A tract of land containing 5.92 acres, being a part of what is known, for
assessment purposes, as Outlot “A” of “Henry J. Frierdich Assessment Plat,”
County Clerk's Assessment Plat 244, reference being had to the plat thereof
recorded in the Recorder's office of St. Clair County, Illinois in Book of
Plats 54 on page 42, being a part of Lot No. 24 in the Northwest Quarter and
part of Lot No. 17 of the Northeast Quarter, both in Section 9 of Township 1
South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian, St. Clair County,
Illinois, as described in the Warranty Deed filed for record on April 5, 1960
in Book 1675 on page 524 of the Recorder of Deeds office, St. Clair County,
Illinois, to be known as Second Addition to Mt. Evergreen Cemetery.
('73 Code, § 15.02)
§ 92.03 ESTABLISHMENT OF OTHER CEMETERIES PROHIBITED.
   Other than those cemeteries described in this chapter no person, association
or corporation shall establish or maintain any cemetery or place of burial
within the village limits or within one mile thereof, as the limits may now be
established or hereafter extended.
('73 Code, § 15.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.04 ADMINISTRATION OF CEMETERIES.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter apply to cemeteries under the control
of the village.
   (B)   The Custodian of Cemeteries and Sexton shall have the actual and
direct care, custody and control of the cemeteries of the village.
   (C)   General supervision and management of the cemeteries shall be vested
in the President and Board of Trustees of the village, acting through their
employees, officers and committees.
('73 Code, § 15.04)
§ 92.05 CONDUCT IN CEMETERIES.
   (A)   No person shall enter any cemetery unless it shall be in a manner or
for a use consistent with the purposes of a cemetery.
   (B)   No person shall wilfully, maliciously or negligently break, deface,
destroy or otherwise injure any monument, flower or decoration, or any other
property, article or thing belonging to or within any of the cemeteries of the
village, or to any other person, or shall trespass upon any grave in any
cemetery.
   (C)   All other acts of any person not consistent with this chapter and with
the peace and dignity of the people of the state are prohibited.
('73 Code, § 15.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.06 ENDOWED CARE FUND.
   (A)   Creation of Fund. There is hereby created a fund to be known as the
“Endowed Care Fund” for cemetery purposes, for the purpose of providing such
care and maintenance for the cemeteries and grave spaces covered thereby as the
net income of the Fund shall make possible.
   (B)   Administration. The Endowed Care Fund shall be administered in
accordance with the provisions of the Cemetery Care Act of Illinois, approved
July 21, 1947, and amendatory acts thereto [ILCS Ch. 760, Act 100, §§ 1 et
seq.].
   (C)   Second Addition. All lots in the Second Addition to Mt. Evergreen
Cemetery shall be under perpetual care.
   (D)   Principal.  
      (1)   The principal of the Fund shall consist of the present principal or
corpus of the Fund heretofore known as the Perpetual Care Fund, together with
the 80% portion of the burial deed fees allocated as set forth in §
92.20(F) and the endowed care charges as set forth in division (D)(2) of this
section.
      (2)   Owners of burial deeds which were previously purchased in Mt.
Evergreen Cemetery may purchase endowed care therefor by paying the amount of
$125 for a four grave lot, or $250 for an eight grave lot, less the price
originally received by the village for the burial deed when originally issued.
      (3)   In accordance with the Cemetery Care Act [ILCS Ch. 760, Act 100, §§
1 et seq.], all principal of this Fund is hereby irrevocably set aside for the
production of income for the maintenance and care of First Addition to Mt.
Evergreen Cemetery, and for such grave spaces in Mt. Evergreen Cemetery for
which such endowed care shall have been purchased.
      (4)   The principal of this Fund shall be invested and kept invested by
the Trustees in such securities as from time to time are eligible therefor
under the Cemetery Care Act.
   (E)   Income. The net income of the Fund is hereby irrevocably pledged for
the providing of such care and maintenance for First Addition to Mt. Evergreen
Cemetery, and for the grave spaces in Mt. Evergreen Cemetery, for which endowed
care shall have been purchased, to the extent that the income shall be
available therefor.
   (F)   Trustees. Annually, on the first meeting of the new fiscal year, the
President and Board of Trustees shall appoint one Trustee of the Endowed Care
Fund. At any time during the fiscal year upon the death, resignation or removal
from office, the President and Board of Trustees shall have the right to fill
such vacancy or vacancies as may from time to time occur, the person so
appointed to fill the vacancy to serve for the unexpired term thereof.
      (1)   Each Trustee appointed for a full term shall serve a term of three
years.
      (2)   Each Trustee prior to the making of any official acts on his part
shall take and subscribe to the oath as set out hereinabove for other village
officers.
      (3)   The Trustees shall not receive any compensation for their services
in this behalf.
   (G)   Duties of Trustees.  
      (1)   It shall be the duty of the Trustees to receive from the Village
Clerk all money allocated and to be added to the principal of this fund and to
keep the same invested as hereinbefore provided.
      (2)   Annually, at the regular monthly meeting of the President and the
Board of Trustees held in the month of April in each year, the Trustees shall
make a report to the President and Board of Trustees, showing the condition of
the Endowed Care Fund on the preceding April report, receipts of principal
subsequently, and collections and disbursements of income. The report shall
show the assets or securities presently on hand in which the principal of the
Fund shall have been invested.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a bill approved by the Board of Trustees showing
the cost of endowed care rendered by the village during the preceding year, the
Trustees shall pay the bill to the extent permitted by the income collected on
the fund. At no time shall any of the principal be used for the payment of the
cost of the endowed care.
      (4)   Whenever all past and current bills for endowed care have been paid
by the Trustees to the village for reimbursement thereof, the remaining income
in the fund may be invested in securities such as are permitted for the
investment therein of principal. Such invested income shall be identified as
such and thereafter shall be subject to liquidation and disbursement in payment
of endowed care expense.
   (H)   Reimbursement to village for care. Between the regular monthly
meetings to be held in the months of April and May in each year, the Cemetery
Committee of the village shall audit the cemetery account and disbursements,
and therefrom prepare a statement showing the cost and expense of rendering
endowed care for the preceding fiscal year. The account shall be submitted to
the Board of Trustees at the regular monthly meeting held in May of each fiscal
year for its approval. Upon approval by the Board of Trustees the statement
shall be rendered to the Endowed Care Fund Trustees representing the charge to
be made against the income of the Endowed Care Fund for endowed care rendered
during the preceding fiscal year. The account shall be kept on a cumulative
basis, and any excess of expense over income collected in any preceding year
shall be carried forward until such time as the account may balance and shall
be thereafter continued from time to time.
('73 Code, § 15.12)
CEMETERY LOTS
§ 92.15 BURIAL DEEDS.
   (A)   No grave shall be dug, body interred, or marker or monument placed
unless there shall have previously been issued a burial deed, as hereinafter
provided, and prior payment made of all of the appropriate burial deed and
other fees therefor as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   Burial deeds shall be issued by the Village Clerk who shall keep a
record thereof in a journal to be provided for him or her by the village, which
record shall be a continuation of all of the former records kept therefor.
   (C)   A burial deed shall not be deemed or construed as a sale of the land
described therein, but merely shall confer the privilege or benefit of therein
interring the remains of the holder of the deed or of such person as he or she
shall designate, or who may be a member of his or her family.
   (D)   A burial deed may be transferred in whole or in part by the surrender
of the deed theretofore issued, duly endorsed by the registered holder thereof,
or by his or her legatees or heirs at law, or representative of his or her
estate, together with the transfer fee of $1.
   (E)   
      (1)   Burial deed fees for interment in Mt. Evergreen Cemetery shall be
as follows:
         (a)   Child graves for those five years and under   $600
         (b)   Adult, single graves   $1,000
         (c)   Lots containing two grave spaces   $1,500
      (2)   Burial deed for interment in the Columbarium in Mt. Evergreen shall
be as follows:
         (a)   Columbarium lots (two columbarium niches)   $1,700
         (b)   Columbarium (single as needed niche on bottom rows)   $850
   (F)   Bi-level interment is prohibited in all cemeteries under the control
of the village.
   (G)   All fees collected for burial deeds in Mt. Evergreen Cemetery and in
all the additions thereto shall be allocated as follows:
      (1)   60% thereof to the Perpetual Care or Endowed Care Fund;
      (2)   40% thereof to the General Fund of the village.
   (H)   Burial deed fees for interment rights sold in Mt. Evergreen Cemetery,
together with all transfer fees collected shall be appropriated and expended
for the care and maintenance of the cemeteries of the village.
   (I)   All grave spaces shall be sold and all burial deeds issued in
numerical sequence.
('73 Code, § 15.05) (Am. Ord. 454, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 546, passed 9-6-88;
Am. Ord. 672, passed 4-17-95; Am. Ord. 791, passed 2-5-01; Am. Ord. 1058,
passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 1303, passed 11-10-25) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 92.16 MAINTENANCE OF GRAVE LOTS.
   Custom mowing for graves not under perpetual care shall be available at an
annual rate of $10 per four grave lot.
('73 Code, § 15.06)
§ 92.17 GRAVES, GRAVE OPENINGS, AND COLUMBARIUM.
   (A)   All graves/columbarium niches shall be opened only by the village.
   (B)   (1)   At the time of ordering a grave opening and closing or interment
for a week day, the applicant shall deposit in full the fee applicable thereto
as follows:
         (a)   Child, five years and under    $600
         (b)   Amputations and ashes   $600
         (c)   All others         $1,150
      (2)   At the time of ordering a grave opening and closing or interment on
a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, or after business hours, the applicant
shall deposit in full the fee applicable thereto as follows:
         (a)   Child, five years and under    $800
         (b)   Amputations and ashes   $800
         (c)   All others         $1,450
      (3)   At the time of ordering a columbarium niche opening and closing or
interment for a week day, the applicant shall deposit in full the fee
applicable thereto as follows:
         (a)   Ashes   $500
      (4)   At the time of ordering a columbarium niche opening and closing or
interment, on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, or after business hours, the
applicant shall deposit in full the fee applicable thereto as follows:
         (a)   Ashes   $700
      (5)   There shall be an extra charge of $150 for services arriving at the
cemetery later than one hour after the scheduled arrival time.
('73 Code, § 15.07) (Ord. 436, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 585, passed 7-16-90; Am.
Ord. 672, passed 4-17-95; Am. Ord. 964, passed 1-15-07; Am. Ord. 990, passed 1-
8-08; Am. Ord. 1058, passed 5-17-10; Am. Ord. 1295, passed 3-24-25; Am. Ord.
1303, passed 11-10-25)
§ 92.18 DISINTERMENTS AND REMOVALS.
   (A)   Disinterment shall be the removal of a body and its containing vessel
from the place of interment, regardless of the reason therefor.
   (B)   Priorities among the next of kin as hereinafter mentioned shall be as
follows:
      (1)   The surviving spouse, if any;
      (2)   Children;
      (3)   Parents;
      (4)   Grandchildren;
      (5)   Brothers and sisters;
      (6)   Grandparents;
      (7)   Collaterals.
   (C)   Prior to the disinterment of any body, the next of kin of the class as
entitled to priority, shall unanimously make application so to do by filling
out a form to be furnished for that purpose by the village. The application
shall identify the deceased, indicate the next of kin making the application,
and disclose the name of the person engaged to do the disinterring of the
containing vessel. If the decedent is buried on a lot or grave space, the title
to which shall not be in his or her name exclusively, the application shall
also be signed by the surviving lot owners or the surviving next of kin of the
other lot owners in the same priority of class.
   (D)   The village shall remove the ground down to the top of the containing
vessel or vault, if there be one, and shall refill the grave except for the
ground removed by the person disinterring the containing vessel, which ground
shall be refilled by him or her.
   (E)   The village shall be notified at least two days prior to the day on
which it is desired to have the disinterment made.
   (F)   (1)   Disinterment will not be permitted on any of the following days:
         (a)   For three days prior to and including Mother’s Day, Father’s
Day, New Years, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving and
Christmas days;
         (b)   On Saturdays or Sundays;
         (c)   On days on which funerals are scheduled in the cemetery;
      (2)   At such time of the year when freezing or thawing shall place the
surface of the cemetery in a condition soft enough that the wheels of the
vehicle used in the disinterment shall depress the ground surface more than two
inches.
   (G)   Disinterment must be completed by 3:30 p.m. on the day on which
disinterment is to be made.
   (H)   The necessary permit required by law must be secured by the applicant
and must be presented to the village prior to the disinterment.
   (I)   The person designated for the removal of the containing vessel shall
not use any mechanical equipment in excavation and shall use only such
equipment for lifting the containing vessel which is similar to that equipment
normally used for the original placing of it. All ground removed by the person
or firm removing the containing vessel shall be deposited on cover, tarpaulin
or plywood, and be replaced without spillage on other graves or ground surface.
   (J)   The fees for disinterment and removal shall be the same as stated for
grave openings.
('73 Code, § 15.08) (Am. Ord. 436, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 454, passed - -; Am.
Ord. 672, passed 4-17-95)
§ 92.19 MARKERS AND MONUMENTS.
   (A)   After November 5, 1959, no ornament or structure of any kind shall be
permanently placed upon any grave or burial space in Old Millstadt, Mt.
Evergreen, or First Addition to Mt. Evergreen Cemeteries, other than one of the
following:
      (1)   A headstone or tombstone of granite or marble, which shall not
exceed a length of 48 inches and a height of 32 inches above the base upon
which it is placed;
      (2)   A bronze marker or memorial of characteristics as are hereinafter
set forth.
   (B)   No shepherd hooks or wrought iron plant hangers or similar bouquet
holders shall be allowed on a gravesite where it interferes with grass cutting
or cemetery maintenance. Any such shepherd hooks, plant hangers, bouquet
holders or any other markers, monuments or other decorations may be removed at
any time by the village when, in the sole judgment of the caretaker, removal is
consistent with a neat and orderly appearance.
   (C)   No headstone or tombstone shall be placed except upon a foundation.
   (D)   No bronze marker shall be installed within any cemetery except upon a
foundation.
   (E)   All bronze markers or memorials shall be placed flush with the
adjacent ground surface and height of designed characters on the markers shall
not exceed one-fourth-inch from the surface of the marker.
   (F)   At time of delivery of the marker to the cemetery for installation,
the person making the delivery shall tender a certificate or affidavit of
analysis from an independent laboratory, showing the qualitative and
quantitative analysis of the bronze alloy used therein.
   (G)   Each casting shall be true, free from any weakening defects of any
character and also free from minor defects and imperfections which would be
visible from a distance of three feet. All exposed surfaces must be smooth.
   (H)   All letters, numerals, ornamentation and insignia must be hand chased,
finely buffed and highlighted. Background shall be a sculptured texture.
Background shall be finished in medium dark statuary bronze color, secured by
entirely chemical means through the formation of cuprous oxide and cupric oxide
on the background surface. No sulphide finishes, painted or pigmented lacquer
finishes will be permitted.
   (I)   Each marker shall be cast with integral bosses on the back there of.
These bosses shall be drilled and tapped to receive 3/8-inch diameter anchor
lugs of brass or bronze from four inches to six inches in length, which anchor
lugs shall be supplied with the marker.
   (J)   In case of markers with vase wells, such vase wells shall be
fabricated out of corrosion proof material.
   (K)   No graves or places of interment in Second Addition to Mt. Evergreen
Cemetery shall be memorialized other than by bronze markers or memorials of the
characteristics herein set forth and under the regulations hereof.
('73 Code, § 15.09) (Am. Ord. 1009, passed 8-4-08; Am. Ord. 1295, passed 3-24-
25)
§ 92.20 BOXES AND VAULTS.
   No interment shall be permitted in any cemetery under the control of the
village excepting where an outside container (box or vault) is used therefor,
and which shall be constructed of concrete, fiber glass, steel or other
nondeteriorating material.
('73 Code, § 15.10) (Am. Ord. 585, passed 7-16-90)
CHAPTER 93: HEALTH, SAFETY AND SANITATION
Section
General Provisions
   
93.01   Littering
   
93.02   Air and water pollution
Dutch Elm Disease
   
93.15   Right of entry; inspection of tree
   
93.16   Nuisance
   
93.17   Destruction of affected trees
   
93.18   Abatement by village
   
93.19   Lien for removal costs
   
93.20   Violation of provisions
Electrical Inspections
   
93.30   Fees for electrical inspections and services
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning public nuisances, see
Ch. 95
   For provisions concerning acts constituting health nuisances, see §
95.02
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 93.01 LITTERING.
   No person shall litter any public or private property with paper or other
debris or foreign matter. Any stored or transported materials susceptible to
blowing or scattering shall be adequately covered or protected to prevent
littering.
('73 Code, § 43.09) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 93.02 AIR AND WATER POLLUTION.
   No person shall pollute the air or any water course by excessive discharge
of waste products or foreign matter.
('73 Code, § 43.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
DUTCH ELM DISEASE
§ 93.15 RIGHT OF ENTRY; INSPECTION OF TREE.
   The officers, agents and employees of the village may enter upon private
property whereon there is located any elm tree having the appearance of or
suspected of being diseased with the Dutch Elm disease, for the purpose of
inspecting the suspected tree and removing therefrom samples or portions
thereof to be tested to establish whether the tree is in fact diseased.
('73 Code, § 12.05(a))
§ 93.16 NUISANCE.
   If it is determined by the village that the tree from which samples have
been taken is in fact diseased or infected with the Dutch Elm disease, the tree
shall be deemed a nuisance.
('73 Code, § 12.05(b))
§ 93.17 DESTRUCTION OF AFFECTED TREES.
   The owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which the diseased elm
tree exists, shall remove and destroy the elm tree within ten days after
notification to such owner, occupant or agent, by the village that the elm tree
situated on the parcel of land is in fact diseased and infected.
('73 Code, § 12.05(c))
§ 93.18 ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE.
   In case the owner, occupant or agent of the parcel of land on which a
diseased elm tree is located cannot be found, or if found and notified as
aforesaid, neglects or refuses to abate the nuisance, the village may abate the
same by the removal and destruction of the diseased elm tree, and the owner,
occupant and agent or any of them, shall be charged with those expenses which
may be incurred by the village in the removal of the diseased elm tree, which
expense shall be collected by the village by suit, or otherwise. In addition
the owner, occupant or agent shall be subject to the fine or penalty provided
in this section.
('73 Code, § 12.05(d))
§ 93.19 LIEN FOR REMOVAL COSTS.
   The cost of removal and destruction of a diseased elm tree is a lien upon
the real estate affected, superior to all other liens and encumbrances, except
tax liens, provided that notice has been given as hereinafter described, and
further provided that within 60 days after such cost and expense is incurred
the village, or person performing the service by authority of the village, in
his own name, files notice of lien in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
this county. The notice shall consist of a sworn statement setting out a
description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof, the
amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or payable for the
service, and the date or dates when such cost and expense was incurred by the
village. Upon payment of the cost and expense by the owner of or persons
interested in such property, after notice of lien has been filed, the lien
shall be released by the village, or person in whose name the lien has been
filed, and the release may be filed of record as in the case of filing notice
of lien. The cost of such tree removal shall not be a lien upon the real estate
affected unless a notice shall be personally served or sent by registered mail
to the person to whom was sent the tax bill for the general taxes for the last
preceding year on the property, such notice to be delivered or sent not less
than 30 days prior to the removal of the tree or trees located thereon. The
notice shall contain the substance of this section and identify the property,
by common description, and the tree or trees affected.
('73 Code, § 12.05(e))
§ 93.20 VIOLATION OF PROVISIONS.
   Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section or who
shall neglect or refuse to remove and destroy a diseased elm tree growing on
any parcel of land of which such person is owner, agent, occupant, or person in
possession, when ordered so to do, or who shall interfere with the removal arid
destruction of such diseased elm tree, shall be subject to the penalty set
forth in §
10.99.
('73 Code, § 12.05(f)) Penalty, see §
10.99
ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS
§ 93.30 FEES FOR ELECTRICAL INSPECTIONS AND SERVICES.
   All fees set forth in the “St. Clair County Building & Zoning Department
Agreement for Building Inspection Program” and all subsequent amendments or
agreements entered into with the village shall be the fees assessed by the
village.
(Ord. 1122, passed 4-21-14; Am. Ord. 1290, passed 3-10-25)
CHAPTER 94: NOISE
Section
   
94.01   Loud and unnecessary noises prohibited; enumeration
   
94.02   Blowing horns
   
94.03   Drums and loudspeakers
   
94.04   Radios and phonographs
   
94.05   Vehicle noise
   
94.06   Devices using compressed air
   
94.07   Exhaust discharge
   
94.99   Penalty
§ 94.01 LOUD AND UNNECESSARY NOISE PROHIBITED; ENUMERATION.
   The creation of an unreasonably loud, disturbing, and unnecessary noise in
the village is prohibited. Noise of such character, intensity, and duration as
to be detrimental to the life or health of any individual is prohibited. The
acts provided in this chapter, among others, are declared to be loud,
disturbing, and unnecessary noises in violation of this chapter, but this
enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.02 BLOWING HORNS.
   The sounding or blowing of any horn or any signal device on any automobile,
motorcycle, bus, or other vehicle while not in motion, except as a signal if
another vehicle is approaching apparently out of control, or if in motion only
as a danger signal; the creation by means of any signal of any reasonably loud
or harsh sound; and the sounding of the device for any unnecessary or
unreasonable period of time shall be prohibited.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.03 DRUMS AND LOUDSPEAKERS.
   The use of any drum, loudspeaker, or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show,
sale, display, or advertisement of merchandise shall be prohibited.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.04 RADIOS AND PHONOGRAPHS.
   (A)   The outdoor use of radios, phonographs, and the like shall be
prohibited in the following incidents:
      (1)   The operation of a juke box, radio, phonograph, television, or
other instrument of like nature, with or without a transmitter or amplifier, so
that the music or information produced by the instrument shall be discharged
into the open or outside of any building.
      (2)   The use of any out-of-door amplifier.
      (3)   The playing of any radio, phonograph, television, or any musical
instrument in such a manner as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or
repose of any persons in any dwelling, hotel, or other type of residence.
   (B)   However, the broadcasting of events occurring in any athletic contest
of the village, the broadcasting of a band concert produced by live
participants in the village, or the broadcasting of any music, chimes, or bells
by any church shall not be included in the foregoing designations.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.05 VEHICLE NOISE.
   The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so
loaded, or in any condition that creates loud or unnecessary grating, grinding,
rattling, screeching of tires, or other noise, shall be prohibited.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.06 DEVICES USING COMPRESSED AIR.
   The use of any mechanical device operated by compressed air shall be
prohibited, unless the noise created thereby is effectively muffled and
reduced.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.07 EXHAUST DISCHARGE.
   The discharge in the open air of the exhaust of a steam engine, stationary
internal combustion engine, or motor vehicle shall be prohibited, except
through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent noises
therefrom.
Penalty, see §
94.99
§ 94.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $500
for each and every violation thereof. Every day the violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Am. Ord. 818, passed 3-18-02)
CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES
Section
   
95.01   Public nuisances prohibited
   
95.02   Public nuisances defined
   
95.03   Abatement of public nuisances
   
95.04   Cost of abatement
§ 95.01 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall erect, contrive, cause, continue, maintain or permit to
exist any public nuisance within the village or within the police jurisdiction
of the village.
('73 Code, § 12.01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 95.02 PUBLIC NUISANCES DEFINED.
   (A)   General. A public nuisance is a thing, act, occupation, condition or
use of property which shall continue for such length of time as to:
      (1)   Substantially annoy, injure or endanger the comfort, health, repose
or safety of the public; or
      (2)   In any way render the public insecure in life or in the use of
property; or
      (3)   Greatly offend the public morals or decency; or
      (4)   Unlawfully and substantially interfere with, obstruct or tend to
obstruct or render dangerous for passage any street, alley, highway, navigable
body of water or other public way.
   (B)   Public nuisances affecting health. The following acts, omissions,
places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be public
health nuisances, but shall not be construed to exclude other health nuisances
coming within the definition of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   All decayed, harmfully adulterated or unwholesome food or drink
sold or offered for sale to the public;
      (2)   Carcasses of animals, birds or fowl not buried or otherwise
disposed of in a sanitary manner within 24 hours after death;
      (3)   Accumulations of decayed animal or vegetable matter, trash,
rubbish, rotting lumber, bedding, packing material, abandoned vehicles or
machinery, scrap metal or any material in which flies, mosquitoes, disease-
carrying insects, rats or other vermin may breed;
      (4)   All stagnant water in which mosquitoes, flies or other insects can
multiply;
      (5)   Garbage cans which are not fly-tight;
      (6)   The escape of smoke, soot, cinders, noxious acids, fumes, gases,
fly ash or industrial dust within the village limits in such quantities as to
endanger the health of persons of ordinary sensibilities or to threaten or
cause substantial injury to property;
      (7)   The pollution of any public well or cistern, stream, lake, canal or
body of water by sewage, creamery or industrial wastes or other substances;
      (8)   Any use of property, substances or things within the village
emitting or causing any foul, offensive, noisome, nauseous, noxious, or
disagreeable odors, effluvia or stenches extremely repulsive to the physical
senses of ordinary persons which annoy, discomfort, injure or inconvenience the
health of any appreciable number of persons within the village;
      (9)   All abandoned wells not securely covered or secured from public
use;
      (10)    Any barn, stable or shed used for keeping animals;
      (11)    Any obstruction in or across any watercourse, drainage ditch or
ravine;
      (12)    The deposit of garbage, rubbish, or any offensive substance on
any street, sidewalk or public place, or on any private property, except as may
be permitted by ordinance;
      (13)    Any noxious weeds on private property, as defined by ILCS Ch.
505, Act 100, § 2.
   (C)   Public nuisances offending morals and decency. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby specifically declared to be
public nuisances offending public morals and decency, but such enumeration
shall not be construed to exclude other nuisances offending public morals and
decency coming within the definition of division (A) of this section;
      (1)   All disorderly houses, bawdy houses, house of ill fame, gambling
houses and buildings or structures kept or resorted to for the purpose of
prostitution, promiscuous sexual intercourse or gambling;
      (2)   All gambling devices and slot machines;
      (3)   All places where intoxicating liquor or fermented malt beverages
are sold, possessed, stored, brewed, bottled, manufactured or rectified without
a permit or license as provided for by
Chapter 110;
      (4)   Any place or premises within the village where ordinances or state
laws relating to public health, safety, peace, morals or welfare are openly,
continuously, repeatedly and intentionally violated.
   (D)   Public nuisances affecting peace and safety. The following acts,
omissions, places, conditions and things are hereby declared to be public
nuisances affecting peace and safety, but such enumeration shall not be
construed to exclude other nuisances affecting public peace or safety coming
within the provisions of division (A) of this section:
      (1)   All buildings erected, repaired or altered in violation of the
provisions of the ordinances of the village relating to materials and manner of
construction of buildings and structures;
      (2)   All unauthorized signs, signals, markings or devices which purport
to be or may be mistaken as official traffic control devices placed or
maintained upon or in view of any public highway or railway crossing;
      (3)   All trees, hedges, billboards or other obstructions which prevent
persons driving vehicles on public streets, alleys or highways from obtaining a
clear view of traffic when approaching an intersection or pedestrian crosswalk;
      (4)   All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk less than
eight feet above the surface thereof or less than ten feet above the surface of
a public street;
      (5)   All use or display of fireworks except as provided by the laws of
the state and ordinances of the village;
      (6)   All buildings or structures so old, dilapidated or out of repair as
to be dangerous, unsafe, insanitary or otherwise unfit for human use;
      (7)   All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are strung
less than 15 feet above the surface of the street or ground;
      (8)   All loud and discordant noises or vibrations of any kind;
      (9)   All obstructions of streets, alleys, sidewalks or crosswalks and
all excavations in or under the same, except as permitted by the ordinances of
the village or which, although made in accordance with such ordinances, are
kept or maintained for an unreasonable length of time after the purpose thereof
has been accomplished;
      (10)    All open and unguarded pits, wells, excavations or unused
basements freely accessible from any public street, alley or sidewalk;
      (11)    All abandoned refrigerators or iceboxes from which the doors and
other covers have not been removed or which are not equipped with a device for
opening from the inside by pushing only with the strength of a small child;
      (12)    Any unauthorized or unlawful use of property abutting on a public
street, alley or sidewalk or of a public street, alley or sidewalk which causes
large crowds of people to gather, obstructing traffic and free use of the
streets or sidewalks;
      (13)    Any advertisements or signs affixed to any building, wall, fence,
sidewalk, street or other private or public property without permission of the
owner thereof;
      (14)    Any sign, marquee or awning which is in an unsafe condition, or
which overhangs any roadway, or which overhangs any sidewalk less than eight
feet above the sidewalk surface;
      (15)    Any structure, material or condition which constitutes a fire
hazard or will impair the extinguishing of any fire;
      (16)    Any nuisance so defined by state statutes.
('73 Code, § 12.02)
§ 95.03 ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   (A)   Inspection of premises. Whenever complaint is made to the Village
President that a public nuisance exists, or has existed, within the village, he
shall promptly notify the Chief of Police, or some other village official whom
the President shall designate, who shall forthwith inspect or cause to be
inspected the premises and shall make a written report of his findings to the
President. Whenever practicable, the inspecting officer shall cause photographs
to be made of the premises and shall file the same in the office of the Village
Clerk.
   (B)   Summary abatement. 
      (1)   Notice to owner. If the inspecting officer shall determine that a
public nuisance exists on private property and that there is great and
immediate danger to the public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, the
Village President may direct the Chief of Police, or a deputy sheriff, to serve
a notice on the owner, or, if the owner cannot be found, on the occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance and to post a copy of
the notice on the premises. Such notice shall direct the owner, occupant or
person causing, permitting or maintaining such nuisance to abate or remove such
nuisance within 24 hours and shall state that unless such nuisance is so
abated, the village will cause the same to be abated and will charge the cost
thereof to the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
same, as the case may be.
      (2)   Abatement by village. If the nuisance is not abated within the time
provided, or if the owner, occupant or person causing the nuisance cannot be
found, the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys, or some other village official
whom the President shall designate, shall cause the abatement or removal of
such public nuisance.
      (3)   Abatement by court action. If the inspecting officer shall
determine that a public nuisance exists on private premises but that the nature
of such nuisance is not such as to threaten great and immediate danger to the
public health, safety, peace, morals or decency, he shall file a written report
of his findings with the President, who shall cause an action to abate such
nuisance to be commenced in the name of the village.
('73 Code, § 12.03)
§ 95.04 COST OF ABATEMENT.
   In addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter for the erection,
contrivance, creation, continuance or maintenance of a public nuisance, the
cost of abating a public nuisance by the village shall be collected as a debt
from the owner, occupant or person causing, permitting or maintaining the
nuisance, and if notice to abate the nuisance has been given to the owner, such
cost shall be assessed against the real estate as other special taxes.
('73 Code, § 12.04)
CHAPTER 96: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
General Provisions
   
96.01   Definitions
   
96.02   Hours when park closed
   
96.03   Use of park in violation of posted notices prohibited
   
96.04   Permit to be produced upon request by officer
   
96.05   Reserving park pavilions
   
96.06   Operating hours for certain parks
   
96.07   Sale of alcoholic liquor
Prohibited Acts
   
96.15   Interfering with park employees
   
96.16   Erection of unauthorized signs
   
96.17   Sale of articles or services
   
96.18   Weapons
   
96.19   Throwing missiles
   
96.20   Fires
   
96.21   Tampering with park equipment, facilities, or property
   
96.22   Damaging trees and plants
   
96.23   Climbing upon park property
   
96.24   Removal of materials; excavations
   
96.25   Depositing refuse and waste
   
96.26   Hunting
   
96.27   Animals running at large
   
96.28   Driving, parking in park
   
96.29   Loitering
   
96.30   Drugs
   
96.31   Disturbing the peace
   
96.32   Begging
   
96.33   Concerts; electrically amplified instruments
   
96.34   Assemblies; demonstrations
   
96.35   Erecting permanent or temporary structures
   
96.36   Interfering with occupation of park by others
   
96.99   Penalty
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 96.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   PARK. Any playfield, playground, tot lot, lake, ice skating rink, drainage
system retention area, open area, building, parts thereof, or other facility,
and the materials and equipment therein owned, leased, or in use by the
village.
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, partnership, group, association, corporation,
governmental unit, company, or organization of any kind, except police officers
of the village and its employees and Board Members while said employees and
Board members are engaged in the performance of village duties.
   VEHICLE. Any motor powered conveyance, including off-road vehicles (O.R.V.),
mini-bikes, go-carts, and snowmobiles, but not including conveyances in use by
the village.
§ 96.02 HOURS WHEN PARK CLOSED.
   No person shall enter any park between dusk and dawn, except when so
authorized to do so by the Board of Trustees, or except when attending an
authorized meeting or other activity being held in a park building or departing
therefrom.
§ 96.03 USE OF PARK IN VIOLATION OF POSTED NOTICES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall enter a park or part thereof posted as "Closed to the
Public", nor shall any person use or abet the use of any such park or part
thereof in violation of posted notices.
§ 96.04 PERMIT TO BE PRODUCED UPON REQUEST BY OFFICER.
   No person issued a permit by the Board of Trustees shall fail to produce the
permit and exhibit it upon request of a police officer.
§ 96.05 RESERVING PARK PAVILIONS.
   Any pavilion may be reserved after the first day of the year (January 1) for
that calendar year.
§ 96.06 OPERATING HOURS OF CERTAIN PARKS.
   (A)   Elm Street Park. The Elm Street Park shall be open daily to the public
for recreation between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 9:00 p.m., Central
Daylight Savings Time, for a period commencing May 1 and terminating October 31
of each and every year. For the period from November 1 through April 30 of each
and every year, the park shall be open daily to the public for recreation
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m. Central Standard Time.
   (B)   City Park. The City Park shall be open daily to the public for
recreation between the hours of 7:00 a.m. through 11:00 p.m.
('73 Code, § 3.19(a),(b)) (Am. Ord. 418, passed - - )
§ 96.07 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR.
   Alcoholic liquor may be sold or delivered at the concession stand located in
the village park, which is under the control of the village.
(Ord. 1055, passed 4-5-10)
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic liquor regulations, see
Ch. 110
PROHIBITED ACTS
§ 96.15 INTERFERING WITH PARK EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall hinder, interfere with, or cause or threaten to do bodily
harm to any employee of the village while such employee is engaged in
performing his duties in and on behalf of the village.
§ 96.16 ERECTION OF UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS.
   No person shall paste, glue, tack, or otherwise affix or post any sign,
placard, advertisement, or inscription whatever, nor erect or cause to be
erected any sign whatever on any structure or thing in a park, except as
authorized by the Board of Trustees.
§ 96.17 SALE OF ARTICLES OR SERVICES.
   No person shall expose or offer for sale any article or thing, nor shall any
person station or place any stand, cart, or vehicle for the transportation,
sale, or display of any such article or thing in any park, except a regularly
licensed concessionaire or other person acting under an official permit of the
Board of Trustees; nor shall any person within any park or on its borders
announce, advertise, or call public attention in any way to any article, or
service for sale or hire.
§ 96.18 WEAPONS.
   No person shall bring or have in his possession, or set off or otherwise
cause to explode or discharge any gun, B-B gun, bow and arrow, air-powered
rifle, pistol, revolver, cracker, torpedo, rocket, squib, or other fireworks,
or explosives of inflammable materials, including any substance, compound,
mixture, or article that in conjunction with any other substance or compound
could cause injury to human or animal life, in any park.
§ 96.19 THROWING MISSILES.
   No person shall throw or propel any stone, brick, bottle, or other missiles
not designed for recreational purposes and being used therein or upon any park.
§ 96.20 FIRES.
   No person shall light, build, or attempt to light or build a fire in any
park except in such areas of a park and under such regulations as may be
designated by the Village Board of Trustees.
§ 96.21 TAMPERING WITH PARK EQUIPMENT, FACILITIES, OR PROPERTY.
   No person shall deface, disfigure, break, cut, tamper with, or displace or
remove in or from any park, any buildings or part thereof, any table, bench,
fireplace, coping, lamp post, fence, wall, paving or paving material, water
line or other public utility, parts, or appurtenances thereof, or any sign,
notice, or placard whether temporary or permanent, equipment, facilities, or
other park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
§ 96.22 DAMAGING TREES AND PLANTS.
   No person shall damage, cut, carve, uproot, or injure any tree or injure the
bark, or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant in any park; not shall
any person attach any rope, wire, or other contrivance to any tree or plant, in
any park, nor shall any person in any other way injure or impair the beauty or
usefulness of any park.
§ 96.23 CLIMBING UPON PARK PROPERTY.
   No person shall climb any tree nor climb, walk, stand, or sit upon any wall,
building, fountain, fence, or railing in any park, nor upon any other park
property not designed for such purpose.
§ 96.24 REMOVAL OF MATERIALS; EXCAVATIONS.
   No person shall remove any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs, plants,
timber, or other wood or materials from any park nor make any excavation by
tool, equipment, blasting, or other means or agency within any park, except as
authorized by the Board of Trustees.
§ 96.25 DEPOSITING REFUSE AND WASTE.
   No person shall bring in or dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken
glass, ashes, paper, fill, boxes, manure, cans, dirt, rubbish, or waste in the
park. Refuse from material consumed in a park must be deposited in receptacles
provided therefor.
§ 96.26 HUNTING; FISHING.
   No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease,
shoot, or throw stones, rocks, or other missiles at any animal or bird in any
park, nor shall any person remove or have in his possession a bird, wild
animal, or the eggs or nest of any bird or wild animal in any park, with the
exception that fishing is permitted in designated areas.
§ 96.27 ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE.
   No person shall leave or allow to run loose upon park premises any animal.
All animals are to be held by a suitable line, chain, or strap in areas where
animals are allowed.
§ 96.28 DRIVING, PARKING IN PARK.
   (A)   No person shall bring, drive, use, or ride in any park, a vehicle
which has not been licensed by the state, nor shall any person bring, drive,
use, or ride any vehicle in any park except where authorized by the Board of
Trustees.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle in any park, except upon paved
roads, parking areas, or other areas designated for such purposes and only then
in accordance with posted signs as to speed, direction, parking, stopping, lane
markings, and traffic controls.
   (C)   No person shall park any vehicle in any park, driveway, or parking
area of a park between dusk and dawn, unless attending an authorized meeting or
other activity in a park building nor shall any person leave any vehicle
anywhere in a park more than 24 hours because of mechanical failure, nor shall
any person fail to notify the Village Police Department and obtain the services
of a tow truck for any vehicle that has failed to function within one hour of
such failure.
§ 96.29 LOITERING.
   No person shall enter into, loiter, or remain in any toilet, rest room,
pavilion, or structure, or section thereof, of any park which has been reserved
and designated by the Board of Trustees for the use of the opposite sex.
§ 96.30 DRUGS.
   No person shall bring within, sell, use, or give away any drugs (as defined
in ILCS Ch. 760, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq. and known as the "Cannabis Control Act"
which act is hereby incorporated herein by reference as if specifically set
forth), nor shall any person be under the influence of said drugs or cannabis
while upon park property.
§ 96.31 DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall make, aid, or countenance or assist in making any loud or
raucous noise, riot, or disturbance tending to a breach of the peace in any
park, or collect, with other persons in bodies or crowds for unlawful purposes.
No person shall use abusive, insulting, or obscene language or language
calculated to occasion a breach of the peace in any park.
§ 96.32 BEGGING.
   No person shall beg or solicit any alms or any contributions in any park.
Nor shall any person solicit, collect any donations, or charge any fees for any
service, whether private or public, except fees as charged by the park and
approved by the Board of Trustees, without first having obtained a written
permit from the Board.
§ 96.33 CONCERTS; ELECTRICALLY AMPLIFIED INSTRUMENTS.
   No person shall conduct any musical concert, play any electrically amplified
instrument, nor set up or use any communication system in a park without first
obtaining a written permit from the Board of Trustees.
§ 96.34 ASSEMBLES; DEMONSTRATIONS.
   No person shall hold or attempt to hold any meeting, assembly,
demonstration, celebration, parade, rally, religious worship, or any sponsored
entertainment, social, recreational, or athletic event without first obtaining
a written permit from the Board of Trustee.
§ 96.35 ERECTING PERMANENT OR TEMPORARY STRUCTURES.
   No person shall construct or erect any building, tent, or structure of
whatever kind in any park, whether permanent or temporary in character, or
string any public service utility into, upon, or across any park, without first
having obtained a written permit from the Board of Trustees.
§ 96.36 INTERFERING WITH OCCUPATION OF PARK BY OTHERS.
   No person shall disturb or interfere with any person or party occupying any
park under the authority of a permit.
§ 96.99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any clauses or provisions of any section of this
chapter shall be fined not less than $75 nor more than $500 for each offense
upon conviction thereof.
CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
General Provisions
   
97.01   Names of streets
   
97.02   Numbering buildings
   
97.03   Damage to streets
   
97.04   Moving structures on streets
   
97.05   Debris in streets
   
97.06   Barbed wire fence
   
97.07   Advertising on streets
   
97.08   Removal of snow on sidewalks
   
97.09   Burning of leaves and rubbish
   
97.10   Street trees or shrubs
Encroachments and Obstructions
   
97.20   Encroachments on street
   
97.21   Obstruction of streets or sidewalks
   
97.22   Builders occupying streets
   
97.23   Materials in streets
Excavations
   
97.35   Permit provisions
   
97.36   Protection of village
   
97.37   Repairing and replacing excavations
   
97.38   Protected excavations and obstructions; lights at night
   
97.39   Liability for damages
   
97.40   Chief of Police to enforce provisions
   
97.41   Village excavations
   
97.42   Notice to Chief of Police
Construction and Repairs
   
97.55   Laying of pipe in streets
   
97.56   Protection of work in streets
   
97.57   Driveways
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 97.01 NAMES OF STREETS.
   All streets of the village shall be known and designated by the names
applied hereto, respectively, on the map of the village kept on file in the
office of the Village Clerk and the street names designated on the map shall
continue to be the names of streets unless and until changed by ordinance of
the Board of Trustees.
('73 Code, § 5.01)
§ 97.02 NUMBERING BUILDINGS.
   Buildings located along the streets of the village shall be numbered in
accordance with a chart kept by the Village Clerk showing the proper street
number of each lot. The owner of any such building shall place such number on
his building so as to be visible from the street.
('73 Code, § 5.02)
§ 97.03 DAMAGE TO STREETS.
   No person shall damage or deface any street, alley, sidewalk, public way,
park or other public property, or any post, wire, lamp, street sign, traffic
sign, tree, grass, vegetation, gutter, drain, manhole or any other appurtenance
thereon, except as may be authorized by the village.
('73 Code, § 5.03) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.04 MOVING STRUCTURES ON STREETS.
   No person shall move any building or structure on any street without a
permit from the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys. The Superintendent may
issue the permit under such conditions as he may reasonably prescribe to
protect the streets and village and private property and to minimize public
inconvenience. The Superintendent may require the permittee to execute a bond
or insurance contract in behalf of the village in such amount as he deems
appropriate conditioned that the permittee will comply with the conditions of
the permit and indemnify the village against any damage caused to village or
private property or any person by removal of the building or structure.
('73 Code, § 5.10) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.05 DEBRIS IN STREETS.
   (A)   No person shall litter or deposit any foreign matter on any street,
alley, sidewalk, park or public place, except building materials and
merchandise as permitted under this chapter, or as may be permitted by the
Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Any person violating this section shall be liable for the cost of
removal of the foreign matter in addition to the penalty provided for violation
of this code.
('73 Code, § 5.11) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.06 BARBED WIRE FENCE.
   No person shall maintain any fence containing barbed wire along nor near any
public sidewalk.
(‘73 Code, § 43.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.07 ADVERTISING ON STREETS.
   No person shall paint or post any signs or bills on any trees, poles or
other structures in any street or on the surface of any street or sidewalk.
('73 Code, § 5.14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.08 REMOVAL OF SNOW ON SIDEWALKS.
   The person occupying the ground floor of any building, the user of any lot
without a structure thereon, and the owner of any vacant building or other
premises shall remove the snow and ice accumulating on the abutting sidewalks
within 24 hours after any snowfall has ceased. If snow or ice cannot be removed
the surface shall be sanded or otherwise treated to lessen the hazard for
pedestrians until the climate permits removal.
('73 Code, § 5.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.09 BURNING OF LEAVES AND RUBBISH.
   No person shall burn any leaves, paper, rubbish or other substances upon any
street, sidewalk or alley.
('73 Code, § 5.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.10 STREET TREES OR SHRUBS.
   (A)   Permits required.
      (1)   Planting permit. No person shall plant any tree or shrub in any
street, parkway or other public place without first having secured a permit
therefor. Application for such permit shall be made to the Village Clerk, and
shall be referred by him to the Board of Trustees for approval.
      (2)   Removal permit. No person shall remove or cut down any tree or
shrub in any street, parkway or other public place without having first secured
a permit therefor. Application for such permit shall be made to the Village
Clerk, and shall be referred by him to the Board of Trustees for approval.
   (B)   Injuring tree or shrub prohibited. No person shall injure any tree or
shrub planted in any street, parkway or public place.
   (C)   Attachment of advertisements on trees. No person shall attach any
sign, advertisement or notice to any tree or shrub in any street, parkway or
public place.
   (D)   Dangerous trees. Any tree or shrub which overhangs any sidewalk,
street or other public place in the village in such a way as to impede or
interfere with traffic or travel on such public place shall be trimmed by the
owner of the abutting premises on which such trees or shrub grows so that the
obstruction shall cease. Any limb of a tree which has become likely to fall on
or across any public way or place shall be removed by the owner of the premises
on which the tree grows or stands.
   (E)   Attachment of wires or ropes on trees. No person shall attach any wire
or rope to any tree without the permission of the Board of Trustees. Any person
granted the right to maintain poles and wires in the streets, alleys or other
public places in the village shall in the absence of provision in the franchise
concerning the subject, keep such wires and poles free from and away from any
trees or shrubs in such places so far as may be possible and shall keep all
such trees and shrubs properly trimmed, subject to the supervision of the
Superintendent of Streets and Alleys, to insure that injury shall not be done
to the poles, wires, shrubs and trees by contact with wires.
('73 Code, § 5.18) Penalty, see §
10.99
ENCROACHMENTS AND OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 97.20 ENCROACHMENTS ON STREET.
   (A)   No person shall erect or maintain any structure or thing on, over or
under any street, alley, sidewalk or public way except by permit from the Board
of Trustees. Application for such permit shall describe the nature of the
encroachment in such detail as the Board shall require. The Board in its
discretion may issue or deny the permit, and may impose any conditions to such
permit it deems appropriate.
   (B)   Awnings made of a pliable substance attached to a building and
extending not less than eight feet above the surface of the sidewalk may be
erected and maintained without a permit.
   (C)   Any encroachment on any street, alley, sidewalk or public way shall be
maintained so that it does not endanger or obstruct the public.
   (D)   Any encroachment maintained in violation of this section is declared a
nuisance and may be abated by the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys
('73 Code, § 5.04) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.21 OBSTRUCTION OF STREETS OR SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct or endanger the free passage or proper use of
the public of any street, sidewalk, alley or public place, except as may be
permitted by this chapter.
   (B)   Goods, wares and merchandise may be placed on sidewalks for such
reasonable time as may be necessary while loading and unloading, provided
pedestrian traffic is not obstructed.
('73 Code, § 5.05)
§ 97.22 BUILDERS OCCUPYING STREETS.
   (A)   Permission required. Building permits shall be held to imply a license
to occupy such portion of the public street and sidewalk abutting upon and
adjacent to such buildings for private use in connection with the actual
building operations under such permit as is required, subject to the
supervision and direction of the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys.
   (B)   Materials on streets. No materials except those required for immediate
use in connection with a building or structure, or the alteration or repair
thereof under such permit, shall be placed upon the street or sidewalk abutting
upon or adjacent to such building. As soon as such building or structure is
under roof, all materials shall be placed within the lot line, and the street
and sidewalk cleaned and placed in the same condition as before the beginning
of building operations under such permit.
   (C)   Area used; temporary walks. No more than one-half the space between
the centerline of the street and the lot line of the premises upon which such
building alterations or repairs are being conducted under such permit, and no
more than one-third the width of any public sidewalk, shall be occupied under
such permit; provided the full width of the sidewalk may be occupied by the
consent of the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys, and the providing of a
temporary walk leading around the obstructed portion of the sidewalk connecting
with the permanent walk at either end thereof. Such temporary walk shall be
constructed to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, and it shall be his duty
to cause the same to be made safe and secure for public travel upon the same.
   (D)   Access to hydrants, drains. No building material, temporary walk or
obstruction shall be placed so as to render inaccessible access to, or obstruct
any fire hydrant, manhole, catch basin, or vault, or render impassable to
vehicles any street, alley or public way.
   (E)   Cleaning of walk. The holder of such permit shall at all times during
the work thereunder, maintain the portion of the permanent sidewalk reserved or
the temporary walk above provided for, in a safe condition and clear of all
material, rubbish, dirt or snow.
   (F)   Barriers. The holder of such permit shall erect and maintain a
sufficient and suitable fence, railing or barricade to guard all excavations,
embankments or obstructions along the street, obstructed during the time he
shall occupy the same under such permit.
   (G)   Lights or tallow pots to be maintained along obstruction area. The
holder of such permit shall place and maintain proper and sufficient red lights
or tallow pots on each end of every such obstruction or excavation and at
intervals of 50 feet along the same at night. No person shall remove,
extinguish or disturb the lights or pots.
   (H)   Obstructing gutters. The holder of such permit shall at no time
obstruct the gutter or waterway of any street so as to prevent free passage of
water along the street, and if any gutter be shaded or covered so that ice
accumulated therein, he shall clear the gutter of such ice so as to allow the
water to pass freely at all times.
('73 Code, § 5.06) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.23 MATERIALS IN STREETS.
   (A)   Any person not holding a building permit shall not store any materials
on any street, sidewalk or public place without a permit therefor from the
village.
   (B)   The fee for such permit shall be $10.
   (C)   The permittee shall conform to the provisions of §
97.22 relating to builders occupying streets to the extent they are applicable,
and to such other conditions as the village may impose when granting the
permit.
('73 Code, § 5.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
EXCAVATIONS
§ 97.35 PERMIT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Permit required; approval of Superintendent of Streets and Alleys. No
person shall change the grade or level, or injure or tear up any pavement of
any street, sidewalk, crosswalk or curb, or any part thereof, dig any hole,
trench, ditch or drain in, or dig or remove any sod, stone, earth, sand or
gravel from any street or public ground in the village without first obtaining
a permit from the office of the Village Clerk, as hereinafter provided. Before
such permit shall be issued, it shall first be approved by the Superintendent
of Streets and Alleys, and in the event that the permit is obtained for the
purpose of making a connection to a sewer or water facility of the village
located in any public street, the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys may, if
practical, require the applicant to tunnel or auger instead of removing or
injuring the pavement.
   (B)   Fee; bond.
      (1)   The fee for a permit required under this section is $50. The
applicant shall also deposit a cash bond for excavation on all streets. The
amount of the cash bond required shall be at minimum $5,000 and based on the
estimated restoration value of the village property.
      (2)   The bond shall guarantee the applicant faithful and prompt
restoration of the excavated area in accordance with the applicable provisions
of this code and any other ordinance of the village and the maintenance thereof
for a period of two years. All public utilities operating under a franchise
with the village shall be exempt from the requirements of this division (B).
('73 Code, § 5.08(a),(b)) (Am. Ord. 1291, passed 3-24-25)  Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.36 PROTECTION OF VILLAGE.
   Any applicant using or excavating any portion of any street pursuant to the
issuance of a permit shall save and keep the village free, clear and harmless
from any loss or liability on account of any accident or damages resulting from
such excavation or work, and shall enter into a hold harmless agreement with
the village to this effect at the time the permit is issued. The applicant
shall fully remove all material, dirt and rubbish from the space so occupied,
and restore such street to its original condition immediately upon the
expiration of the period named in the permit.
('73 Code, § 5.08(c))
§ 97.37 REPAIRING AND REPLACING EXCAVATIONS.
   The person excavating in any street or public place, shall, if required by
the Superintendent of Streets and Alleys to do so, immediately upon completion
of the work, and as fast as practicable during the accomplishment thereof,
return the earth, ram and pack down the same as fast as practicable to a firm
and solid bearing state and in a manner, if possible, that will entirely
prevent any settling of such earth. Such work shall be done to the satisfaction
of the Superintendent and under his direction. The Superintendent may adopt
proper rules and regulations for such relaying and replacing of such pavements
and material. The Superintendent may relay all pavement caused by any street
opening other than those openings specifically required to be relayed by others
or by the President and Board of Trustees from time to time.
('73 Code, § 5.08(d)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.38 PROTECTED EXCAVATIONS AND OBSTRUCTIONS; LIGHTS AT NIGHT.
   It shall be the duty of any person engaged in digging into or working upon a
street or public place, or who places building materials on any street or
public place, where such work if left exposed would be dangerous to
pedestrians, to erect a fence, barricade or railing at such excavation or work
in such manner as to prevent danger to pedestrians. It shall be the duty of
such person to place suitable and sufficient lights upon such railing or fence
at sunset in the evening, and keep them burning through the night.
('73 Code, § 5.08(e)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.39 LIABILITY FOR DAMAGES.
   Any person performing any of the work mentioned in this section shall be
liable for any damage which may be occasioned to persons or property by reason
of carelessness connected with the work.
('73 Code, § 5.08(f))
§ 97.40 CHIEF OF POLICE TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.
   It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to see that the requirements in
regard to the erection of fencing and placing lights are complied with.
('73 Code, § 5.08(g))
§ 97.41 VILLAGE EXCAVATIONS.
   Whenever a street or other public place is excavated by the village, the
village shall erect and maintain the fencing and lights required by this
subchapter.
('73 Code, § 5.08(h))
§ 97.42 NOTICE TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   Whenever any public street is obstructed or rendered impassable for vehicles
by an excavation therein, or by the occupation thereof by building materials,
or by any house in the process of moving, the person so obstructing such street
shall immediately notify the Chief of Police of the location of such excavation
or other obstruction, and of any change therein from day to day during the
progress of the work causing such obstruction.
('73 Code, § 5.08(i))
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIRS
§ 97.55 LAYING OF PIPE IN STREETS.
   (A)   Permit required. No sewer, water pipe, conduit pipe, gas pipe, wire or
cable for conveying electric current nor any street or alley pavement,
sidewalk, or other like improvement shall be placed, laid or maintained in,
under, or upon any street, alley, sidewalk, easement of passage or public
place, except improvements constructed under special assessment proceedings,
unless a permit authorizing the same has been issued by the village.
   (B)   Location of gas pipes. Any gas pipes when placed in any public street
or alley shall be laid so that there will be no interference with sewers or
water pipes, and before any pipes are laid, permission must be secured from the
village and same must be placed in a portion of the street or alley as may be
directed by the village.
   (C)   Map to be filed. Every gas company that lays down gas pipes in any
public street or alley shall make and file with the Village Clerk an accurate
map showing the exact location of every line of pipe laid by it, which map
shall be accessible for public inspection and shall be kept constantly revised
to show any changes or additions.
('73 Code, § 5.09)
§ 97.56 PROTECTION OF WORK IN STREETS.
   Any person laying, or making an excavation in, or doing any work in any
street, sidewalk or other public place shall maintain suitable barricades to
prevent injury to any person or vehicle by reason of the work. Barricades shall
be protected by suitable lights at night. Any defect in any pavement shall be
barricaded to prevent injury. Any person maintaining any opening or excavation
in any such place shall guard such opening or excavation while the same remains
open, by proper barricades and lights. No person shall interfere with or
disturb any barricades or lights lawfully placed to protect or make new
pavement or excavation or opening in any street, alley or sidewalk.
('73 Code, § 5.12) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 97.57 DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   Permit provisions.  
      (1)   Permit required. No person shall construct a driveway across any
sidewalk without first having obtained a permit therefor from the Board of
Trustees.
      (2)   Fee. The fee for a driveway construction permit is $10.
   (B)   Specifications. Driveways across sidewalks shall be constructed in
compliance with specifications which have been adopted by the Board of Trustees
and which are on file in the office of the Village Clerk.
   (C)   Repairs. The person maintaining a driveway shall keep it in good
repair at the place where it crosses the sidewalk and free from any obstruction
or other openings.
('73 Code, § 5.17) Penalty, see §
10.99
CHAPTER 98: WEEDS
Section
   
98.01   Definition
   
98.02   Weeds prohibited
   
98.03   Conditions constituting nuisance; maintenance of prohibited
   
98.04   Dried weeds likely to cause fire prohibited
   
98.05   Notice to remove weeds
   
98.06   Removal by village
   
98.07   Costs to become a lien
Cross-reference:
   For provisions concerning public nuisances, see
Ch. 95
§ 98.01 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   WEEDS. Include all grass or rank vegetable growth over one-foot in height.
('73 Code, § 12.06(a))
§ 98.02 WEEDS PROHIBITED.
   All weeds as defined in §
98.01 are hereby prohibited in the village.
('73 Code, § 12.06(b)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.03 CONDITIONS CONSTITUTING NUISANCE; MAINTENANCE OF PROHIBITED.
   All weeds which exhale unpleasant or noxious odors or which may conceal
filthy deposits or which are a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies or insects,
or which because of uncleanliness and insanitation or any other cause are a
menace to public health, are declared to be a nuisance, and any person allowing
such weeds to grow or remain as set forth in this section shall be deemed
guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
('73 Code, § 12.06(c)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.04 DRIED WEEDS LIKELY TO CAUSE FIRE PROHIBITED.
   All dead grass, dry weeds or similar dangerous combustible material
remaining or lying upon any premises which are likely to become ignited and
cause a fire, are likewise hereby declared to be a nuisance and any person
allowing and permitting the same to remain upon his premises shall be deemed
guilty of maintaining a nuisance.
('73 Code, § 12.06(d)) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 98.05 NOTICE TO REMOVE WEEDS.
   Upon five days notice in writing by the Chief of Police or any other
delegated official, all weeds shall be cut and removed by the owner, tenant,
agent or person having control of the premises, which provision shall likewise
apply to the combustible material as aforesaid. Service of the notice may be
had personally or by leaving a copy thereof with some member of the family of
the person, tenant or agent, over ten years of age, or by mailing a copy to the
last known address of the owner of property that may be vacant.
('73 Code, § 12.06(e))
§ 98.06 REMOVAL BY VILLAGE.
   The village may, upon failure to cut, destroy and remove such weeds and
combustible material within the time prescribed in the notice, enter upon the
premises and proceed to cut, destroy and remove the same at the expense of the
owner of the premises, which cost of cutting and removal shall be paid by such
owner or person upon presentation of a bill therefor. The village shall make a
charge for the service of $ 40 per hour, with a minimum charge of $ 40.
('73 Code, § 12.06(f))
§ 98.07 COSTS TO BECOME A LIEN.
   If such charge or cost is not paid by such owner, tenant, agent or person in
charge, the village shall have a lien upon the premises for such charge or
cost, which lien may be enforced by obtaining a judgment against such party and
his property for such charges and costs of suit, or by filing a claim for lien
therefor in the Recorder's office of St. Clair County, itemizing the date,
charge and description of property, which claim shall be supported by
affidavit, and which may be foreclosed in the manner provided by law for the
foreclosure of other statutory liens.
('73 Code, § 12.06(g))
CHAPTER 99: FIRE PREVENTION; FIREWORKS
Section
Fireworks
   
99.01   Fireworks
Fire Prevention
   
99.02   Fires
FIREWORKS
§ 99.01 FIREWORKS.
   No person shall sell, offer for sale, use or explode any fireworks in the
village except the Board of Trustees may grant a permit for a public display of
fireworks under such conditions as it may impose under the provisions of ILCS
Chapter 425, Act 35.
(‘73 Code, § 43.04)
FIRE PREVENTION
§ 99.02 FIRES.
   No person shall start or maintain any fire in any street, sidewalk, park or
public place, or any place within 30 feet of any building or structure.
(‘73 Code, § 43.05)
TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS
   Chapter
      
110.   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
      
111.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
      
112.   RAFFLES
      
113.   TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, BODY BRANDING AND BODY CARVING
      
114.   MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
      
115.   PAWNBROKERS
      
116.   CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
      
117.   CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
CHAPTER 110: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
General Provisions
   
110.01   Interpretation
   
110.02   Definitions
   
110.03   Solicitation or acceptance of gifts
   
110.04   Peddling liquor prohibited
   
110.05   Public intoxication
Licensing Provisions
   
110.15   License required; exceptions
   
110.16   Restrictions
   
110.17   Application
   
110.18   Classifications and fees
   
110.19   (Reserved)
   
110.20   Number of licenses
   
110.21   Duration
   
110.22   Nature of license; renewal
   
110.23   Change of license
   
110.24   Display
   
110.25   Revocation
   
110.26   License by the hour
   
110.27   Dram Shop insurance
Sales and Purchasing
   
110.35   Sales of minors, drunkards, spendthrifts
   
110.36   Credit sales
   
110.37   Refilling original packages
   
110.38   Minimum size containers
   
110.39   Removal of liquor from premises
   
110.40   Underaged sales
Standards for Licensed Premises
   
110.50   Access to dwelling quarters from licensed premises
   
110.51   Sanitary conditions
   
110.52   Employees
   
110.53   Hours of operation
   
110.54   Use of words bar or saloon
Administration and Enforcement
   
110.65   Local Liquor Control Commissioner
   
110.66   Complaint of violations
   
110.67   Violations; responsibility of owners of premises
   
110.68   Acts of agent or employee
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 110.01 INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall be liberally construed to the end that the health, safety
and welfare of the residents of the village shall be protected and temperance
in the consumption of alcoholic liquor shall be fostered and promoted.
('73 Code, § 34.01(a))
§ 110.02 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless the context shall otherwise require, terms used in this chapter shall
have the definitions given in the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, as amended from time to
time. Where not otherwise qualified, the term license or licensee wherever used
in this chapter means a license or licensee of the village under this chapter.
('73 Code, § 34.01(b))
§ 110.03 SOLICITATION OR ACCEPTANCE OF GIFTS.
   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner, his agent or agents, members of a
committee appointed by him to assist in local control, members of the Board of
Trustees and police officers are prohibited from soliciting or accepting any
gift, gratuity, emolument or employment from any licensee and every licensee or
employee, agent or officer of such licensee is prohibited from offering or
making any such gift, gratuity or emolument to any person prohibited from
accepting any such gift, gratuity or emolument.
('73 Code, § 34.22)
§ 110.04 PEDDLING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.
   No person shall peddle alcoholic liquor in the village.
('73 Code, § 34.26) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.05 PUBLIC INTOXICATION.
   No person shall be in an intoxicated condition on any street, alley or
public place of the village or in any private house or place to the disturbance
of another.
('73 Code, § 34.25) Penalty, see §
10.99
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 110.15 LICENSE REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall sell or offer for sale or possess with intention to
sell at retail in the village any alcoholic liquor without a retailer's license
from the village in addition to a state license. No person shall sell or offer
for sale at retail in the village any alcoholic liquor in violation of the
terms and conditions of the license or in violation of any provision of this
chapter or any provision of the Illinois Liquor Control Act [i.e., ILCS, Ch.
235, Act 5, § 1-1 et seq.].
   (B)   The requirement that a village license be procured shall not apply to
physicians, dentists, pharmacists, hospitals or churches when these persons or
institutions possess or dispense alcoholic liquor in accordance with the
provisions of the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 2-1, as amended from time to time.
('73 Code, § 34.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.16 RESTRICTIONS.
   No village retailer's license of any kind shall be issued:
   (A)   To a person, partnership or corporation declared ineligible for
license under the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2, as amended from time to time, or
to a person, partnership or corporation not eligible for a state retail liquor
dealer's license.
   (B)   For use on premises adjacent to churches, schools, hospitals or other
institutions or place of business if issuance of such license would be contrary
to the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 6-11, 6-12, or 6-15, as amended from time to
time.
   (C)   For premises to be licensed under a restaurant, hotel, club or bowling
alley classification unless such premises shall fully qualify under the
definitions of such places as given in the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, as amended from
time to time.
('73 Code, § 34.03)
§ 110.17 APPLICATION.
   (A)   An applicant for a license or for renewal of a license from the
village shall submit an application to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner.
The application shall be in writing under oath and shall be signed by the
applicant if an individual; or if the application is on behalf of a
partnership, firm, association, club or corporation then it shall be signed and
sworn to by at least two members of such partnership, or by the president and
secretary of such firm, club, association or corporation.
   (B)   The application shall state the following:
      (1)   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual or of all persons entitled to share in the profits in the case of a
copartnership; in the case of a club or corporation, the name, date of
incorporation, the address, the objects for which it was organized; the names
and addresses of all stockholders of a corporation and the proportion of stock
held by each; the names and addresses of all members of a club.
      (2)   The citizenship of the applicant, his place of birth, and if a
naturalized citizen, the time and place of his naturalization.
      (3)   The character of the business or operation with which the desired
license is to be used and the class of license for which application is made.
      (4)   The length of time that the applicant has been in that business or
operation and the date at which that business or operation was started in the
village and, in the case of a corporation, the date on which its charter was
issued.
      (5)   The location and description of the premises or place of business
which is to be operated under the desired license.
      (6)   Whether applicant has ever made application for license to retail
alcoholic liquor on premises other than described in this application and the
disposition of such application.
      (7)   That applicant has never been convicted of a felony and is not
disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing contained in
this code or laws of this state.
      (8)   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof, or
by the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
      (9)   That the applicant is familiar with the laws of the United States
and of this state and of this village as they relate to retailers of alcoholic
liquors and that the applicant has never violated these laws and will not
violate nor permit his employees or agents to violate any of the laws of the
United States or of this state or this code or any other ordinance of this
village in the conduct of the business for which a license is desired.
('73 Code, § 34.04)
§ 110.18 CLASSIFICATIONS AND FEES.
   Licenses are divided into five classes:
   (A)   Class A licenses. Class A licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale on the premises specified, of alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises, commonly described as whiskeys, gins, brandies, wines, and the like,
as well as other retail sales of such alcoholic liquors. The fee for such
license on an annual basis shall be $200.
   (B)   Class B licenses. Class B licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale on the premises specified of alcoholic liquors consisting of beer and
light wines for consumption on the premises as well as other retail sales of
such alcoholic liquors. The annual fee for such license shall be $200.
   (C)   Class C licenses. Class C licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of any alcoholic liquor, but not for consumption on the premises where
sold. The annual fee for such license shall be $200.
   (D)   Class D licenses. Class D licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquors consisting of beer and light wines, but not for
consumption on the premises. The annual fee for such license shall be $40.
   (E)   Class E licenses. Class E licenses, which shall authorize the retail
sale of alcoholic liquors by a club, for which license the annual fee shall be
$80.
   (F)   Class F licenses.  
      (1)   Class F licenses, which shall permit the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption on the premises of restaurants, but not for consumption
off the premises of restaurants, and not for resale in any form. For the
purpose of this Class F license, a restaurant is defined to mean a public place
kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public where meals are
served and where meals actually are served and regularly served without
sleeping accommodations; such space being provided with adequate and sanitary
kitchen and dining room equipment and capacity, and having employed therein a
sufficient number and kind of employees to prepare, cook and serve suitable
foods for its guests; it is further provided that a restaurant as herein
defined shall mean an establishment which derives more than 50% of its gross
sales from the sale of food. The annual fee for such license shall be $200.
There shall be no limit on the number of Class F licenses.
      (2)   At any time during the license period or prior to the renewal of a
Class F license, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner may order the licensee
to produce their accounting records to determine if the licensee is qualified
to hold a Class F liquor license. The failure of the licensee to produce the
records for the Local Liquor Control Commissioner upon request shall result in
the automatic revocation of a Class F liquor license.
      (3)   At the time of renewal of a Class F license, the licensee shall
produce to the Local Liquor Control Commissioner their accounting records to
determine if the licensee is qualified to hold a Class F liquor license. If the
licensee fails to produce the records the Local Liquor Control Commissioner at
the time of the renewal of the Class F liquor licenses, the Class F liquor
license shall not be renewed.
   (G)   The annual fee effective March 1, 2024 is hereby amended to $100 for
each video gaming terminal operating under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.,
the Video Gaming Act. This fee shall be increased on an annual basis, effective
March 1, 2025 each video gaming machine will increase to $125 and effective
March 1, 2026 each video gaming machine will increase to $150.
('73 Code, § 34.06(b)) (Am. Ord. 508, passed 2-3-87; Am. Ord. 1095, passed 8-6-
12; Am. Ord. 1268, passed 3-13-23)
§ 110.19 (RESERVED)
§ 110.20 NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   No retail liquor licenses of Classes A or B in addition to those
presently outstanding, and as herein provided for, shall be issued until such
time as the population of the village exceeds 300 for each outstanding retail
liquor license.
   (B)   This restriction upon the number of outstanding licenses shall not be
applicable to:
      (1)   The renewal of any existing license;
      (2)   The issuance of a license to the purchaser or lessee of an
established licensed retail liquor business of Classes A and B;
      (3)   The issuance of a license because of the transfer of location.
   (C)   This restriction shall apply to outstanding licenses which expire
without renewal or are revoked.
   (D)   This restriction shall continue and remain applicable to the number of
outstanding retail liquor licenses so that their number, except as herein
provided, shall not exceed one for every 500 of population.
('73 Code, § 34.07)
§ 110.21 DURATION.
   Every license shall terminate on April 30 next following issuance unless
sooner revoked or suspended. The fee for a new license shall be the annual fee
reduced in proportion to the number of full months that have expired since the
last prior May 1. The fee for renewal shall be the full annual fee. There shall
be no rebate for the unexpired term of a license. An application for renewal
shall not be considered as such unless made prior to April 30, and unless
submitted with the appropriate fee. No license shall be valid unless the proper
fee has been paid.
('73 Code, § 34.08)
§ 110.22 NATURE OF LICENSE; RENEWAL.
   A license shall be purely a personal privilege and shall be subject to all
the limitations and privileges set forth in the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-1, as
amended from time to time.
('73 Code, § 34.09)
§ 110.23 CHANGE OF LICENSE.
   After a license has been granted for a particular premises, the Local Liquor
Control Commissioner, upon application by the licensee, may endorse upon the
license permission to abandon the premises thereon described and to remove the
license to other premises approved by him and described in the endorsement. The
application for transfer shall be in writing under oath and shall fully
describe the new premises. The reasons for transfer shall be given and it shall
be shown that the new premises comply in all respects with the requirements of
this chapter and the ILCS Ch. 235, as amended from time to time.
('73 Code, § 34.10)
§ 110.24 DISPLAY.
   Every licensee shall cause his license to be framed and hung in plain view
in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
('73 Code, § 34.12)
§ 110.25 REVOCATION.
   The Local Commissioner may revoke any local license issued by the village if
he determines that the licensee has violated any provision of this chapter or
of the Illinois Liquor Control Act [i.e., ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.].
There shall be no refund of license fee. These penalties shall be in addition
to any other penalties that may be assessed for conviction of violation. When
any license shall have been revoked for cause, no license shall be granted to
any person for the period of one year thereafter for the sale of alcoholic
liquor on the premises described in the revoked license.
('73 Code, § 34.29)
§ 110.26 LICENSE BY THE HOUR.
   (A)   Upon application, the Local Liquor Control Commissioner is authorized
to issue a license for a period not to exceed 24 hours to any organization
which keeps or desires to keep any place for selling or offering for sale or in
any manner dealing in any alcoholic liquors. The fee for such license for the
sale shall be $30, and any such license shall not be valid beyond the period
stated in the license.
   (B)   No such license shall be transferable.
('73 Code, § 34.32) (Am. Ord. 374, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1294, passed 3-24-25)
§ 110.27 DRAM SHOP INSURANCE.
   Every licensee shall carry Dram Shop Insurance in an amount sufficient to
cover the maximum liability of exposure under the Dram Shop laws of the state,
and shall keep on file with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner evidence of
the insurance. The failure of a licensee to obtain and carry Dram Shop
insurance shall result in the automatic revocation of his liquor license.
(Ord. 510, passed 2-16-87)
SALES AND PURCHASING
§ 110.35 SALES OF MINORS, DRUNKARDS, SPENDTHRIFTS.
   No licensee, nor any officer, associate, member, representative, agent or
employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor to any
person under the age of 21 years, or to any intoxicated person, or to any
person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift, insane, mentally
ill, mentally deficient, or in need of mental treatment. No person, after
purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell, give or deliver
such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of 21 years, except in
the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
('73 Code, § 34.11) (Am. Ord. 338, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 790, passed 2-5-01)
Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.36 CREDIT SALES.
   No person shall sell or furnish alcoholic liquor at retail under terms
contrary to the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-19, as amended from time to time.
('73 Code, § 34.19) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.37 REFILLING ORIGINAL PACKAGES.
   No person except a manufacturer, distributor or importing distributor shall
fill or refill, in whole or in part, any original package for alcoholic liquor
with the same or any other kind of quality of alcoholic liquor with any
diluent. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession for sale
or retail any bottles, casks, or other container containing alcoholic liquor
except in the original package.
('73 Code, § 34.20) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.38 MINIMUM SIZE CONTAINERS.
   No unmixed whiskey, unmixed rum or unmixed gin shall be sold or offered for
sale at retail for consumption on the premises except in a container having a
minimum capacity of at least one fluid ounce and which contains at the time of
sale at least one fluid ounce of the beverage being sold. No person licensed to
sell alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption on the premises shall use in
such sales or possess on the premises any glass or other container so
constructed as to be deceptive in appearance or to mislead the consumer as to
its true capacity.
('73 Code, § 34.21) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.39 REMOVAL OF LIQUOR FROM PREMISES.
   No person shall remove any alcoholic liquor in any container of any kind
from a premises licensed solely to sell alcoholic liquor for consumption on the
premises.
('73 Code, § 34.23) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.40 UNDERAGED SALES.
   (A)   No person under the age of 21 years shall purchase or obtain any
alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage in any tavern or other place in the
village where alcoholic liquor or alcoholic beverage is sold.
   (B)   No person under the age of 21 years shall misrepresent his or her age
for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining alcoholic liquor or alcoholic
beverage in any tavern or place in the village where alcoholic beverage is
sold.
(Ord. 1067, passed 10-18-10)
STANDARDS FOR LICENSED PREMISES
§ 110.50 ACCESS TO DWELLING QUARTERS FROM LICENSED PREMISES.
   There shall be no access from licensed premises to dwelling quarters except
as permitted under the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-13, as amended from time to
time.
('73 Code, § 34.14) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.51 SANITARY CONDITIONS.
   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor, or of storage of
such liquor for sale, shall be kept in full compliance with ordinances
regulating the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for
human consumption.
('73 Code, § 34.15) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.52 EMPLOYEES.
   No person shall employ in any premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor any person who is afflicted with or who is a carrier of any contagious,
infectious or venereal diseases; and no person who is affected with or is a
carrier of any such disease shall work in or about any premises or engage in
any way in the handling, preparation or distribution of such liquor.
('73 Code, § 34.16) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.53 HOURS OF OPERATION.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale at retail or to give
away in or upon any licensed premises any alcoholic liquor between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. prevailing time on any day of the week. Furthermore,
all licensed premises, except for premises with a Class C or Class D license,
shall cease doing business at the hour of 1:00 a.m., and all persons other than
the licensee or his employees or persons residing thereon shall vacate or be
removed therefrom, and such premises shall remain closed and not again be
occupied by persons other than the licensee or its employees or persons
residing thereon, or any business be done therein, until the hour of 5:00 a.m.
   (B)   At all times during which the premises shall be open for business, the
entire interior shall be continuously lighted with natural or with artificial
white light of a sufficient intensity so that all parts of the interior thereof
shall be clearly visible to sight through windows or the doors thereto.
('73 Code, § 34.17) (Am. Ord. 1007, passed 7-7-08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 110.54 USE OF WORDS BAR OR SALOON.
   No person licensed to sell alcoholic liquor shall use the words “bar“ or
“saloon” in any advertisements or signs.
('73 Code, § 34.18) Penalty, see §
10.99
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 110.65 LOCAL LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   Administration of provisions. The President of the Board of Trustees
shall be the Local Liquor Control Commissioner and shall be charged with the
administration of the provisions of this chapter and of the appropriate
provisions of the Liquor Control Act [i.e., ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et
seq.] of the state. The Commissioner may appoint a person or persons to assist
him in the exercise of these powers and responsibilities. The Local
Commissioner and his assistants shall receive no compensation for performing
these duties but this provision shall not cause the Commissioner or his
assistants to be ineligible for compensation for other offices or positions
they may occupy.
   (B)   Powers. The Commissioner shall have the following powers, functions
and duties:
      (1)   To grant and revoke for cause all local licenses issued to persons
for premises within the village. Cause shall specifically include but shall not
be limited to, a licensee's failure to operate the licensed premises for a
period of 60 consecutive days.
      (2)   To enter or to authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon the premises licensed under this chapter to determine whether any of
the provisions of this chapter or of the Liquor Control Act of the state or any
of the rules or regulations adopted by the State Commission have been or are
being violated, and at such times to examine the premises of the licensee in
connection therewith.
      (3)   To receive complaint from any citizen of the village that any
provision of this chapter or the Liquor Control Act has been or is being
violated and to act upon such complaint in the manner provided by law.
      (4)   To receive or cause to be received all local license fees and pay
same forthwith to the Village Treasurer.
      (5)   To examine or cause to be examined under oath any applicant for
village license or for renewal thereof or any licensee upon whom notice of
revocation has been served, all as provided in the ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-5,
as amended from time to time.
      (6)   To notify the Secretary of State of violations by nonprofit and
foreign corporations.
   (C)   List of licensees. The Local Commissioner shall keep or cause to be
kept a complete record and file of particulars of all licenses issued by him.
('73 Code, § 34.27)
§ 110.66 COMPLAINT OF VIOLATIONS.
   Any five residents of the village shall have the right to file a complaint
with the Local Liquor Control Commissioner stating that any retail licensee has
been or is violating any provision of this chapter or of the Illinois Liquor
Control Act [i.e., ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.]. Such complaint shall
be in writing and shall be signed and sworn to by the parties complaining. The
complaint shall state the particular provisions believed to have been violated
and the facts in detail upon which the belief is based. If the Local
Commissioner is satisfied that the complaint substantially charges a violation
and that from the facts alleged there is reasonable cause for such belief, he
shall set the matter for hearing and shall serve notice upon the licensee of
the time and place of such hearing and of the particulars charged in the
complaint.
('73 Code, § 34.28)
§ 110.67 VIOLATIONS; RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNERS OF PREMISES.
   If the owner of the licensed premises or any person from whom the licensee
derives the right to possession of such premises, or the agent of such owner or
person, shall knowingly permit the licensee to use the premises in violation of
the terms of this chapter or of the applicable provisions of the Liquor Control
Act [i.e., ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.], the owner, agent or other
person shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter to the same extent
as such licensee and shall be subject to the same penalties.
('73 Code, § 34.30)
§ 110.68 ACTS OF AGENT OR EMPLOYEE.
   Every act or omission constituting a violation of any provision of this
chapter or of the Liquor Control Act [i.e., ILCS Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et
seq.] by any officer, director, manager, agent or employee of any licensee
shall be deemed and held to be the act of such employer or licensee and the
employer or licensee shall be punishable in the same manner as if such act or
omission had been done or omitted by him personally.
('73 Code, § 34.31)
CHAPTER 111: PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
General Provisions
   
111.01   Definitions
   
111.02   Hours permitted for peddling and soliciting
   
111.03   Unwanted peddling and soliciting
   
111.04   Soliciting contributions on public highways
   
111.05   Exceptions
Licensing Provisions
   
111.15   License required
   
111.16   Application for license
   
111.17   Investigation of applicant
   
111.18   Bond
   
111.19   Credentials
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 111.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PEDDLER. Any person, including agents or employees of any firm or
corporation, whether a resident of the village or not, travelling by foot,
wagon, automobile, motor truck, or any other type of conveyance from place to
place, from house to house, or from door to door, carrying, conveying or
transporting goods, wares or merchandise or offering or exposing the same for
sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers.
   SOLICITOR. Any person, including agents and employees of any firm or
corporation, whether a resident of the village or not, travelling either by
foot, wagon, automobile, motor truck or any other type of conveyance, from
place to place, from house to house, or from door to door, taking or attempting
to take orders for the sale of goods, wares or merchandise, personal property
of any nature, or any other item for future delivery or for services to be
furnished or performed in the future.
   TRANSIENT MERCHANT. Any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or
employee, and whether a resident of the village or not, who temporarily engages
in the sale of merchandise for present or future delivery within the village
and who in furtherance of such purpose, leases, uses or occupies  any building,
vehicle, trailer, tent, railroad car, hotel or motel room or other place in the
village for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise.
('73 Code, § 32.01)
§ 111.02 HOURS PERMITTED FOR PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler or solicitor to solicit business on
Sundays and holidays, and the business of peddling and soliciting shall be
conducted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on all other days
unless by appointment.
('73 Code, § 32.07) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.03 UNWANTED PEDDLING AND SOLICITING.
   Nothing contained in this chapter, nor the issuance of any license
hereunder, shall entitle the licensee to go in or upon any private residence
for the purpose of peddling or soliciting if such licensee, his agents or
employees are directed to depart from the private residence by the owner or
person in charge thereof.
('73 Code, § 32.08) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.04 SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except pursuant to this section.
   (B)   Solicitation on highways within the village shall be allowed only at
intersections where all traffic is required to come to a full stop.
   (C)   The soliciting agency shall be:
      (1)   Registered with the Attorney General as a charitable organization.
      (2)   Engaged in a statewide fund raising activity.
      (3)   Be liable for any injury or injuries to any person or property
during the solicitation which is casually related to an act of ordinary
negligence of the soliciting agency.
      (4)   Any such person engaged in an act of solicitation shall have
attained 16 years of age.
      (5)   Any person engaged in an act of solicitation shall be wearing a
high visibility vest.
   (D)   Prior to entering into the solicitation, the soliciting agency shall
obtain from the office of the Village Clerk a permit. The permit shall include
the following:
      (1)   The name and address of the soliciting agency.
      (2)   The name of the statewide fund raising activity.
      (3)   The name and address of the organization for whose benefit the fund
raising activity is.
      (4)   Shall post evidence of financial security for any injuries to
person and property during the solicitation which is casually related to an act
of ordinary negligence of the soliciting agent in an amount equal to the
village's basic liability policy of insurance and in such companies as approved
by the Village President and Board of Trustees.
      (5)   The date and hour of the planned fund raising activity, subject to
the approval of the Village President and Board of Trustees.
      (6)   Upon all of the above requirements being met, the Village Clerk
shall issue such permit.
(Ord. 475, passed 8-20-84) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.05 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall not apply to the selling of personal property at
wholesale to dealers in such articles; to newsboys and newsgirls; to merchants
or their employees in delivery of goods in the regular course of business; to
vendors of milk, bakery products, groceries or ice who distribute their
products to regular customers on established routes; or to farmers or truck
gardeners who vend, sell or dispose of or offer to sell, vend or dispose of the
products of the farms or gardens occupied and cultivated by them.
   (B)   This chapter does not prohibit any sale required by statute or by
order of any court, or prohibit any auction sales conducted pursuant to law.
('73 Code, § 32.09)
LICENSING PROVISIONS
§ 111.15 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any peddler, solicitor or transient merchant to
sell, solicit or distribute goods, wares or merchandise from place to place,
from house to house or from door to door in the village, without first
obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions hereof.
('73 Code, § 32.02) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 111.16 APPLICATION FOR LICENSE.
   (A)   The applicant for a license under this chapter shall file with the
Village Clerk a sworn application in writing which shall give the following
information:
      (1)   Name and physical description of the applicant.
      (2)   Permanent home and local address of applicant, and in case of
transient merchants, the local address from which proposed sales will be made.
      (3)   A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to
be sold.
      (4)   The name and address of the employer, if any.
      (5)   The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
      (6)   If employer is a corporation, the state of its incorporation,
whether it is authorized to do business in the state, and evidence that the
corporation has designated a resident agent in the village upon whom legal
service may be made and that corporation will be responsible for the acts of
its employees in this village.
      (7)   A statement as to whether or not the applicant or any of its
employees and agents have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation
of any municipal ordinance, other than a traffic violation, the nature of the
offense and the penalty imposed.
      (8)   The names of the last cities or villages, not exceeding three,
where applicant has carried on business immediately preceding the date of
application and the addresses from which the businesses were conducted in those
municipalities.
      (9)   Two photographs of the applicant and such of its employees as will
be used in the solicitation, peddling or merchandising, taken within 60 days,
immediately prior to the filing of the application, which pictures shall be two
inches by two inches, showing the head and shoulders of the applicant, or its
agents and employees, in a clean and distinguishing manner.
   (B)   Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall pay to the
Village Clerk the sum of $150 to defray the cost of processing such
application.
('73 Code, § 32.03) (Am. Ord. 801, passed 7-16-01)
§ 111.17 INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT.
   Upon receipt of each application, it shall be referred by the Village Clerk
to the Chief of Police, who shall immediately investigate the business and
moral character of the applicant, its agents and employees, if any. The Chief
of Police shall promptly return the application to the Village Clerk, listing
his findings as to the business and moral character of the applicant and its
agents and employees. If upon investigation the applicant's character or the
character of its agents and employees, if any, is found unsatisfactory, no
license shall be issued.
('73 Code, § 32.04)
§ 111.18 BOND.
   Applicant for license under this chapter shall file with the village a
surety bond in the amount of $1,000, conditioned that the applicant shall
comply fully with the provisions of this code and any other ordinance of the
village and statutes of this state regulating peddlers, solicitors and
transient merchants, and guaranteeing to the residents of this village that all
money paid to such licensee will be accounted for and applied according to the
representations of the licensee, and further guaranteeing to the residents of
this village doing business with the licensee that the property purchased will
be delivered according to the representations of the licensee. Action on such
bond may be brought by the person aggrieved and for whose benefit, among
others, the bond is given.
('73 Code, § 32.05)
§ 111.19 CREDENTIALS.
   Upon approval of the application for license, as hereinbefore stated, the
Village Clerk shall issue credentials to the applicant and each of his agents
and employees,which credentials shall be issued over the name of the Village
Clerk, and to which shall be appended a photograph of the applicant or its
employees and agents. Such credentials must be displayed by the licensee, his
agents and employees, upon request of any householder within this village.
('73 Code, § 32.06)
CHAPTER 112: RAFFLES
Section
   
112.01   License required; compliance with provisions
   
112.02   Type of organization
   
112.03   Limitations on prizes, price and number of days
   
112.04   Conduct of raffles
   
112.05   Raffle manager
   
112.06   Records to be kept
   
112.07   Persons ineligible for license
   
112.08   Filing fee
§ 112.01 LICENSE REQUIRED; COMPLIANCE WITH PROVISIONS.
   No organization shall operate a raffle in the village without first
obtaining a license and complying with the regulations set forth in this
chapter.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.02 TYPE OF ORGANIZATION.
   Organization must be one of the following: religious, charitable, labor,
fraternal, educational or veterans. The organization must have been in
existence for five years.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.03 LIMITATIONS ON PRIZES, PRICE AND NUMBER OF DAYS.
   (A)   Prizes.
      (1)   Retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded in a single
raffle shall not exceed $500,000.
      (2)   Retail value of each prize in a single raffle shall not exceed
$500,000.
   (B)   Price. Maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance
issued or sold shall not exceed $25.
   (C)   Number of days. The maximum number of days during which chances may be
issued or sold shall not exceed 90 days.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.04 CONDUCT OF RAFFLES.
   (A)   The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively devoted to
the lawful purposes of the organization.
   (B)   No person except a bona fide member of the sponsoring organization may
participate in the management or operation of the raffle.
   (C)   No person may receive any payment or profit for participating in the
management of the raffle.
   (D)   An organization may rent a premises on which to determine the winning
chance or chances in a raffle only from another organization which is also
licensed to have raffles.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.05 RAFFLE MANAGER.
   All operation of and the conduct of raffles within the village shall be
under the supervision of a single raffles managers designated by the
organization. The manager shall obtain a fidelity bond in the sum of $1,000 in
favor of the organization. A copy of this bond must be filed with the office of
the Village Clerk.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.06 RECORDS TO BE KEPT.
   (A)   Each organization shall keep records of its gross receipts, expenses
and net proceeds for each single occasion at which winning chances are
determined. All deductions from gross receipts for each single occasion shall
be documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a
description of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction.
The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee, purpose, amount
and date of payment.
   (B)   Each organization shall have separate records of each raffle
conducted. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles on behalf of such organization shall not
be the same person who accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   (C)   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report monthly to
its membership, and to the village, its gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from raffles, and the distribution of net proceeds itemized. This
report shall be submitted to the Village Clerk's office on the first of each
month.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.07 PERSONS INELIGIBLE FOR LICENSE.
   The following persons are ineligible for a license:
   (A)   Any person who has been convicted of a felony;
   (B)   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or gambling
promoter; and
   (C)   Any person who is not of good moral character.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
§ 112.08 FILING FEE.
   A filing fee of $5 per raffle must be paid when applying for the raffle
license.
(Ord. 1160, passed 4-10-17)
CHAPTER 113: TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, BODY BRANDING AND BODY CARVING
Section
   
113.01   Definitions
   
113.02   Tattooing, body piercing, body branding and body carving of minors
without permit
   
113.03   Health procedures and records
   
113.04   Permit required
   
113.05   Application for establishment
   
113.06   Application for operator’s permit
   
113.07   Approval of application by village
   
113.08   Issuance or denial of establishment permit
   
113.09   Permit fee
   
113.10   Establishment permit shall be displayed
   
113.11   Revocation or suspension
   
113.12   Permit not transferable
   
113.13   Location
   
113.99   Penalty
§ 113.01 DEFINITIONS.
   The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
   BRAND, BRANDED or BRANDING. Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin by the aid of heated
instruments comprised of metal or other materials.
   CARVE, CARVED or CARVING. Any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls,
figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with the use of, but
not limited to, knives, wires, scalpels or other materials used in surgical and
anatomical operations and dissections.
   PIERCE, PIERCED or PIERCING. Any method of perforating the skin for the
purpose of attaching ornaments such as, but not limited to, earrings, metal
rings or bars.
   TATTOO, TATTOOED and TATTOOING. Any method of placing designs, letters,
scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or
any other substance resulting in the coloration of the skin by the aid of
needles or any other instruments designed to touch or puncture the skin.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
§ 113.02 TATTOOING, BODY PIERCING, BODY BRANDING AND BODY CARVING OF MINORS
WITHOUT PERMIT.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, other than a person licensed to tattoo,
body pierce, body brand or body carve, any person under the age of 21 years of
age.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.03 HEALTH PROCEDURES AND RECORDS.
   Any individual or establishment performing tattooing, body piercing, body
branding or body carving procedures shall comply with the following
requirements:
   (A)   The entire premises of the facility and all equipment shall be
maintained in a clean, sanitary condition and be in good repair.
   (B)   Any individual or establishment desiring to perform a tattooing, body
piercing, body branding or body carving procedure shall first inquire as to
whether or not the potential recipient of the procedure has a history of any
communicable disease. Any individual providing a history of a communicable
disease shall not receive a tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body
carving procedure.
   (C)   Any individual or establishment desiring to perform a tattooing, body
piercing, body branding or body carving procedure shall in written form or
through a conspicuously posted sign explain the following to each potential
recipient before performing a tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body
carving procedure:
      (1)   The nature of the procedure to be performed.
      (2)   Possible tissue reactions following the procedure.
      (3)   Importance of after-procedure care.
      (4)   In the case of tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body
carving, the permanent nature of the application.
   (D)   Any individual or establishment who performs a tattooing, body
piercing, body branding or body carving procedure shall maintain proper records
of each client. The records shall include the following:
      (1)   The date on which the procedure was performed.
      (2)   The name, address, phone number and age of the recipient of the
procedure.
      (3)   The name, address, phone number and age of the individual
performing the procedure.
      (4)   A description of the procedure.
      (5)   The signature of the recipient of the procedure.
   (E)   The information required in division (D) of this section shall be
permanently recorded and made available for examination by any village agent or
employee for examination, and shall be kept by the individual or establishment
for a minimum of two years.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02) Penalty, see §
113.99
113.04 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage in or carry on the business of operating a tattooing,
body piercing, body branding or body carving establishment unless he or she
possesses a valid permit issued by the village, pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter for each and every separate office or place of business conducted
by such person within the village.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.05 APPLICATION FOR ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Any person desiring a permit to operate a tattooing, body piercing,
body branding or body carving establishment shall file a written application
within the Village Clerk's office on a form to be furnished by the Village
Clerk's office.
   (B)   The applicant shall accompany the application with a tender of the
correct permit fee, as provided in §
113.10, and shall in addition furnish the following personal information
concerning the manager or other person principally in charge of the operation
of the business:
      (1)   Name, complete residence address and residence telephone number.
      (2)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address.
      (3)   Written proof of age consisting of a birth certificate.
      (4)   Height, weight and color of hair.
      (5)   Authorization for the village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application regarding the qualifications of the applicant for the
requested permit.
      (6)   The names and addresses of three adult residents within the county
who will serve as character references. These references must be persons other
than relatives and business associates.
      (7)   Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury,
that the information contained in the application is true and correct, with
such declaration being duly dated and signed in the village.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.06 APPLICATION FOR OPERATOR'S PERMIT.
   (A)   A person desiring a permit to do tattooing, body piercing, body
branding or body carving shall file a written application with the Village
Clerk's office on a form to be furnished by the Village Clerk's office.
   (B)   The applicant shall tender with the application the correct permit
fee, as provided in §
113.10, and in addition, furnish the following:
      (1)   The business address and telephone number where the tattooing, body
piercing, body branding or body carving establishment is to be operated.
      (2)   The following personal information concerning the applicant;
         (a)   Name, complete residence address and residence telephone number.
         (b)   The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present
address of the applicant.
         (c)   Written proof of age consisting of a birth certificate.
         (d)   Height, weight and color of hair of applicant.
         (e)   Authorization for the village, its agents and employees to seek
information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set
forth in the application and the qualifications of the applicant for the
permit.
         (f)   Written declaration by the applicant, under penalty of perjury,
that the information contained in the application is true and correct, with the
application being duly dated and signed in the village.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.07 APPROVAL OF APPLICATION BY VILLAGE.
   (A)   Upon receiving the application for a tattooing, body piercing, body
branding or body carving establishment, or for a permit to perform tattooing,
body piercing, body branding or body carving, the Mayor shall review the
application.
   (B)   The Village Board must give final approval prior to any issuance of a
permit.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
§ 113.08 ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT.
   The Village Clerk shall issue a tattooing, body piercing, body branding or
body carving establishment permit within 45 days of receipt of the application,
unless he or she finds the following:
   (A)   The correct permit fee has not been tendered to the village and, in
the case of a check or bank draft, honored with payment upon presentation.
   (B)   The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not
comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to the village’s
zoning, building and health regulations.
   (C)   The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent
statement of fact in the application for the permit or in any document required
by the village in connection therewith.
   (D)   The applicant has operated a tattooing, body piercing, body branding
or body carving establishment and has had a license denied, revoked or
suspended for any of the causes set forth in divisions (A) through (C) of this
section by the village or any other state or local agency within two years
prior to the date of the application.
   (E)   The applicant, principally in charge of the operation of the business
is not over the age of 21 years of age.
   (F)   The Village Board has denied the application.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
§ 113.09 PERMIT FEE.
   The permit fee for a tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body carving
establishment permit shall be $70 per year, or any part thereof. The permit fee
for each person employed on the premises who will do tattooing, body piercing,
body branding or body carving shall be $100 per year, or any part thereof. All
fees are payable to the Village Clerk’s office upon application and are
refundable upon denial of the permit by the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
§ 113.10 ESTABLISHMENT PERMIT SHALL BE DISPLAYED.
   The tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body carving establishment
permittee shall display his or her permit and that of each and every person
employed in the establishment in an open and conspicuous place on the premises
of the establishment.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02) Penalty, see §
113.99
§ 113.11 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION.
   Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to suspension or
revocation by the Mayor for violation of any provision of this chapter or for
any grounds that would warrant the denial or issuance of such permit in the
first place. The Mayor, upon such revocation or suspension, shall state his or
her reasons in writing, specifying the particular grounds for such revocation
or suspension.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
§ 113.12 PERMIT NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   No tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body carving establishment
permit shall be transferable, separable or divisible, and such authority as a
permit confers shall be conferred only on the permittee named therein.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
§ 113.13 LOCATION.
   (A)   Any tattoo, body piercing, body branding or body carving business
shall be a permitted use provided that a tattoo, body piercing, body branding
or body carving business may not be operated within 1,000 feet of the following
established uses:
      (1)   A church, synagogue or regular place of worship.
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school.
      (3)   Any property legally used or zoned for residential use.
      (4)   A public park.
      (5)   A day care facility.
      (6)   Another tattoo, body piercing, body branding or body carving
business.
   (B)   For the purpose of this section, measurement shall be made in a
straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where the business of tattooing, body piercing, body branding or body carving
is being conducted, to the nearest property line of a church, synagogue,
regular place of worship, school, park, day care facility, residential use, or
other tattoo, body piercing, body branding or body carving business, or to the
nearest boundary of a residential zoning district.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to authorize or permit
any activity or conduct prohibited by any state or federal law.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
113.99 PENALTY
   Any person and/or establishment convicted of a violation of this chapter
shall be subject to a fine of not less than $750.
(Ord. 813, passed 1-7-02)
CHAPTER 114: MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Section
   
114.01   Definitions
   
114.02   Permits and education required
   
114.03   Filing of application and fee provision
   
114.04   Application for therapeutic massage establishment
   
114.05   Issuance of permit for a therapeutic massage establishment
   
114.06   Revocation or suspension of permit for therapeutic massage
establishment
   
114.07   Therapeutic massage permit
   
114.08   Application form for therapeutic massage permit
   
114.09   Issuance of therapeutic massage permit
   
114.10   Revocation of therapeutic massage permit
   
114.11   Facilities necessary
   
114.12   Operating requirements
   
114.13   Advertising
   
114.14   Out-call registration
   
114.15   Out-call service
   
114.16   Inspections
   
114.17   Employment of person under the age of 18 prohibited
   
114.18   Identification card
   
114.19   Transfer of permits
   
114.20   Display of permits
   
114.21   Employment of massage therapists
   
114.22   Time limit for filing application for permit
   
114.23   Nonapplicability
   
114.24   Rules and regulations
   
114.25   Maintaining public nuisance
   
114.26   Review of Police
   
114.99   Penalty
§ 114.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   EMPLOYEE. Any and all persons other than the massage therapist, who render
any service to the permittee, who receive compensation directly from the
permittee, and who have no physical contact with customers and clients.
   MASSAGE THERAPIST. Any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages
in the practice of therapeutic massages as herein defined.
   OUT-CALL THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE SERVICE. Any business, the function of which is
to engage in or carry on therapeutic massages at a location designated by the
customer or client rather than at a therapeutic massage establishment.
   PERMITTEE. The operator of a therapeutic massage establishment.
   PERSONS. Any individual, co-partnership, firm, association, joint stock
company, corporation or combination of individuals of whatever form or
character.
   SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA. Includes the genitals, pubic area, anus or perineum
of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female. However, this definition
shall exclude displacement of breast tissue for muscular therapy.
   THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE. Any method of pressure on or friction against or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or other parts of the human body
or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or
without such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics,
oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations
commonly used in this practice.
    THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS. Any establishment having a fixed place
of business where any person, firm, association or corporation engaged in, or
carries on, or permits to be engaged in or carried on any of the activities
mentioned in the definition of THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.02 PERMITS AND EDUCATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on,
or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises
in the village, the operation of a therapeutic massage establishment as herein
defined, without first having obtained a permit from the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Furthermore, no person shall be allowed to engage in, conduct or carry
on, or upon any premises in the village, the operation of a therapeutic massage
establishment, as hereinafter defined, without first maintaining a minimum of
100 hours of education from a recognized school training in therapeutic massage
or licensed in a state other than the State of Illinois.
   (C)   Furthermore, all persons shall be required to secure $100,000
liability insurance in order to operate as a therapeutic massage therapist.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.03 FILING OF APPLICATION AND FEE PROVISION.
   (A)   Every applicant for a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a massage
establishment shall file an application in duplicate under oath with the Chief
of Police upon a form provided by the Chief of Police and pay an non-refundable
filing fee of $100 to the Village Treasurer, who shall issue a receipt which
shall be attached to the application filed with the Chief of Police.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall within 30 days of receipt of the application
notify the applicant that his application is granted, denied, or held for
further investigation. The period of such additional investigation shall not
exceed an additional 30 days unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant. Upon
the conclusion of such additional investigation the Chief of Police shall
advise the applicant in writing whether the application is granted or denied.
   (C)   Whenever an application is denied or held for further investigation,
the Chief of Police shall advise the applicant in writing of the reasons for
such action.
   (D)   The failure or refusal of the applicant to promptly give any
information relevant to the investigation of the application or his or her
refusal or failure to appear at any reasonable time and place for examination
under oath regarding the application or his or her refusal to submit to or
cooperate with any inspection required by this chapter shall constitute an
admission by the applicant that he or she is ineligible for such permit and
shall be grounds for denial thereof by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.04 APPLICATION FOR THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The application for a permit to operate a therapeutic massage
establishment shall set forth the exact nature of the therapeutic massage to be
administered, and the proposed place of business and facilities therefor.
   (B)   In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a permit, including
any partner or limited partner of a partnership applicant, and any officer or
director of a corporate applicant and any stockholder holding more than 10% of
the stock of a corporate applicant, shall furnish the following information
      (1)   Name and address;
      (2)   Written proof that the individual is at least 18 years of age;
      (3)   All residential addresses for the past three years;
      (4)   The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair.
      (5)   The business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three
years immediately preceding the date of application.
      (6)   The therapeutic massage or similar business license history of the
applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city
or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason
therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of
suspension or revocation;
      (7)   All criminal or ordinance violation convictions, forfeitures of
bond and pleading of nolo contendere on all charges, except minor traffic
violations;
      (8)   The fingerprints and photograph of the applicant; and
      (9)   If the applicant is a corporation, or a partner of a partnership is
a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown
in its Articles of Incorporation.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.05 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT FOR A THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Upon receipt of any and all certification which the Chief of Police
believes is necessary that the proposed therapeutic massage establishment
complies with all the requirements of the village ordinances, the Chief of
Police shall issue a permit to maintain, operate or conduct a therapeutic
massage establishment, unless he finds:
      (1)   That the operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted,
would not have complied with all applicable laws, including but not limited to,
the building, health, planning, housing, zoning and fire codes of the village;
or
      (2)   That the applicant and any other person who will be directly or
indirectly engaged in the management and operation of a therapeutic massage
establishment has been convicted of:
         (a)   A felony;
         (b)   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
         (c)   Prostitution, soliciting for a prostitute, pandering, keeping a
place of prostitution, pimping or other offense opposed to decency and
morality.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, at his discretion, may issue a permit to any
person convicted of any of the crimes in subsections (A)(2)(a), (b) and (c) if
he finds that such conviction occurred at least four years prior to the date of
application, the applicant has had no subsequent convictions and the applicant
has shown evidence of rehabilitation sufficient to warrant the public trust.
   (C)   Every therapeutic massage establishment permit issued pursuant to this
chapter shall terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its
issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.06 REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF PERMIT FOR THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE
ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   Any permit issued for a therapeutic massage establishment may be
revoked or suspended by the Chief of Police after a hearing for good cause or
in any case where any of the provisions of this chapter are violated or any
employee of the permittee, including a massage therapist, is engaged in any
conduct at permittee’s place of business, which violates any of the provisions
of this chapter or any state law which provides for imprisonment, and permittee
has actual or constructive knowledge of such violations or the permittee should
have actual or constructive knowledge by due diligence, or where any applicant
has made a false statement on an application for a permit under this chapter or
in any case where the permittee or licensee refuses to permit any duly
authorized police officer or health inspector of the village and the county to
inspect the premises or the operations therein. Such permit may also be revoked
or suspended by the Chief of Police, after hearing upon the recommendation of
any duly authorized police officer or health inspector of the village that such
business is being managed, conducted or maintained without regard for the
public health or healths of patrons or customers or without due regard to
proper sanitation or hygiene.
   (B)   Any violation of this chapter by any employee of the permittee
including a massage therapist, shall be cause for suspension of the permit for
not more than 30 days in the first instance. Any subsequent violation of this
chapter by any employee of the permittee, including a massage therapist, shall
be cause for suspension or revocation of the permit.
   (C)   The Chief of Police, before revoking or suspending any permit, shall
give the permittee at least ten days written notice of the charges against him
or her and the opportunity for a public hearing before the Chief of Police, at
which time the permittee may present evidence bearing upon the question. In
such cases, the charges shall be specific and in writing.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.07 THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE PERMIT.
   Any person, including an applicant for a therapeutic massage establishment
permit, who engages in the practice of therapeutic massages as herein defined
shall file an application for a therapeutic massage permit with the Chief of
Police upon a form provided by the Chief of Police and shall pay a non-
refundable filing fee of $25 for an original application and $25 for a renewal
application, to the Village Treasurer, who shall issue a receipt which shall be
attached to the application filed with the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.08 APPLICATION FORM FOR THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE PERMIT.
   The application for a therapeutic massage permit shall contain the
following:
   (A)   Name and residence address;
   (B)   Social security number and driver’s license number, if any;
   (C)   Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and eyes;
   (D)   Written evidence that applicant is at least 18 years of age;
   (E)   Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for three years
immediately preceding the date of application;
   (F)   Whether the applicant has ever been convicted of, pleaded nolo
contendere to or suffered a forfeiture on a bond charge of committing any crime
except minor traffic violations. If the answer is in the affirmative, a
statement must be made giving the place of the court in which such conviction
plea or forfeiture was had, the specific charge under which the conviction plea
or forfeiture was obtained and the sentence imposed as a result thereof; and
   (G)   The Chief of Police, or his delegate, shall have the right to take
fingerprint and a photograph of the applicant and the right to confirm the
information submitted.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.09 ISSUANCE OF THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police may issue a therapeutic massage permit within 21
days following application, unless he finds that the applicant for therapeutic
massage permit has been convicted of:
      (1)   A felony;
      (2)   An offense involving sexual misconduct with children;
      (3)   Keeping or residing in a house of ill fame, solicitation of a lewd
or unlawful act, prostitution or pandering.
   (B)   The Chief of Police, in his discretion, may issue a permit to any
person convicted of such crimes if he finds that such conviction occurred at
least four years prior to the date of the application and the applicant has had
no subsequent convictions.
   (C)   Every therapeutic massage permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall
terminate at the expiration of one year from the date of its issuance, unless
sooner suspended.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.10 REVOCATION OF THERAPEUTIC MASSAGE PERMIT.
   (A)   A therapeutic massage permit issued by the Chief of Police shall be
revoked or suspended where it appears that the massage therapist has been
convicted of any offense which would be cause for denial of a permit upon an
original application, had made a false statement on an application for a
permit, or has committed an act in violation of this chapter.
   (B)   The Chief of Police in revoking or suspending a therapeutic massage
permit shall give the permit holder a written notice specifying the grounds
therefor. Such person may within ten days of such revocation or suspension file
a written request with the Chief of Police for a public hearing before the
Chief of Police, at which time the message therapist may present evidence
bearing upon the question.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.11 FACILITIES NECESSARY.
   (A)   No therapeutic massage establishment shall be issued a permit, nor be
operated, established or maintained in the village unless an inspection reveals
that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum
requirements:
      (1)   Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and
showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with all applicable building codes;
      (2)   All therapeutic massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or
bath areas and floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected;
      (3)   Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided
for the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female
patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing, locker and
therapeutic massage room facilities shall be provided;
      (4)   The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing non-disposable instruments and materials used in administering
therapeutic massages. Such non-disposable instruments and materials shall be
disinfected after use on each patron;
      (5)   Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in connection with administering
therapeutic massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials shall be
kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which containers or cabinets
shall be kept separate from the clean storage areas;
      (6)   Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the same time,
separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A single water
closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more employees or patrons of
that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water
closets after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be designated
as to the sex accommodated therein;
      (7)   Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or a vestibule. Lavatories
or washbasins shall be provided with a soap and a dispenser and with sanitary
towels; and
      (8)   The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
services.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall obtain what certification he believes is
necessary that the proposed therapeutic massage establishment complies with all
the requirements of the village ordinances.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.12 OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Every portion of the therapeutic massage establishment, including
appliances and apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary
condition;
   (B)   Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the
reception area in a location available to call prospective customers;
   (C)   All employees, including massage therapists, shall be clean and wear
clean, nontransparent outer garments, covering the sexual and genital areas,
whose use is restricted to the therapeutic massage establishment. A separate
dressing room for each sex must be available on the premises with individual
lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and
shall be self-closing;
   (D)   All therapeutic massage establishments shall be provided with clean,
laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner;
   (E)   The sexual or genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or massage
therapist;
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person, knowingly, in a therapeutic
massage establishment, to place his or her hand upon, to touch with any part of
his or her body, to fondle in any manner, or to massage, a sexual or genital
area of any other persons.
   (G)   No massage therapist, employee or operator shall perform, offer or
agree to perform, any act which would require the touching of the patron's
genital area.
   (H)   All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and
all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor cabinets, shower
compartments and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business
is in operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
   (I)   Oils, creams, lotions or other preparations used in administering
therapeutic massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
   (J)   Eating in the therapeutic massage work areas shall not be permitted.
Animals, except for seeing eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the therapeutic
massage work area.
   (K)   No massage therapist shall administer a therapeutic massage to a
patron exhibiting any skin fungus, skin infection, skin inflammation or skin
eruption, unless a physician duly licensed by the state certifies in writing
that such person may be safely massaged prescribing the conditions thereof.
   (L)   Each massage therapist shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administering a therapeutic
massage to each patron.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.13 ADVERTISING.
   No therapeutic massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions
of this chapter shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed,
published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the
human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons that any
services are available other than those services described in the definition of
therapeutic massage of §
114.01, or that employees, or massage therapists are dressed in any manner
other than prescribed in §
114.12(C) of this chapter, nor shall any therapeutic massage establishment
indicate in the text of such advertising that any services are available other
than those services described in the definition of therapeutic massage of §
114.01.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.14 OUT-CALL REGISTRATION.
   Any massage therapist who provides any of the services listed in the
definition of therapeutic massage of §
114.01 at any hotel or motel must first register his or her name and permit
number with the owner, manager or person in charge of the hotel or motel.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.15 OUT-CALL SERVICE.
   No "Out-Call Massage Service" may be operated other than by a licensed
therapeutic massage establishment. All therapeutic massages performed by an
"out-call massage service" must be performed in the manner prescribed in §§
114.12 and
114.13.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.16 INSPECTIONS.
   The Police Department and any applicable Department of Public Health shall
from time to time, and at least twice a year, make an inspection of each
therapeutic massage establishment granted a permit under the provisions of this
chapter for the purposes of determining that the provisions of this chapter are
complied with. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times and in a
reasonable manner. It shall be unlawful for any permittee to fail to allow such
inspection officer access to the premises or to hinder such officer in any
manner.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.17 EMPLOYMENT OF PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 18 PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner, proprietor, manager or other person in
charge of any therapeutic massage establishment to employ any person to perform
therapeutic massages who is not at least 18 years of age.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.18 IDENTIFICATION CARD.
   The Chief of Police shall provide each massage therapist granted a permit
with an identification card which shall contain a photograph of the massage
therapist and the full name and permit number assigned to the massage
therapist, which must be worn on the front of the outermost garment at all
times during the hours of operation of any establishment granted a permit
pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.19 TRANSFER OF PERMIT.
   No permit for the operation of a therapeutic massage establishment issued
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable except with
the written consent of the Chief of Police; provided, however, that upon the
death or incapacity of the permittee the therapeutic massage establishment may
continue in business for a reasonable period of time to allow for an orderly
transfer of the permit.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.20 DISPLAY OF PERMITS.
   Every permittee shall display a valid permit in a conspicuous place within
the therapeutic massage establishment so that the name may be readily seen by
persons entering the premises.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01) Penalty, see §
114.99
§ 114.21 EMPLOYMENT OF MASSAGE THERAPISTS.
   It shall be the responsibility of the permittee for the therapeutic massage
establishment or the employer of any persons purporting to act as massage
therapists to insure that each person employed as a massage therapist shall
first have obtained a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.22 TIME LIMIT FOR FILING APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   All persons who presently operate a therapeutic massage establishment or who
are employed as a massage therapist must file for a permit within three months
of the effective date of this chapter. Applications for renewal of permits must
be filed not more than two months nor less than one month prior to termination
of an existing permit.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.23 NONAPPLICABILITY.
   This chapter shall not apply to hospitals, nursing homes, sanitaria or
persons holding an unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the
laws of the state or persons working under the direction of any such persons or
in any such establishments, nor shall this chapter apply to barbers or
cosmetologist lawfully carrying out their particular profession or business and
holding a valid, unrevoked license or certificate of registration issued by the
state.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.24 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Police and any applicable Board of Health may, after public
hearing, make and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict
with, but to carry out the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.25 MAINTAINING PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Any building used as a therapeutic massage establishment in violation of
this chapter with the intentional, knowing, reckless or negligent permission of
the owner thereof, or the agent of the owner managing the building, together
with all fixtures and other property used in violation of this chapter are
hereby declared to be a nuisance.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.26 REVIEW OF POLICE CHIEF'S DECISION.
   The decision of the Chief of Police with regard to the issuance, suspension
or revocation of any license under this chapter shall be reviewable by the
Mayor of the village, upon the written request of the party filed with the
Mayor within ten days of such refusal, revocation or suspension. The Mayor
shall review evidence previously submitted to the Chief of Police, and any
additional evidence presented with the written request for review. The decision
of the Mayor upon such review shall be a final appealable order.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
§ 114.99 PENALTY.
   Every person except those persons who are specifically exempted by this
chapter, whether acting as an individual owner, employee of the owner, operator
or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner,
employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who
gives therapeutic massages or conducts a therapeutic massage establishment
without first obtaining a permit and paying a license fee to do so from the
village, or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, be punished by a fine not to exceed $750.
(Ord. 811, passed 12-17-01)
CHAPTER 115: PAWNBROKERS
Section
   
115.01   License required
   
115.02   Records
   
115.03   Prohibited locations and restricted number of licenses
   
115.04   License not transferable
§ 115.01 LICENSE REQUIRED.
   A pawnbroker is any person who loans money on deposit or pledge or personal
property or other valuable thing or deals in the purchase of personal property
on condition of selling the same back again at a stipulated price. No person
shall engage in the business of pawnbroker within this village without a
license. The license fee is $500 per year.
(Ord. 798, passed 6-4-01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.02 RECORDS.
   Every pawnbroker doing business in the village shall keep a record,
including a photograph, of every article pledged with him or sold to him and
this record shall be open to the inspection of any police officer at any time
during the hours of business. In addition, every pawnbroker doing business in
the village shall obtain and keep on file a copy of a valid identification
properly identifying every person pledging or selling an article to him, and
these copies of valid identifications shall also be open to the inspection of
any police officer at any time during the hours of business. It shall be the
duty of every pawnbroker to report to the police any article pledged with him
or which is sought to be pledged with him if he shall have the reason to
believe that the article was stolen or lost and found by the person attempting
to pledge it in the case of a lost article.
(Ord. 798, passed 6-4-01) Penalty, see §
10.99
§ 115.03 PROHIBITED LOCATIONS AND RESTRICTED NUMBER OF LICENSES.
   (A)   No establishment requiring a license hereunder shall be located within
1,000 feet of the following established uses:
      (1)   A church, synagogue or regular place of worship.
      (2)   A public or private elementary or secondary school.
      (3)   Any property legally used or zoned for residential use.
      (4)   A public park.
      (5)   A day care facility.
      (6)   Another pawnbroker business.
   (B)   The village hereby restricts the number of pawnbrokers in the village
to two.
(Ord. 798, passed 6-4-01)
§ 115.04 LICENSE NOT TRANSFERABLE.
   A pawnbrokers license shall only be valid for the person and the premises
for which the license was issued and may not be transferred to another person
or location.
(Ord. 798, passed 6-4-01)
CHAPTER 116: CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION LAW
Section
   
116.01   Customer service and privacy protection law
   
116.02   Enforcement
   
116.03   Penalties
   
116.04   Customer credits
§ 116.01 CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW.
   (A)   Adoption. The regulations of ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501 are hereby
adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video providers
offering services within the village's boundaries.
   (B)   Amendments. Any amendment to the Cable and Video Customer Protection
Law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village.
(Ord. 992, passed 3-17-08)
§ 116.02 ENFORCEMENT.
   The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the Cable and Video
Protection Law with respect to complaints received from residents within the
village.
(Ord. 992, passed 3-17-08)
§ 116.03 PENALTIES.
   The village, pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(1), does hereby
provide for a schedule of penalties for any material breach of the Cable and
Video Protection Law by cable or video providers in addition to the penalties
provided in the law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively
neutral basis and shall not exceed $750 for each day of the material breach,
and shall not exceed $25,000 for each occurrence of a material breach per
customer.
   (A)   MATERIAL BREACH means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   (B)   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least 30
days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach.
   (C)   A material breach, for the purposes of assessing penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in division (B).
(Ord. 992, passed 3-17-08)
§ 116.04 CUSTOMER CREDITS.
   The village hereby adopts the schedule of customer credits for violations.
Those credits shall be as provided for in the provisions of ILCS Ch. 220, Act
5, § 22-501(s) and applied on the statement issued to the customer for the next
billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation. The cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits
and the customer is under no obligation to request the credit.
(Ord. 992, passed 3-17-08)
CHAPTER 117: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
Section
   
117.01   Definitions
   
117.02   Cable/video service provider fee imposed
   
117.03   PEG access support fee imposed
   
117.04   Applicable principles
   
117.05   No impact on other taxes due from holder
   
117.06   Audits of cable/video service provider
   
117.07   Late fees, payments
§ 117.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
   CABLE SERVICE. That term as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 522(6).
   COMMISSION. The Illinois Commerce Commission.
   GROSS REVENUES. All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
      (1)   GROSS REVENUES shall include the following:
         (a)   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
         (b)   Event-based charges for cable service or video service,
including, but not limited to, pay-per-view and video-on-demand charges.
         (c)   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
         (d)   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including but not limited to activation, installation, and
repair charges.
         (e)   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service
or video service, including but not limited to service order and service
termination charges.
         (f)   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges,
and other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent
payments.
         (g)   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
         (h)   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection (i).
         (i)   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled
or integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications,
the portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
         (j)   The service provider fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-
801(b).
      (2)   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
         (a)   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad
debt, subject to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi).
         (b)   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state-issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
         (c)   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or Internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
         (d)   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which
the purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the
purchaser's subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that
it will resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by ILCS
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) with respect to the service.
         (e)   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the
subscribers or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other
governmental entity and collected by the holder of the state-issued
authorization and required to be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales
and use taxes.
         (f)   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
         (g)   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar
vendors for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part
of the cable service or video service.
      (3)   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b) which would
otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
   HOLDER. A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or
provide cable or video service from the Commission pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-401.
   PEG. Public, education and governmental.
   PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service areas within
its territorial jurisdiction.
   SERVICE. The provision of "cable service" or "video service" to subscribers
and the interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the Commission
pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401.
   SERVICE PROVIDER FEE. The amount paid under this chapter and ILCS Ch. 220,
Act 5, § 21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas within its
territorial jurisdiction.
   VIDEO SERVICE. Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right-of-way without regard to delivery technology, including Internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 U.S.C. § 332(d) or any video
programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables users to
access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over
the public Internet.
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
§ 117.02 CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   Fee imposed. A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be 5% of the
holder's gross revenues. [Note: The fee can be no greater than the fee paid to
the village by an incumbent cable operator providing cable service.]
   (C)   Notice to the village. The holder shall notify the village at least
ten days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service or
video service in the village.
   (D)   Holder's liability. The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following 30 days after receipt of the
ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting this
chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on the
holder's application notice sent pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)
(6) to the village.
   (E)   Payment date. The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (F)   Exemption. The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   (G)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may deduct the
amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under §
117.02(B).
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
§ 117.03 PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED.
   (A)   PEG fee imposed. A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to §
117.02(B).
   (B)   Amount of fee. The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be 1% of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the percentage of
gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village or its
designee for PEG access support in the village.
   (C)   Payment. The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the
village or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The
holder's liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date
set forth in §
117.02(D).
   (D)   Payment due. The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, 45 days after the close of the calendar quarter. If mailed,
the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each payment shall
include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of the fee.
   (E)   Credit for other payments. An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to ILCS Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)
shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary payments for PEG
access that would have been due during the remaining term of the agreement had
it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments made by an
incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be credited
against the fees that that operator owes under §
117.03(B).
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
§ 117.04 APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES.
   All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made
pursuant to generally accepted accounting principles.
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
§ 117.05 NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state-issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state-issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges.
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
§ 117.06 AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER.
   (A)   Audit requirement. The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50,
Act 45, §§ 1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be construed as
an accord that the amounts are correct.
   (B)   Additional payments. Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within 30 days after the municipality's submission of an invoice for the
sum.
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
§ 117.07 LATE FEES, PAYMENTS.
   All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this municipality pursuant to the Local Government Taxpayers' Bill
of Rights Act, ILCS Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.
(Ord. 993, passed 3-17-08)
TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES
   Chapter
      
130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
131.   OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
      
132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
      
133.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
      
134.    OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
      
135.   GAMBLING OFFENSES
      
136.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
      
137.   WEAPONS
CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
130.01   Definitions
   
130.02   Intent
   
130.03   Knowledge
   
130.04   Recklessness
   
130.05   Negligence
   
130.06   Attempt
   
130.99   Penalty
§ 130.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ACT. The taking of action or a failure or omission to take action.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2)
   ANOTHER. A person or persons other than the offender.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3)
   CONDUCT. An act or a series of acts, and the accompanying mental state.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4)
   OFFENSE. A violation of a penal statute of this village or state.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12)
§ 130.02 INTENT.
   A person intends, or acts intentionally or with intent, to accomplish a
result or engage in conduct described by the section defining the offense, when
his conscious objective or purpose is to accomplish that result or engage in
that conduct.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4)
§ 130.03 KNOWLEDGE.
   (A)   A person knows, or acts knowingly or with knowledge of:
      (1)   The nature or attendant circumstances of his or her conduct,
described by the section defining the offense, when he or she is consciously
aware that his or her conduct is of that nature or that those circumstances
exist. Knowledge of a material fact includes awareness of the substantial
probability that the fact exists.
      (2)   The result of his or her conduct, described by the section defining
the offense, when he or she is consciously aware that that result is
practically certain to be caused by his or her conduct.
   (B)   Conduct performed knowingly or with knowledge is performed willfully,
within the meaning of a statute using the term WILLFULLY, unless the section
clearly requires another meaning.
   (C)   When the law provides that acting knowingly suffices to establish an
element of an offense, that element also is established if a person acts
intentionally.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5)
§ 130.04 RECKLESSNESS.
   A person is reckless or acts recklessly when that person consciously
disregards a substantial and unjust- ifiable risk that circumstances exist or
that a result will follow, described by the section defining the offense, and
that disregard constitutes a gross deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation. An act performed recklessly
is performed wantonly, within the meaning of a section using the term WANTONLY,
unless the statute clearly requires another meaning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6)
§ 130.05 NEGLIGENCE.
   A person is negligent, or acts negligently, when that person fails to be
aware of a substantial and unjustifiable risk that circumstances exist or a
result will follow, described by the statute defining the offense, and that
failure constitutes a substantial deviation from the standard of care that a
reasonable person would exercise in the situation.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7)
§ 130.06 ATTEMPT.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits the offense of attempt when,
with intent to commit a specific offense, he or she does any act that
constitutes a substantial step toward the commission of that offense.
   (B)   Impossibility.  It is not a defense to a charge of attempt that
because of a misapprehension of the circumstances it would have been impossible
for the accused to commit the offense attempted.
   (C)   Sentence. A person convicted of attempt may be fined or imprisoned or
both not to exceed the maximum provided for the offense attempted. If such fine
exceeds that set forth in § 130.99 below, however, the village shall enforce
said offense under the provisions of state law.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 130.99 PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provisions of this title for which another penalty is
not specifically provided shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $500.
CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES PERTAINING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
131.01   (Reserved)
   
131.02   Trespass to land
   
131.03   Damaging village property
   
131.04   Damaging property
   
131.05   Theft
§ 131.01 (RESERVED)
§ 131.02 TRESPASS TO LAND.
   (A)   (1)   A person commits criminal trespass to real property when he or
she:
         (a)   Knowingly and without lawful authority enters or remains within
or on a building;
         (b)   Enters upon the land of another, after receiving, prior to the
entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry is forbidden;
         (c)   Remains upon the land of another, after receiving notice from
the owner or occupant to depart;
         (d)   Presents false documents or falsely represents his or her
identity orally to the owner or occupant of a building or land in order to
obtain permission from the owner or occupant to enter or remain in the building
or on the land;
         (e)   Intentionally removes a notice posted on residential real estate
as required by subsection (l) of Section 15-1505.8 of Article XV of the Code of
Civil Procedure before the date and time set forth in the notice; or
         (f)   Enters a field used or capable of being used for growing crops,
an enclosed area containing livestock, an agricultural building containing
livestock, or an orchard in or on a motor vehicle (including an off-road
vehicle, motorcycle, moped, or any other powered two-wheel vehicle) after
receiving, prior to the entry, notice from the owner or occupant that the entry
is forbidden or remains upon or in the area after receiving notice from the
owner or occupant to depart.
      (2)   For purposes of division (A)(1)(a), this section shall not apply to
being in a building which is open to the public while the building is open to
the public during its normal hours of operation, nor shall this section apply
to a person who enters a public building under the reasonable belief that the
building is still open to the public.
   (B)   (1)   A person has received notice from the owner or occupant within
the meaning of division (A) if the person has been notified personally, either
orally or in writing, including a valid court order as defined by ILCS Ch. 725,
Act 5, § 112A-3 granting remedy (2) of ILCS Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-14(b), or if
a printed or written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted
or exhibited at the main entrance to the land or the forbidden part thereof.
      (2)   Subject to the provisions of division (B)(3) of this section, as an
alternative to the posting of real property as set forth in division (B)(1) of
this section, the owner or lessee of any real property may post the property by
placing identifying purple marks on trees or posts around the area to be
posted. Each purple mark shall be:
         (a)   A vertical line of at least eight inches in length and the
bottom of the mark shall be no less than three feet nor more than five feet
high. Such marks shall be placed no more than 100 feet apart and shall be
readily visible to any person approaching the property; or
         (b)   A post capped or otherwise marked on at least its top two
inches. The bottom of the cap or mark shall be not less than three feet but not
more than five feet six inches high. Posts so marked shall be placed not more
than 36 feet apart and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the
property. Prior to applying a cap or mark which is visible from both sides of a
fence shared by different property owners or lessees, all such owners or
lessees shall concur in the decision to post their own property.
         (c)   Nothing in this division (B)(2) shall be construed to authorize
the owner or lessee of any real property to place any purple marks on any tree
or post or to install any post or fence if doing so would violate any
applicable law, rule, ordinance, order, covenant, bylaw, declaration,
regulation, restriction, contract, or instrument.
      (3)   Any owner or lessee who marks his or her real property using the
method described in division (B)(2) of this section must also provide notice as
described in division (B)(1) of this section. The public of this state shall be
informed of the provisions of division (B)(2) of this section by the Illinois
Department of Agriculture and the Illinois Department of Natural Resources.
These Departments shall conduct an information campaign for the general public
concerning the interpretation and implementation of division (B)(2) of this
section. The information shall inform the public about the marking requirements
and the applicability of division (B)(2) of this section including information
regarding the size requirements of the markings as well as the manner in which
the markings shall be displayed. The Departments shall also include information
regarding the requirement that, until the date this division (3) becomes
inoperative, any owner or lessee who chooses to mark his or her property using
paint, must also comply with one of the notice requirements listed in division
(B)(1) of this section. The Departments may prepare a brochure or may
disseminate the information through agency websites. Non-governmental
organizations including, but not limited to, the Illinois Forestry Association,
Illinois Tree Farm and the Walnut Council may help to disseminate the
information regarding the requirements and applicability of division (B)(2) of
this section based on materials provided by the Departments. This division (B)
(3) is inoperative on and after January 1, 2013.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person, whether a migrant worker or
otherwise, living on the land with permission of the owner or of the owner's
agent having apparent authority to hire workers on the land and assign them
living quarters or a place of accommodations for living thereon, nor to anyone
living on the land at the request of or by occupancy, leasing, or other
agreement or arrangement with the owner or the owner's agent, nor to anyone
invited by the migrant worker or other person so living on the land to visit
him or her at the place that person is so living upon the land.
   (D)   (1)   A person shall be exempt from prosecution under this section if
the person beautifies unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial
properties located within any municipality.
      (2)   For the purpose of this division (D), UNOCCUPIED AND ABANDONED
RESIDENTIAL AND INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY means any real estate:
         (a)   In which the taxes have not been paid for a period of at least
two years; and
         (b)   Which has been left unoccupied and abandoned for a period of at
least one year.
      (3)   For the purpose of this division (D), BEAUTIFIES means to
landscape, to clean up litter, or to repair dilapidated conditions on, or to
board up windows and doors.
   (E)   No person shall be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of unoccupied and abandoned residential and industrial property which
that person beautifies pursuant to division (D) of this section.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a person from entering a building or
upon the land of another for emergency purposes. For purposes of this division
(F), EMERGENCY means a condition or circumstance in which an individual is or
is reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   (G)   Division (A)(1)(d) does not apply to a peace officer or other official
of a unit of government who enters a building or land in the performance of his
or her official duties.
   (H)   A violation of division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), or (A)(1)(d)
of this section is a Class B misdemeanor. A violation of division (A)(1)(5) of
this section is a Class A misdemeanor.
   (I)   A person may be liable in any civil action for money damages to the
owner of the land he or she entered upon with a motor vehicle as prohibited
under division (A)(1)(e) of this section. A person may also be liable to the
owner for court costs and reasonable attorney's fees. The measure of damages
shall be: (i) the actual damages, but not less than $250, if the vehicle is
operated in a nature preserve or registered area as defined in Sections 3.11
and 3.14 of the Illinois Natural Areas Preservation Act; (ii) twice the actual
damages if the owner has previously notified the person to cease trespassing;
or (iii) in any other case, the actual damages, but not less than $50. If the
person operating the vehicle is under the age of 16, the owner of the vehicle
and the parent or legal guardian of the minor are jointly and severally liable.
For the purposes of this division (I):
      (1)   LAND includes, but is not limited to, land used for crop land,
fallow land, orchard, pasture, feed lot, timber land, prairie land, mine spoil
nature preserves and registered areas. LAND does not include driveways or
private roadways upon which the owner allows the public to drive.
      (2)   OWNER means the person who has the right to possession of the land,
including the owner, operator or tenant.
      (3)   VEHICLE has the same meaning as provided under ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5,
§ 1-217.
   (J)   This section does not apply to the following persons while serving
process:
      (1)   A person authorized to serve process under Section 2-202 of the
Code of Civil Procedure; or
      (2)   A special process server appointed by the circuit court.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.03 DAMAGING VILLAGE PROPERTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to:
      (1)   Knowingly damage any village property without the village's
consent.
      (2)   Recklessly, by means of fire or explosion, damage village property
without the village's consent.
      (3)   Knowingly start a fire on village land without the consent of the
village.
      (4)   Knowingly deposit on village land or in a village building any
stink bomb or any offensive- smelling compound which thereby tends to interfere
with the use by the village of its land or buildings.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, PROPERTY means anything of value
including, but not limited to real estate, money, commercial instruments,
written instruments representing or embodying rights concerning anything of
value, labor, or services, things affixed to or found on land or part of or
affixed to any building, electricity, gas, or water.
Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.04 DAMAGING PROPERTY.
   No person shall damage, destroy, deface any public or private property
without permission of the owner.
(‘73 Code, § 43.08) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 131.05 THEFT.
   A person commits theft when he knowingly:
   (A)   Obtains or exerts unauthorized control over property of the owner,
having a value of not exceeding $150; or
   (B)   Obtains by deception control over property of the owner, having value
of not exceeding $150; or
   (C)   Obtains by threat control over property of the owner, having value of
not exceeding $150; or
   (D)   Obtains control over stolen property having a value of not exceeding
$150, knowing the property to have been stolen by another, or under such
circumstances as would reasonably induce him to believe that the property was
stolen; and
      (1)   Intends to deprive the owner permanently of the use or benefit of
the property; or
      (2)   Knowingly uses, conceals or abandons the property in such manner as
to deprive the owner permanently of such use or benefit; or
      (3)   Uses, conceals or abandons the property knowing such use,
concealment or abandonment probably will deprive the owner permanently of such
use or benefit.
   (E)   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than
$500.
(‘73 Code, § 43.17)
CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC ORDER
Section
   
132.01   Disorderly conduct
   
132.02   Curfew
   
132.03   Possession of tobacco or electronic nicotine delivery system by minors
   
132.04   Truancy
   
132.05   Possession of cannabis by persons under 21
   
132.06   Drug paraphernalia prohibited
§ 132.01 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   No person shall engage in disorderly conduct in the village. Any of the
following acts constitute disorderly conduct;
   (A)   Making, aiding or assisting in making any improper noise, riot,
disturbance, breach of the peace or diversion tending to a breach of the peace.
   (B)   Assaulting, striking or deliberately injuring another person.
   (C)   Engaging in or aiding or abetting any fight, quarrel or other
disturbance.
   (D)   Disturbing any religious service, funeral, public or private meeting
place of amusement, or assembly of persons.
   (E)   Collecting in crowds for unlawful purposes, or for any purpose to the
annoyance or disturbance of other persons.
   (F)   Loitering continuously in public places or being idle or dissolute and
going about begging.
   (G)   Being intoxicated in public places, or in any place to the annoyance
or disturbance of other persons.
   (H)   Resisting or obstructing the performance of one known to be a police
officer or any authorized act within the police officer's official capacity; or
impersonating a police officer.
   (I)   Assisting any person in custody of police to escape or furnishing any
weapon, drugs, or liquor to any such person.
   (J)   Assembling with two or more other persons for the purpose of using
force or violence to disturb the public peace.
   (K)   Failing to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person known to be a
peace officer, where three or more persons are committing acts of disorderly
conduct in the immediate vicinity, which acts are likely to cause substantial
harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance or alarm.
   (L)   Lodging in or being in out-houses, sheds, barns, stables or unoccupied
buildings, or being a vagrant.
   (M)   Engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain money or
other valuable thing, or the practice of fortune telling, palmistry, card
reading, astrology, clairvoyancy or other scheme to obtain money or other
value.
   (N)   Giving any false alarm of fire, danger or disturbance to any person,
or false information to any peace officer or fireman or any village officer.
   (O)   Making a telephone call with intent to annoy another, whether or not
conversation ensues.
   (P)   Engaging in obscene or indecent activities or entertainment, or any
lewd or lascivious behavior, or appearing in public in a state of nudity.
   (Q)   Maintaining or being in houses of ill fame or gaming houses, or
engaging in or soliciting unlawful sexual actions.
   (R)   Using any obscene, profane, threatening or inciting language in any
public place.
   (S)   Throwing stones or missiles in public places or at any person or
property, or using, brandishing or threatening to use any missile, or dangerous
weapon or object.
   (T)   Damaging or defacing trees, bushes, gardens, fences, windows, signs,
buildings, monuments, or vehicles or engaging in any acts of vandalism.
   (U)   Abusing, beating or cruelly injuring any animal, or attempting to kill
or wound any bird other than a sparrow, crow, or blackbird.
   (V)   Urinating in public.
(‘73 Code, § 43.01) (Am. Ord. 1006, passed 7-7-08) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 132.02 CURFEW.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for a person less than 18 years of age to be
present at or upon any public assembly, building, place, street, or highway at
the following times unless accompanied and supervised by a parent or legal
guardian, or unless engaged in a business or occupation which the laws of the
state or this code or other ordinances of the village authorize a person less
than 18 years of age to perform:
         (a)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Friday and 6:00 a.m. on Saturday;
         (b)   Between 11:00 p.m. on Saturday and 6:00 a.m. on Sunday; and
         (c)   Between 10:00 p.m. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive, and 6:00
a.m. on the following day.
      (2)   This division shall not apply to a child who is, with the consent
of the child's parent or guardian, either participating in, going to or
returning from a school sanctioned activity or an expressive religious or
associational activity protected by either federal or state law, including but
not limited to the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right
of assembly.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian or other person to
knowingly permit a person in his or her custody or control to violate division
(A) above.
   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section
shall be guilty of a petty offense and shall be fined not less than $25 nor
more than $500.
(Am. Ord. 887, passed 5-17-04; Am. Ord. 1073, passed 12-20-10)
Statutory reference:
   Authority to impose curfew, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5
§ 132.03 POSSESSION OF TOBACCO OR ELECTRONIC NICOTINE DELIVERY SYSTEM BY
MINORS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 18 years to have
in his or her possession any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but
not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco or
sipping tobacco, while upon any public sidewalks, public thoroughfares, public
streets, highways, public parks or any property of a public school or any other
public areas within the village limits.
   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have
in his or her possession, tobacco, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products as defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 675 (Prevention of Tobacco
Use by Persons under 21 Years of Age and Sale and Distribution of Tobacco
Products Act) within the village limits.
   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.
(Ord. 913, passed 3-21-05; Am. Ord. 1218, passed 10-12-20)
§ 132.04 TRUANCY.
   (A)   (1)   It is unlawful for any minor who is subject to compulsory
education by statute or court order to be present in any public place or on the
premises of any establishment within the village while the school the minor is
required to attend is in session.
      (2)   This division shall not apply to minors engaged in the following:
         (a)   Accompanied by a parent, guardian, custodian, or responsible
adult when the minor is excused from school;
         (b)   Involved in a bona fide emergency;
         (c)   Going to, or returning to home or school from a medical
appointment without detour;
         (d)   Going to, or returning to home or school from employment
pursuant to a cooperative school vocation program without any detour;
         (e)   In possession of valid proof that the minor student has
permission to leave the school campus;
         (f)   A bona fide participant in any alternative education or home
schooling program;
         (g)   An authorized or excused absence from school, including but not
limited to lunch periods.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian, or responsible
adult supervising a minor, to knowingly permit or, by insufficient control,
allow the minor to be present in any public place or on the premises of any
establishment within the village while the school the minor is required to
attend is in session.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any owner, operator, or any employee of an
establishment to allow a minor to be present or to remain upon the premises of
the establishment while in violation of this section. It shall be an
affirmative defense, however, if the owner, operator, or employee of the
establishment notifies the Police Department immediately upon discovering that
a suspected violation of this has occurred on the premises of the
establishment.
   (D)   (1)   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $75.00 but not more than $500.00.
      (2)   In lieu of a fine, a first minor offender may be ordered to perform
ten hours of court-approved community service. A subsequent minor offender may
be ordered to perform court-approved community service in addition to the
minimum fine.
      (3)   Parents, guardians, or custodians may be ordered to attend a court-
approved parenting class or other counseling related to parenting.
      (4)   In addition to the penalties above, the minor’s parents, guardians,
or custodians may be required by the court to pay restitution to the village
for all costs incurred for the custody or care of the minor, or for any damages
caused directly or indirectly by the minor.
(Ord. 939, passed 2-21-06)
§132.05 POSSESSION OF CANNABIS BY PERSONS UNDER 21.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to
possess cannabis, as defined under the Illinois Cannabis Control Act (ILCS Ch.
720, Act 550, §3). An exception shall be if the person in possession is a
qualified patient under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Program Act
(ILCS Ch. 410, Act 130).
   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.
(Ord. 1218, passed 10-12-20)
§132.06 DRUG PARAPHERNALIA PROHIBITED.
   (A)   Definition. For the purposes of this section, the following definition
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.
         (a)   All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are
used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this Act
(meaning the Controlled Substances Act of the state). It includes, but is not
limited to:
            1.   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
            2.   Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in
manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing or preparing
controlled substances;
            3.   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for
use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
            4.   Testing equipment used, intended for use or designed for use
in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
            5.   Scales and balances used, intended for use or designed for use
in weighing or measuring controlled substances;
            6.   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use or designed for
use in cutting controlled substances;
            7.   Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use or designed
for use in removing twigs and seeds from, or in otherwise cleaning or refining,
marijuana;
            8.   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons and mixing devices used,
intended for use or designed for use in compounding controlled substances;
            9.   Capsules, balloons, envelopes and other containers used,
intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
            10.   Containers and other objects used, intended for use or
designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
            11.   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances
into the human body;
            12.   Objects used, intended for use or designed for use in
ingesting, inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
               A.   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic
pipes with or without screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls;
               B.   Water pipes;
               C.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
               D.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
               E.   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand;
               F.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
               G.   Chamber pipes;
               H.   Carburetor pipes;
               I.   Electric pipes;
               J.   Air-driven pipes;
               K.   Chillums;
               L.   Bongs; and
               M.   Ice pipes or chillers.
         (b)   In determining whether an object is DRUG PARAPHERNALIA, a court
or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically relevant
factors, the following:
            1.   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
            2.   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in
control of the object, under any state or federal law relating to any
controlled substance;
            3.   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of this Act;
            4.   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
            5.   The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the
object;
            6.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner,
or of anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons whom he or she
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a
violation of this Act; the innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, as to a direct violation of this Act shall not prevent a finding
that the object is intended for use, or designed for use as DRUG PARAPHERNALIA;
            7.   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object
concerning its use;
            8.   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
            9.   National and local advertising concerning its use;
            10.   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
            11.   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
            12.   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of
the object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
            13.   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in
the community; and
            14.   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (B)   Forfeiture of property.
      (1)   All articles defined in division (A) above shall be subject to
forfeiture.
      (2)   Property subject to forfeiture under this section may be seized by
any peace officer upon process issued by any court having jurisdiction over the
property. Seizure by any police officer without process may be made:
         (a)   If the property subject to seizure has been the subject of a
prior judgment in favor of the village in an ordinance violation proceeding;
and
         (b)   If there is probable cause to believe that the property is
directly or indirectly dangerous to health or safety.
      (3)   In the event of seizure pursuant to division (B)(2) above,
proceedings under division (B)(4) below shall be instituted promptly.
      (4)   Property taken or detained under this section shall not be subject
to replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the Chief of Police, subject
only to the order and judgments of the Circuit Court having jurisdiction over
the forfeiture proceedings. When property is seized under this section, the
Chief of Police may:
         (a)   Place the property under seal;
         (b)   Remove the property to a place designated by him or her; or
         (c)   Take custody of the property and remove it to an appropriate
location for destruction.
   (C)   A person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section
shall be fined not less than $50 nor more than $500.
(Ord. 1218, passed 10-12-20)
CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION
Section
   
133.01   Resisting or obstructing a peace officer, firefighter, or correctional
institution employee
   
133.02   Refusing to aid an officer
   
133.03   Tampering with public notice
§ 133.01 RESISTING OR OBSTRUCTING A PEACE OFFICER, FIREFIGHTER, OR CORRECTIONAL
INSTITUTION EMPLOYEE.
   (A)   A person who knowingly:
      (1)   Resists arrest; or
      (2)   Obstructs the performance by one known to the person to be a peace
officer, firefighter, or correctional institution employee of any authorized
act within his or her official capacity commits a Class A misdemeanor.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, the term CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION
EMPLOYEE shall mean any person employed to supervise and control inmates
incarcerated in a penitentiary, state farm, reformatory, prison, jail, house of
correction, police detention area, half-way house, or other institution or
place for the incarceration or custody of persons under sentence for offenses
or awaiting trial or sentence for offenses, under arrest for an offense, a
violation of probation, a violation of parole, a violation of aftercare
release, a violation of mandatory supervised release, or awaiting a hearing or
preliminary hearing on setting the conditions of pretrial release, or who are
sexually dangerous persons or who are sexually violent persons; and FIREFIGHTER
means any individual, either as an employee or volunteer, of a regularly
constituted fire department of a municipality or fire protection district who
performs fire fighting duties, including, but not limited to, the fire chief,
assistant fire chief, captain, engineer, driver, ladder person, hose person,
pipe person, and any other member of a regularly constituted fire department.
FIREFIGHTER also means a person employed by the Office of the State Fire
Marshal to conduct arson investigations.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of this section if a
person resists or obstructs the performance of one known by the person to be a
firefighter by returning to or remaining in a dwelling, residence, building, or
other structure to rescue or to attempt to rescue any person.
   (D)   A person shall not be subject to arrest for resisting arrest under
this section unless there is an underlying offense for which the person was
initially subject to arrest.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.02 REFUSING TO AID AN OFFICER.
   No person, upon command, shall refuse or knowingly reasonably fail to aid a
person known by him to be a police officer in:
   (A)   Apprehending a person whom the officer is authorized to apprehend; or
   (B)   Preventing the commission by another of any offense.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 133.03 TAMPERING WITH PUBLIC NOTICE.
   (A)   A person commits tampering with public notice when he or she knowingly
and without lawful authority alters, destroys, defaces, removes or conceals any
public notice, posted according to law, during the time for which the notice
was to remain posted.
   (B)   Tampering with public notice is a petty offense.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 134: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC MORALS
Section
   
134.01   Public indecency
   
134.02   Obscenity
   
134.03   Harmful material
§ 134.01 PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   Any person of the age of 17 years and upwards who performs any of the
following acts in a public place commits a public indecency:
      (1)   An act of sexual penetration or sexual conduct; or
      (2)   A lewd exposure of the body done with intent to arouse or to
satisfy the sexual desire of the person.
   (B)   PUBLIC PLACE. For purposes of this section means any place where the
conduct may reasonably be expected to be viewed by others.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.02 OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Elements of the offense. A person commits obscenity when, with
knowledge of the nature or content thereof, or recklessly failing to exercise
reasonable inspection which would have disclosed the nature or content thereof,
he or she:
      (1)   Sells, delivers, or provides, or offers or agrees to sell, deliver,
or provide any obscene writing, picture, record, or other representation or
embodiment of the obscene;
      (2)   Presents or directs an obscene play, dance or other performance or
participates directly in that portion thereof which makes it obscene;
      (3)   Publishes, exhibits, or otherwise makes available anything obscene;
      (4)   Performs an obscene act or otherwise presents an obscene exhibition
of his or her body for gain;
      (5)   Creates, buys, procures, or possesses obscene matter or material
with intent to disseminate it in violation of this section, or of the penal
laws or regulations of any other jurisdiction; or
      (6)   Advertises or otherwise promotes the sale of material represented
or held out by him or her to be obscene, whether or not it is obscene.
   (B)   Obscene defined. Any material or performance is OBSCENE if:
      (1)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that, taken as a whole, it appeals to the prurient
interest;
      (2)   The average person, applying contemporary adult community
standards, would find that it depicts or describes, in a patently offensive
way, ultimate sexual acts or sadomasochistic sexual acts, whether normal or
perverted, actual or simulated, or masturbation, excretory functions, or lewd
exhibition of the genitals; and
      (3)   Taken as a whole, it lacks serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
   (C)   Interpretation of evidence.
      (1)   Obscenity shall be judged with reference to ordinary adults except
that it shall be judged with reference to children or other specially
susceptible audiences if it appears from the character of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination to be specially designed for or directed to
such an audience.
      (2)   Where circumstances of production, presentation, sale,
dissemination, distribution, or publicity indicate that material is being
commercially exploited for the sake of its prurient appeal, such evidence is
probative with respect to the nature of the matter and can justify the
conclusion that the matter is lacking in serious literary, artistic, political,
or scientific value.
      (3)   In any prosecution for an offense under this section, evidence
shall be admissible to show:
         (a)   The character of the audience for which the material was
designed or to which it was directed;
         (b)   What the predominant appeal of the material would be for
ordinary adults or a special audience, and what effect, if any, it would
probably have on the behavior of such people;
         (c)   The artistic, literary, scientific, educational, or other merits
of the material, or absence thereof;
         (d)   The degree, if any, of public acceptance of the material in this
state;
         (e)   Appeal to prurient interest, or absence thereof, in advertising
or other promotion of the material;
         (f)   Purpose of the author, creator, publisher, or disseminator.
   (D)   Permissive inference. The trier of fact may infer an intent to
disseminate from the creation, purchase, procurement, or possession of a mold,
engraved plate, or other embodiment of obscenity specially adapted for
reproducing multiple copies, or the possession of more than three copies of
obscene material.
   (E)   Affirmative defenses. It shall be an affirmative defense to obscenity
that the dissemination:
      (1)   Was not for gain and was made to personal associates other than
children under 18 years of age;
      (2)   Was to institutions or individuals having scientific or other
special justification for possession of such material.
   (F)   Forfeiture of property. A person who has been convicted previously of
the offense of obscenity and who is convicted of a second or subsequent offense
of obscenity is subject to the property forfeiture provisions set forth in
Article 124B of the Code of Criminal Procedure of 1963.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 134.03 HARMFUL MATERIAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession of, whether with or without
consideration.
      HARMFUL TO MINORS. Quality of any description or representation, in
whatever form, of nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse, when, taken as a whole:
         (a)   Predominantly appeals to the prurient interest in sex of minors;
         (b)   Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult
community in the state as a whole with respect to what is suitable material for
minors; and
         (c)   Lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value
for minors.
      KNOWINGLY. Having knowledge of the contents of the subject matter, or
recklessly failing to exercise reasonable inspection which would have disclosed
the contents thereof.
      MATERIAL. 
         (a)   Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, film, video game,
computer game, video or similar visual depiction, including such representation
or image which is stored electronically; or
         (b)   Any book, magazine, printed matter however reproduced, or
recorded audio of any sort.
      MINOR. Any person under the age of 18.
      NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion below the top of
the nipple, or the depiction of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
      SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one clothed
for sexual gratification or stimulation.
      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Acts of masturbation, sexual intercourse, or physical
contact with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or,
if such person be a female, breast.
      SEXUAL EXCITEMENT. The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   (B)   A person is guilty of distributing harmful material to a minor when he
or she:
      (1)   Knowingly sells, lends, distributes, exhibits to, depicts to, or
gives away to a minor, knowing that the minor is under the age of 18 or failing
to exercise reasonable care in ascertaining the person's true age:
         (a)   Any material which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sado-
masochistic abuse, or which contains explicit and detailed verbal descriptions
or narrative accounts of sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic
abuse, and which taken as a whole is harmful to minors;
         (b)   A motion picture, show or other presentation which depicts
nudity, sexual conduct or sado-masochistic abuse and is harmful to minors; or
         (c)   An admission ticket or pass to premises where there is exhibited
or to be exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation; or
      (2)   Admits a minor to premises where there is exhibited or to be
exhibited such a motion picture, show or other presentation, knowing that the
minor is a person under the age of 18 or failing to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the person's true age.
   (C)   In any prosecution arising under this section, it is an affirmative
defense:
      (1)   That the minor as to whom the offense is alleged to have been
committed exhibited to the accused a draft card, driver's license, birth
certificate or other official or apparently official document purporting to
establish that the minor was 18 years of age or older, which was relied upon by
the accused;
      (2)   That the defendant was in a parental or guardianship relationship
with the minor or that the minor was accompanied by a parent or legal guardian;
      (3)   That the defendant was a bona fide school, museum or public
library, or was a person acting in the course of his or her employment as an
official of such organization or retail outlet affiliated with and serving the
educational purpose of such organization;
      (4)   That the act charged was committed in aid of legitimate scientific
or educational purposes; or
      (5)   That an advertisement of harmful material as defined in this
section culminated in the sale or distribution of such harmful material to a
child under circumstances where there was no personal confrontation of the
child by the defendant, his or her employees or agents, as where the order or
request for such harmful material was transmitted by mail, telephone, internet
or similar means of communication and delivery of such harmful material to the
child was by mail, freight, internet or similar means of transport, which
advertisement contained the following statement, or a substantially similar
statement, and that the defendant required the purchaser to certify that he or
she was not under the age of 18 and that the purchase falsely stated that he or
she was under the age of 18:
NOTICE: It is unlawful for any person under the age of 18 to purchase the
matter advertised. Any person under the age of 18 that falsely states that he
or she is not under the age of 18 for the purpose of obtaining the material
advertised is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor under the laws of the State.
   (D)   The predominant appeal to prurient interest of the material shall be
judged with reference to average children of the same general age of the child
to whom the material was sold, lent, distributed pr given, unless it appears
from the nature of the matter or the circumstances of its dissemination or
distribution that it is designed for specially susceptible groups, in which
case the predominant appeal of the material shall be judged with reference to
its intended or probable recipient group.
   (E)   Distribution of harmful material in violation of this section is a
Class A misdemeanor. A second or subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (F)   Any person under 18 years of age who falsely states, either orally or
in writing, that he or she is not under the age of 18 years, or who presents or
offers to any person any evidence of age and identity that is false or not
actually his or her own with the intent of ordering, obtaining, viewing, or
otherwise procuring or attempting to procure or view any harmful material is
guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
   (G)   A person over the age of 18 who fails to exercise reasonable care in
ascertaining the true age of a minor, knowingly distributes to, or sends, or
causes to be sent, or exhibits to, or offers to distribute, or exhibits any
harmful material to a person that he or she believes is a minor is guilty of a
Class A misdemeanor. If that person utilized a computer web camera, cellular
telephone, or any other type of device to manufacture the harmful material,
then each offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (H)   Telecommunications carriers, commercial mobile service providers, and
providers of information services, including, but not limited to, Internet
service providers and hosting service providers, are not liable under this
section, except for willful and wanton misconduct, by virtue of the
transmission, storage, or caching of electronic communications or messages of
others or by virtue of the provision of other related telecommunications,
commercial mobile services, or information services used by others in violation
of this section.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21) Penalty, see §
130.99
CHAPTER 135: GAMBLING OFFENSES
Section
   
135.01   Definitions
   
135.02   Gambling
   
135.03   Keeping a gambling place
   
135.04   Seizure of gambling devices and gambling funds
§ 135.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.
   ACCESS and COMPUTER have the same meanings ascribed to them in ILCS Ch. 720,
Act 5, § 25-16(D).
   GAMBLING DEVICE. Any clock, tape machine, slot machine, or other machines or
device for the reception of money or other thing of value on chance or skill,
or upon the action of which money or other thing of value is staked, hazarded,
bet, won, or lost; or any mechanism, furniture, fixture, equipment, or other
device designed primarily for use in a gambling place. A GAMBLING DEVICE does
not include the following, as more specifically defined in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5,
§ 28-2 (a)(1) through (a)(4):
      (1)   Coin-in-the-slot operated mechanical devices.
      (2)   Vending machines.
      (3)   Crane games.
      (4)   Redemption machines.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system, or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server, and includes, but is not limited
to, an information service, system, or access software provider that provides
access to a network system commonly known as the internet, or any comparable
system or service and also includes, but is not limited to, a world wide web
page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other online service.
   LOTTERY. Any scheme or procedure whereby one or more prizes are distributed
by chance among persons who have paid or promised consideration for a chance to
win such prizes, whether such scheme or procedure is called a lottery, raffle,
gift, sale, or some other name, excluding savings promotion raffles authorized
under Section 5g of the Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank
Act, Section 42.7 of the Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B of the
National Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 25a), or Section 4 of the Home Owners’ Loan Act
(12 U.S.C. 1463) .
   POLICY GAME. Any scheme or procedure whereby a person promises or guarantees
by any instrument, bill, certificate, writing, token, or other device that any
particular number, character, ticket, or certificate shall in the event of any
contingency in the nature of a lottery entitle the purchaser or holder to
receive money, property, or evidence of debt.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2)
§ 135.02 GAMBLING.
   (A)   A person commits gambling when, within the corporate limits of the
village, when he or she:
      (1)   Knowingly plays a game of chance or skill for money or other thing
of value, unless excepted in division (B);
      (2)   Knowingly makes a wager upon the result of any game, contest, or
any political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (3)   Knowingly operates, keeps, owns, uses, purchases, exhibits, rents,
sells, bargains for the sale or lease of, manufactures, or distributes any
gambling device;
      (4)   Contracts to have or give himself or herself or another the option
to buy or sell, or contracts to buy or sell, at a future time, any grain or
other commodity whatsoever, or any stock or security of any company, as
described in ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1 (a)(4);
      (5)   Knowingly owns or possesses any book, instrument, or apparatus by
means of which bets or wagers have been, or are, recorded or registered, or
knowingly possesses any money which he has received in the courses of a bet or
wager;
      (6)   Knowingly sells pools upon the result of any game or contest of
skill or chance, political nomination, appointment, or election;
      (7)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any lottery or sells, offers to sell,
or transfers any ticket or share for any lottery;
      (8)   Knowingly sets up or promotes any policy game or sells, offers to
sell, or knowingly possesses or transfers any policy ticket, slip, record,
document, or other similar device;
      (9)   Knowingly drafts, prints, or publishes any lottery ticker or share,
or any policy ticket, slip, record, document or similar device, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state or foreign
government;
      (10)   Knowingly advertises any lottery or policy game, except for such
activity related to lotteries, bingo games, and raffles authorized by and
conducted in accordance with the laws of Illinois or any other state;
      (11)   Knowingly transmits information as to wagers, betting odds, or
changes in betting odds by telephone, telegraph, radio, semaphore, or similar
means; or knowingly installs or maintains equipment for the transmission or
receipt of such information; except that nothing in this division prohibits
transmission or receipt of such information for use in news reporting of
sporting events or contests; or
      (12)   Knowingly establishes, maintains, or operates an internet site
that permits a person to play a game of chance or skill for money or other
thing of value by means of the internet or to make a wager upon the result of
any game, contest, political nomination, appointment, or election by means of
the internet. This division (A)(12) does not apply to activities referenced in
division (B)(6)(a) and (b), (8)(a) and (b) and (15) of this section.
   (B)   Participants in any of the following activities shall not be convicted
of gambling:
      (1)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of chance
including without limitation contracts of indemnity or guaranty and life or
health or accident insurance.
      (2)   Offers of prizes, awards, or compensation to the actual contestants
in any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength, or
endurance or to the owners of animals or vehicles entered in such contest.
      (3)   Pari-mutuel betting as authorized by the law of this state.
      (4)   Manufacture of gambling devices, including the acquisition of
essential parts therefor and the assembly thereof, for transportation in
interstate or foreign commerce to any place outside this state when such
transportation is not prohibited by any applicable federal law.
      (5)   The game commonly known as “bingo,” when conducted in accordance
with ILCS Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.
      (6)   (a)   Lotteries when conducted by the state in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq. This exemption includes any activity conducted
by the Department of Revenue to sell lottery tickets pursuant to the provisions
of ILCS Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq. and its rules.
         (b)   The purchase of lottery tickets through the Internet for a
lottery conducted by the state under the program established in ILCS Ch. 20,
Act 1605, § 7.12.
      (7)   Possession of an antique slot machine that is neither used nor
intended to be used in the operation or promotion of any unlawful gambling
activity or enterprise. For the purpose of this division, an ANTIQUE SLOT
MACHINE is one manufactured 25 years ago or earlier.
      (8)   (a)   Raffles and poker runs when conducted in accordance with ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.
         (b)   The purchase of raffle chances for a raffle conducted in
accordance with the Raffles and Poker Runs Act.
      (9)   Charitable games when conducted in accordance with ILCS Ch. 230,
Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.
      (10)   Pull tabs and jar games when conducted under ILCS Ch. 230, Act 20,
§§ 1 et seq.
      (11)   Gambling games when authorized under the Illinois Gambling Act,
ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.
      (12)   (a)   Video gaming terminal games at a licensed establishment,
licensed truck stop establishment, licensed large truck stop establishment,
licensed fraternal establishment, or licensed veterans establishment when
conducted in accordance with the Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1
et seq.
         (b)   An annual fee of $25 shall be imposed for each video gaming
terminal operating under the Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et
seq. (Ord. 1103, passed 11-19-12)
      (13)   Games of skill or chance where money or other things of value can
be won but no payment or purchase is required to participate.
      (14)   Savings promotion raffles authorized under Section 5g of the
Illinois Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the
Illinois Credit Union Act, Section 5136B of the National Bank Act (12 U.S.C.
25a), or Section 4 of the Home Owners’ Loan Act (12 U.S.C. 1463).
      (15)   Sports wagering when conducted in accordance with the Sports
Wagering Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 45.
   (C)   Circumstantial evidence. In prosecutions under section, circumstantial
evidence shall have the same validity and weight as in any criminal
prosecution.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.03 KEEPING A GAMBLING PLACE.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, a GAMBLING PLACE is any real estate,
vehicle, boat, or any other property whatsoever used for the purposes of
gambling other than gambling conducted in the manner authorized by the Illinois
Gambling Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq., the Sports Wagering Act, ILCS
Ch. 230, Act 45, or the Video Gaming Act, ILCS Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.
Any person who knowingly permits any premises or property owned or occupied by
him or her or under his or her control to be used as a gambling place commits a
Class A misdemeanor. Each subsequent offense is a Class 4 felony.
   (B)   When any premises is determined by the circuit court to be a gambling
place:
      (1)   The premises is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and may be
proceeded against as such;
      (2)   All licenses, permits or certificates issued by the State of
Illinois or any subdivision or public agency thereof authorizing the serving of
food or liquor on such premises shall be void; and no license, permit or
certificate so cancelled shall be reissued for such premises for a period of 60
days thereafter; nor shall any person convicted of keeping a gambling place be
reissued such license for one year from his or her conviction and, after a
second conviction of keeping a gambling place, any such person shall not be
reissued such license; and
      (3)   The premises of any person who knowingly permits thereon a
violation of any section of this chapter shall be held liable for, and may be
sold to pay any unsatisfied judgment that may be recovered and any unsatisfied
fine that may be levied under any section of this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3)  Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 135.04 SEIZURE OF GAMBLING DEVICES AND GAMBLING FUNDS.
   (A)   Every device designed for gambling which is incapable of lawful use or
every device used unlawfully for gambling shall be considered a gambling device
and shall be subject to seizure, confiscation, and destruction by village
authorities. As used in this section, a GAMBLING DEVICE includes any slot
machine and includes any machine or device constructed for the reception of
money or other thing of value and so constructed as to return or cause someone
to return on chance to the player thereof money, property, or a right to
receive money or property. With the exception of any device designed for
gambling which is incapable of lawful use, no gambling device shall be
forfeited or destroyed unless an individual with a property interest in the
device knows of the unlawful use thereof.
   (B)   Every gambling device shall be seized and forfeited as contraband to
the county wherein the seizure occurs. Any money or other thing of value
integrally related to acts of gambling shall be seized and forfeited as
contraband to the county wherein the seizure occurs.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b))
CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
Section
Litter
   
136.01   Definitions
   
136.02   Dumping or depositing of litter prohibited; exemptions
   
136.03   Dumping or depositing litter from motor vehicle prohibited
   
136.04   Accumulation of litter prohibited
   
136.05   Presumption of violation by operator throwing litter from motor
vehicle
   
136.06   Receptacles required in public areas
   
136.07   Power of court to order removal of litter
LITTER
§ 136.01 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
136.01 through
136.07 the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings
ascribed to them respectively.
   LITTER. Any discarded, used, or unconsumed substance or waste. LITTER may
include, but is not limited to, any garbage, trash, refuse, cigarettes, debris,
rubbish, grass clippings, or other lawn or garden waste; newspaper, magazines,
glass, metal, plastic or paper containers, or other packaging construction
material, abandoned vehicle, as defined in ILCS Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 1-100 et
seq., motor vehicle parts, furniture, oil, carcass of a dead animal, any
nauseous or offensive matter of any kind; any object likely to injure any
person or create a traffic hazard, potentially infectious medical waste as
defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360; or anything else of an unsightly or
unsanitary nature, which has been discarded, abandoned, or otherwise disposed
of improperly.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3)
   MOTOR VEHICLE. As defined in
Chapter 70 of this Code of Ordinances.
§ 136.02 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING OF LITTER PROHIBITED; EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, leave, cause, or
permit the dumping, depositing, dropping, throwing, discarding, or leaving of
litter upon any public or private property in this city, or upon or into any
river, lake, pond, or other stream or body of water in this village unless:
      (1)   The property has been designated by the city or any of its agencies
for the disposal of litter, and the litter is disposed of on that property in
accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the state Pollution
Control Board;
      (2)   The litter is placed into a receptacle or other container intended
by the owner or tenant in lawful possession of that property for the deposit of
litter;
      (3)   The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of the
property or has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in lawful
possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner
or tenant and does not create a public health or safety hazard, a public
nuisance, or a fire hazard;
      (4)   The person is acting under the direction of proper public officials
during special cleanup days; and/or
      (5)   The person is lawfully acting in or reacting to an emergency
situation where health and safety is threatened, and removes and properly
disposes of any litter, including but not limited to potentially infectious
medical waste as defined in ILCS Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360, when the emergency
situation no longer exists.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   An individual convicted of violating this section by disposing of
litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any other penalty, be required
to maintain litter control for 30 days over a designated portion of that
highway, including, at the discretion of the agency having jurisdiction over
the section of the highway in question, the site where the offense occurred, as
provided in section 50 of the Illinois Adopt-a-Highway Act (ILCS Ch. 605, Act
120, §§ 1 et seq.).
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §§ 4 and 8)
§ 136.03 DUMPING OR DEPOSITING LITTER FROM MOTOR VEHICLE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall dump, deposit, drop, throw, discard, or otherwise
dispose of litter from any motor vehicle upon any public highway, upon any
public or private property or upon or into any river, lake, pond, stream, or
body of water in this city except as permitted under §
136.02 (A)(1) through (5). Nor shall any person transport, by any means,
garbage or refuse from any dwelling, residence, place of business, farm, or
other site to and deposit the material in, around, or on top of trash barrels
or other receptacles placed along public highways or at roadside rest areas.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   An individual convicted of violating this section by disposing of
litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any other penalty, be required
to maintain litter control for 30 days over a designated portion of that
highway, including, at the discretion of the agency having jurisdiction over
the section of the highway in question, the site where the offense occurred, as
provided in section 50 of the Illinois Adopt-a-Highway Act (ILCS Ch. 605, Act
120, §§ 1 et seq.).
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §§ 5 and 8)
§ 136.04 ACCUMULATION OF LITTER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall allow litter to accumulate upon real property, of
which the person charged is the owner or tenant in control, in such a manner as
to constitute a public nuisance or in such a manner that the litter may be
blown or otherwise carried by the natural elements on to the real property of
another person.
   (B)   (1)   Any person convicted of a violation of this section shall be
fined not less than $10 nor more than $500.
      (2)   An individual convicted of violating this section by disposing of
litter upon a public highway may, in addition to any other penalty, be required
to maintain litter control for 30 days over a designated portion of that
highway, including, at the discretion of the agency having jurisdiction over
the section of the highway in question, the site where the offense occurred, as
provided in section 50 of the Illinois Adopt-a-Highway Act (ILCS Ch. 605, Act
120, §§ 1 et seq.).
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, §§ 6 and 8)
§ 136.05 PRESUMPTION OF VIOLATION BY OPERATOR THROWING LITTER FROM MOTOR
VEHICLE.
   Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped, or dumped from any motor
vehicle not carrying passengers for hire, the presumption is created that the
operator of that motor vehicle has violated §
136.03, but that presumption may be rebutted.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 9)
§ 136.06 RECEPTACLES REQUIRED IN PUBLIC AREAS.
   (A)   In order to assist the public in complying with this chapter, the
owner or person in control of any property which is held out to the public as a
place for assemblage, the transaction of business, recreation, or as a public
way shall cause to be placed and maintained receptacles for the deposit of
litter of sufficient volume and in sufficient numbers to meet the needs of the
numbers of people customarily coming on or using the property.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE
TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS includes, but is not limited to commercially operated
parks, campgrounds, drive-in restaurants, automobile service stations, business
parking lots, car washes, shopping centers, marinas, boat launching areas,
industrial parking lots, boat moorage and fueling stations, piers, beaches and
bathing areas, airports, roadside rest stops, drive-in movies, and shopping
malls; and PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR ASSEMBLAGE, RECREATION, OR AS A
PUBLIC WAY includes, but is not limited to any property that is publicly owned
or operated for any of the purposes stated in the definition in this division
for PROPERTY HELD OUT TO THE PUBLIC FOR THE TRANSACTION OF BUSINESS but
excludes state highway rights-of-way and rest areas located thereon.
   (C)   If no litter receptacles are placed on property described in this
section, the owner or person in control of the property shall be fined $100 for
violating this section. If the owner or person in control of the property has
placed litter receptacles on his property but the number or size of the
receptacles has proved inadequate to meet the needs of the numbers of people
coming on or using his property as indicated by the condition and appearance of
that property, and the owner or person in control has failed to provide
sufficient or adequate receptacles within ten days after being made aware of
that fact by written notice from the police, he shall be fined $25 for each
receptacle not so provided and maintained.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 10)
§ 136.07 POWER OF COURT TO ORDER REMOVAL OF LITTER.
   The penalties prescribed in this chapter are in addition to, and not in lieu
of any penalties, rights, remedies, duties, or liabilities which may be
otherwise imposed or conferred by a court.
(ILCS Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8)
CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS
Section
Deadly Weapons
   
137.01   Unlawful use of weapons
   
137.02   Exemptions
   
137.03   Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition
   
137.04   Defacing identification marks of firearms
   
137.05   Confiscation and disposition of weapons
   
137.06   Firearms
Statutory reference:
   Firearms and ammunition registration, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 83-1 through
83-16.3
   Boarding aircraft with weapons, ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, §§ 84-1 through 84-7
DEADLY WEAPONS
§ 137.01 UNLAWFUL USE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly:
      (1)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry any bludgeon, black-
jack, slung-shot, sand-club, sand-bag, metal knuckles or other knuckle weapon
regardless of its composition, throwing star, or any knife, commonly referred
to as a switchblade knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand
pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle of the
knife, or a ballistic knife, which is a device that propels a knifelike blade
as a projectile by means of a coil spring, elastic material or compressed gas;
      (2)   Carry or possess with intent to use the same unlawfully against
another, a dagger, dirk, billy, dangerous knife, razor, stiletto, broken bottle
or other piece of glass, stun gun or taser or any other dangerous or deadly
weapon or instrument of like character;
      (3)   Carry on or about his person or in any vehicle, a tear gas gun
projector or bomb or any object containing noxious liquid gas or substance,
other than an object containing a non-lethal noxious liquid gas or substance
designed solely for personal defense carried by a person 18 years of age or
older;
      (4)   Carry or possess in any vehicle or concealed on or about his
person, except when on his land or in his own abode, legal dwelling, or fixed
place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as
an invitee with that person's permission, any pistol, revolver, stun gun,
taser, or other firearm, except that this division (A)(4) does not apply to or
affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid Firearm Owner’s Identification Card; or
         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act; or
      (5)   Set a spring gun;
      (6)   Possess any device or attachment of any kind designed, used or
intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm;
      (7)   Sell, manufacture, purchase, possess or carry:
         (a)   A MACHINE GUN, which shall be defined for the purposes of this
division (A)(7) as any weapon, which shoots, is designed to shoot, or can be
readily restored to shoot, automatically more than one shot without manually
reloading by a single function of the trigger, including the frame or receiver
of any such weapon, or sell, manufacture, purchase, possess, or carry any
combination of parts designed or intended for use in converting any weapon into
a machine gun, or any combination or parts from which a machine gun can be
assembled if such parts are in the possession or under the control of a person;
         (b)   Any rifle having one or more barrels less than 16 inches in
length or a shotgun having one or more barrels less than 18 inches in length or
any weapon made from a rifle or shotgun, whether by alteration, modification,
or otherwise, if such a weapon as modified has an overall length of less than
26 inches;
         (c)   Any bomb, bomb-shell, grenade, bottle or other container
containing an explosive substance of over one-quarter ounce for like purposes,
such as, but not limited to, black powder bombs and Molotov cocktails or
artillery projectiles; or
      (8)   (a)   Carry or possess any firearm, stun gun or taser or other
deadly weapon in any place which is licensed to sell intoxicating beverages, or
at any public gathering held pursuant to a license issued by any governmental
body or any public gathering at which an admission is charged, excluding a
place where a showing, demonstration, or lecture involving the exhibition of
unloaded firearms is conducted;
         (b)   This division (A)(8) does not apply to any auction or raffle of
a firearm held pursuant to a license or permit issued by a governmental body,
nor does it apply to persons engaged in firearm safety courses;
      (9)   Carry or posses in a vehicle or on or about his person any pistol,
revolver, stun gun or taser or firearm or ballistic knife, when he is hooded,
robed or masked in such manner as to conceal his identity;
      (10)   Carry or possess on or about his person on any public street,
alley, or other public lands within this village, except when an invitee
thereon or therein for the purpose of display of the weapon or the lawful
commerce in weapons, or except when on his land or in his own abode, legal
dwelling, or fixed place of business, or on the land or in the legal dwelling
of another person as an invitee with that person's permission, any pistol,
revolver, stun gun or taser, or other firearm, except that this subdivision
does not apply to or affect transportation of weapons that meet one of the
following conditions:
         (a)   Are broken down in a non-functioning state;
         (b)   Are not immediately accessible;
         (c)   Are unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box,
shipping box, or other container by a person who has been issued a currently
valid Firearm Owner’s Identification Card; or
         (d)   Are carried or possessed in accordance with the Firearm
Concealed Carry Act by a person who has been issued a currently valid license
under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act.
      (11)   Sell, manufacture, deliver, import, possess, or purchase any
assault weapon attachment or .50 caliber cartridge in violation of ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 24-1.9 or any explosive bullet. EXPLOSIVE BULLET shall mean the
projectile portion of an ammunition cartridge which contains or carries an
explosive charge which will explode upon contact with the flesh of a human or
an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal case having a projectile affixed at
the front thereof and a cap or primer at the rear end thereof, with the
propellant contained in the tube between the projectile and the cap;
      (12)   Carry or possess on or about his or her person while in a building
occupied by a unit of government, a billy club, other weapon of like character,
or other instrument of like character intended for use as a weapon. For the
purposes of this section, BILLY CLUB means a short stick or club commonly
carried by police officers which is either telescopic or constructed of a solid
piece of wood or other man-made material;
      (13)   Manufactures, possesses, sells, or offers to sell, purchase,
manufacture, import, transfer, or use any device, part, kit, tool, accessory,
or combination of parts that is designed to and functions to increase the rate
of fire of a semiautomatic firearm above the standard rate of fire for
semiautomatic firearms that is not equipped with that device, part, or
combination of parts;
      (14)   Carries or possesses any assault weapon or .50 caliber rifle in
violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.9; or
      (15)   Manufactures, sells, delivers, imports, or purchases any assault
weapon or .50 caliber rifle in violation of ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.9.
   (B)   A STUN GUN or TASER, as used in division (A), means:
      (1)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which fires one or several barbs attached to a length of wire
and which, upon hitting a human, can send out a current capable of disrupting
the person's nervous system in such a manner as to render him incapable of
normal functioning; or
      (2)   Any device which is powered by electrical charging units, such as
batteries, and which, upon contact with a human or clothing worn by a human,
can send out a current capable of disrupting the person's nervous system in
such a manner as to render him incapable of normal functioning.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)) Penalty, see §
130.99
Statutory reference:
   For provisions concerning silencers on guns; machine guns; possession of
weapon while hooded, robed and/or masked; or possession of weapons on school or
university grounds (all of which are felonies), see ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1
(a)(6), (7), and (9) respectively
§ 137.02 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Sections
137.01(A)(3), (4), (10) and (12) do not apply to or affect any of the
following:
      (1)   Peace officers or any person summoned by a peace officer to assist
in making arrests or preserving the peace while actually engaged in assisting
the officer.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents, and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails, and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense, while in the performance of their official duty, or while
commuting between their homes and place of employment.
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard or the Reserve Officers Training Corps,
while in the performance of their official duty.
      (4)   Special agents employed by a railroad or a public utility to
perform police functions or guards of armored car companies while actually
engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or commuting
between their homes and places of employment; watchmen while actually engaged
in the performance of the duties of their employment.
      (5)   Persons licensed as private security contractors, private
detectives or private alarm contractors or employed by a private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency licensed by
the Department of Professional Regulation if their duties include the carrying
of a weapon under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 446, §§ 1 et seq., while
actually engaged in the performance of the duties of their employment or
commuting between their homes and places of employment. A person shall be
considered eligible for this exemption if he or she has completed the required
20 hours of training for a private security contractor, private detective, or
private alarm contractor, or employee of a licensed private security
contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor agency and 28 hours
of required firearm training, and has been issued a firearm control card by the
Department of Financial and Professional Regulation. Conditions for the renewal
of firearm control cards issued under the provisions of this section shall be
the same as for those cards issued under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act
446, §§ 1 et seq. The firearm control card shall be carried by the private
security contractor, private detective, or private alarm contractor, or
employee of the licensed private security contractor, private detective, or
private alarm contractor agency at all times when he or she is in possession of
a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control card.
      (6)   Any person regularly employed in a commercial or industrial
operation as a security guard for the protection of persons employed and
private property related to that commercial or industrial operation while
actually engaged in the performance of their duty or traveling between sites or
properties belonging to the employer, and who, as a security guard, is a member
of a security force registered with the Department of Financial and
Professional Regulation; provided, that the security guard has successfully
completed a course of study, approved by and supervised by the state Department
of Financial and Professional Regulation consisting of not less than 48 hours
of training which shall include theory of law enforcement, liability for acts,
and the handling of weapons. A person shall be considered eligible for this
exemption if he or she has completed the required 20 hours of training for a
security officer and 20 hours of required firearm training and has been issued
a firearm control card by the state Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for the renewal of firearm control cards issued under
the provisions of this section shall be the same as for those cards issued
under the provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 446, §§ 1 et seq. The firearm control
card shall be carried by the security guard at all times when he is in
possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control
card.
      (7)   Agents and investigators of the Illinois Legislative Investigating
Commission authorized by the Commission to carry the weapons specified in §
137.01(A)(3) and (4) while on duty in the course of any investigation for the
Commission.
      (8)   Persons employed by a financial institution as a security guard for
the protection of other employees and property related to that financial
institution, while actually engaged in the performance of their duties,
commuting between their homes and places of employment, or traveling between
sites or properties owned or operated by the financial institution, and who, as
a security guard, is a member of a security force registered with the
Department; provided that any person so employed has successfully completed a
course of study, approved by and supervised by the state Department of
Financial and Professional Regulation, consisting of not less than 48 hours of
training which includes theory of law enforcement, liability for acts, and the
handling of weapons. A person shall be considered to be eligible for this
exemption who has completed the required 28 hours of training for a security
officer and 20 hours of required firearm training and who has been issued a
firearm control card by the state Department of Financial and Professional
Regulation. Conditions for renewal of firearm control cards issued under the
provisions of this section shall be the same as for those issued under the
provisions of ILCS Ch. 225, Act 446, §§ 1 et seq. The firearm control card
shall be carried by the security guard at all times when he or she is in
possession of a concealable weapon permitted by his or her firearm control
card. For purposes of this division, FINANCIAL INSTITUTION means a bank,
savings and loan association, credit union, or company providing armored car
services.
      (9)   Any person employed by an armored car company to drive an armored
car while actually engaged in the performance of his duties.
      (10)   Persons who have been classified as peace officers pursuant to
ILCS Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.
      (11)   Investigators of the Office of the State's Attorneys Appellate
Prosecutor authorized by the board of governors of the Office of the State's
Attorneys Appellate Prosecutor to carry weapons pursuant to ILCS Ch. 725, Act
210, §§ 1 et seq.
      (12)   Special investigators appointed by a State's Attorney under ILCS
Ch. 55. Act 5, § 3-9005.
      (13)   Probation officers while in the performance of their duties, or
while commuting between their homes, places of employment or specific locations
that are part of their assigned duties, with the consent of the chief judge of
the circuit for which they are employed, if they have received weapons training
according to requirements of the Peace Officer and Probation Officer Firearm
Training Act.
      (14)   Court Security Officers while in the performance of their official
duties, or while commuting between their homes and places of employment, with
the consent of the Sheriff.
      (15)   A person employed as an armed security guard at a nuclear energy,
storage, weapons or development site or facility regulated by the Nuclear
Regulatory Commission who has completed the background screening and training
mandated by the rules and regulations of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
      (16)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of weapons to persons
authorized under (A)(1) through (14) of this section to possess those weapons.
   (A-5) Section
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(10) do not apply to or affect any person carrying a
concealed pistol, revolver, or handgun and the person has been issued a
currently valid license under the Firearm Concealed Carry Act at the time of
the commission of the offense.
   (A-6) Section
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(10) do not apply to or affect a qualified current or
retired law enforcement officer or a current or retired deputy, county
correctional office, or correctional officer of the Department of Corrections
qualified under the laws of this state or under the federal Law Enforcement
Officers Safety Act.
   (B)   Sections
137.01(A)(4) and (10) do not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Members of any club or organization organized for the purpose of
practicing shooting at targets upon established target ranges, whether public
or private, or patrons of the ranges while the members or patrons are using
their firearms on those target ranges;
      (2)   Duly authorized military or civil organizations while parading with
the special permission of the Governor;
      (3)   Hunters, trappers, or fishermen while engaged in lawful hunting,
trapping, or fishing under the provisions of the Wildlife Code or the Fish and
Aquatic Life Code;
      (4)   Transportation of weapons that are broken down in a nonfunctioning
state or are not immediately accessible.
      (5)   Carrying or possessing any pistol, revolver, stun gun or taser or
other firearm on the land or in the legal dwelling of another person as an
invitee with that person's permission.
   (C)   Section
137.01(A)(1) does not apply to the purchase, possession, or carrying of a
black-jack or slung-shot by a police officer.
   (D)   Section
137.01(A)(7) does not apply to or affect any of the following:
      (1)   Peace officers while in performance of their official duties.
      (2)   Wardens, superintendents and keepers of prisons, penitentiaries,
jails and other institutions for the detention of persons accused or convicted
of an offense.
      (3)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States of the Illinois National Guard, which in the performance of their
official duty.
      (4)   Manufacture, transportation, or sale of machine guns to persons
authorized under divisions (D)(1) through (3) of this section to possess
machine guns, if the machine guns are broken down in a non-functioning state or
are not immediately accessible.
      (5)   (a)   Persons licensed under federal law to manufacture any weapon
from which eight or more shots or bullets can be discharged by a single
function of the firing device, or ammunition for such weapons, and actually
engaged in the business of manufacturing such weapons or ammunition, but only
with respect to activities which are within the lawful scope of such business,
such as the manufacture, transportation, or testing of such weapons or
ammunition. The exemption does not authorize the general private possession of
any weapon from which eight or more shots or bullets can be discharged by a
single function of the firing device, but only such possession and activities
as are within the lawful scope of a licensed manufacturing business described
in this division (D)(5).
         (b)   During transportation, such weapons shall be broken down in a
non-functioning state or not immediately accessible.
      (6)   (a)   The manufacture, transport, testing, delivery, transfer or
sale, and all lawful commercial or experimental activities necessary thereto,
of rifles, shotguns, and weapons made from rifles or shotguns, or ammunition
for such rifles, shotguns or weapons, where engaged in by a person operating as
a contractor or subcontractor pursuant to a contract or subcontract for the
development and supply of such rifles, shotguns, weapons or ammunition to the
United States government or any branch of the Armed Forces of the United
States, when such activities are necessary and incident to fulfilling the terms
of such contract.
         (b)   The exemption granted under this division (D)(6) shall also
apply to any authorized agent of any such contractor or subcontractor who is
operating within the scope of his employment, where such activities involving
such weapon, weapons or ammunition are necessary and incident to fulfilling the
terms of such contract.
      (7)   A person possessing a rifle with a barrel or barrels less than 16
inches in length if: the person has been issued a curios and relics license
from the U.S. Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives; or the
person is an active member of a bona fide, nationally recognized military re-
enacting group and the modification is required and necessary to accurately
portray the weapon for historical re-enactment purposes; the re-enactor is in
possession of a valid and current re-enacting group membership credential; and
the overall length of the weapon as modified is not less than 26 inches.
   (E)   Section
137.01(A)(8) does not apply to any owner, manager, or authorized employee of
any place specified in that division or to any law enforcement officer.
   (F)   Sections
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(10) do not apply to members of any club or organization
organized for the purpose of practicing shooting at targets upon established
target ranges, whether public or private, while using their firearms on those
target ranges.
   (G)   Section
137.01(A)(11) does not apply to:
      (1)   Members of the Armed Services or Reserve Forces of the United
States or the Illinois National Guard, while in the performance of their
official duty.
      (2)   Bona fide collectors of antique or surplus military ordnance.
      (3)   Laboratories having a department of forensic ballistics, or
specializing in the development of ammunition or explosive ordnance.
      (4)   Commerce, preparation, assembly, or possession of explosive bullets
by manufacturers of ammunition licensed by the federal government, in
connection with the supply of those organizations and persons exempted by
division (F)(1) above, or like organizations and persons outside this state, or
the transportation of explosive bullets to any organization or person exempted
in this section by a common carrier or by a vehicle owned or leased by an
exempted manufacturer.
   (H)   (1)   Section
137.01(A)(6) does not apply to or affect persons licensed under federal law to
manufacture any device or attachment of any kind designed, used, or intended
for use in silencing the report of any firearm, firearms, or ammunition from
those firearms equipped with those devices, and actually engaged in the
business of manufacturing those devices, firearms, or ammunition, but only with
respect to activities that are within the lawful scope fo that business, such
as the manufacture, transportation, or testing of those devices, firearms, or
ammunition. This exemption does not authorize the general private possession of
any device or attachment of any kind designed, used, or intended for use in
silencing the report of any firearm, but only such possession and activities as
are within the lawful scope of a licensed manufacturing business described in
this division (H). During transportation, these devices shall be detached from
any weapon or not immediately accessible.
      (2)   Section
137.01(A)(4) and (A)(10) do not apply to or affect any parole agent or parole
supervisor who meets the qualifications and conditions prescribed in Section 3-
14-1.5 of the Unified Code of Corrections.
      (3)   Section
137.01(A)(6) does not apply to a peace officer while serving as a member of a
tactical response team or special operations team. A peace officer may not
personally own or apply for ownership of a device or attachment of any kind
designed, used, or intended for use in silencing the report of any firearm.
These devices shall be owned and maintained by lawfully recognized units of
government whose duties include the investigation of criminal acts.
   (I)   An information or indictment based upon a violation of any provision
of this subchapter need not negative any exemptions contained in this
subchapter. The defendant shall have the burden of proving such an exemption.
   (J)   Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or affect the
transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol or revolver, stun gun,
taser, or other firearm consigned to a common carrier operating under license
with the state or the federal government where such transportation, carrying,
or possession is incident to the lawful transportation in which the common
carrier is engaged. Nothing in this subchapter shall prohibit, apply to, or
affect the transportation, carrying, or possession of any pistol, revolver,
stun gun, taser, or other firearm not the subject of and regulated by ILCS Ch.
720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7) or division (C) of this section above, which is
unloaded and enclosed in a case, firearm carrying box, shipping box, or other
container by the possessor of a valid firearm owner's identification card.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2)
§ 137.03 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM AMMUNITION.
   A person commits the offense of unlawful possession of firearms or firearm
ammunition when:
   (A)   He is under 18 years of age and has in his possession any firearm of a
size which may be concealed upon the person;
   (B)   He is under 21 years of age, has been convicted of a misdemeanor other
than a traffic offense or adjudged delinquent, and has any firearms or firearm
ammunition in his possession;
   (C)   He is a narcotic addict and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in
his possession;
   (D)   He has been a patient in a mental institution within the past five
years and has any firearms or firearm ammunition in his possession. For the
purposes of this division (D):
      (1)   MENTAL INSTITUTION means any hospital, institution, clinic,
evaluation facility, mental health center, or part thereof, which is used
primarily for the care or treatment of persons with mental illness.
      (2)   PATIENT IN A MENTAL INSTITUTION means the person was admitted,
either voluntarily or involuntarily, to a mental institution for mental health
treatment, unless the treatment was voluntary and solely for an alcohol abuse
disorder and no other secondary substance abuse disorder or mental illness; or
   (E)   He is a person with an intellectual disability and has any firearms or
firearm ammunition in his possession.
   (F)   He has in his possession any explosive bullet. For the purposes of
this section, EXPLOSIVE BULLET means the projectile portion of an ammunition
cartridge which contains or carries an explosive charge which will explode upon
contact with the flesh of a human or an animal. CARTRIDGE means a tubular metal
case having a projectile fixed at the front thereof and a cap or primer at the
rear end thereof with the propellent contained in the tube between the
projectile and the cap.
   (G)   Nothing in division (A) above prohibits a person under 18 years of age
from participating in any lawful recreational activity with a firearm such as,
but not limited to, practice shooting at targets upon established public or
private target ranges or hunting, trapping, or fishing in accordance with the
Wildlife Code or the Fish and Aquatic Life Code.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.04 DEFACING IDENTIFICATION MARKS OF FIREARMS.
   (A)   Any person who shall knowingly or intentionally change, alter, remove,
or obliterate the name of the importer's or manufacturer's serial number of any
firearm commits a Class 2 felony.
   (B)   A person who possesses any firearm upon which any such importer's or
manufacturer's serial number has been changed, altered, removed, or obliterated
commits a Class 3 felony.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent a person from making repairs,
replacement of parts, or other changes to a firearm if those repairs,
replacement of parts or changes cause the removal of the name of the maker,
model or other marks of identification other than the serial number of the
firearm's frame or receiver.
   (D)   A prosecution for a violation of this section may be commenced within
six years after the commission of the offense.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-5) Penalty, see §
130.99
§ 137.05 CONFISCATION AND DISPOSITION OF WEAPONS.
   Upon conviction of an offense in which a weapon was used or possessed by the
offender, any weapon seized may be confiscated by the trial court for further
disposition consistent with state law.
(ILCS Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6(a))
§ 137.06 FIREARMS.
   (A)   Weapons prohibited. It shall be unlawful to fire or discharge any
firearm, air gun, bow and arrow, crossbow, slingshot or other dangerous weapon
within the village limits so that the bullet, bb, pellet, arrow or other
projectile enters the village limits without the prior written permission of
the Village President or his or her designated representative. The permit shall
prescribe the limits within which such firing may be made and may be revoked at
any time.
   (B)   Exception. The firing or discharging of a weapon is permissible upon
property zoned agricultural provided the person or persons discharging the
weapon has first obtained the permission of the landowner. All discharge of
weapons must comply with state and federal regulations.
   (C)   Law enforcement exception. This section shall not apply to any duly
commissioned officer of the law discharging any weapon in the performance of
his or her duty.
(‘73 Code, § 43.02) (Am. Ord. 1243, passed 10-11-21)
TITLE XV: LAND USAGE
   Chapter
      
150.   BUILDING REGULATIONS
      
151.   SUBDIVISION CODE
         
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULES AND BONDS
         
APPENDIX B: FIGURES
      
152.   ZONING CODE
         
APPENDIX A: SUMMARY TABLE OF LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
         
APPENDIX B: FIGURES
         
APPENDIX C: LOT TERMS
      
153.   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
      
154.   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
CHAPTER 150: BUILDING REGULATIONS
Section
General Provisions
   
150.01   Adoption of Building Code
   
150.02   Definitions
   
150.03   Fees
Building Demolition
   
150.10   Demolitions of buildings
   
150.11   Fee
Commercial Design
   
150.20   Commercial design
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 150.01 ADOPTION OF BUILDING CODE.
   (A)   There is hereby adopted by the village for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition,
equipment use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings and
structures, including permits and penalties, Chapter 7 of the Building
Regulations of the Revised Code of Ordinances of the County of St. Clair
County, Illinois, and the codes adopted therein, which shall henceforth be
known as the “Building Code of the Village of Millstadt,” being particularly
the current Chapter 7 of the St. Clair County Building Regulations and all
subsequent additions and updates thereof as they relate to the foregoing, save
and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended, and
the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length
herein, and from the date on which this Code shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling in the construction of all buildings and
structures therein contained within the corporate limits of the village.
   (B)   All fees set forth in Chapter 7 of the Building Regulations of the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the County of St. Clair County, Illinois are
amended to be the fees established by written contract between the village and
the County of St. Clair County, Illinois. In the absence of a specific written
agreement, the fees set forth in Chapter 7 of the Building Regulations of the
Revised Code of Ordinances of the County of St. Clair County, Illinois shall be
the fees assessed by the village.
   (C)   Section 7-6-12 of Chapter 7 of the Building Regulations of the Revised
Code of Ordinances of the County of St. Clair County, Illinois is amended to
read as follows:
7-6-12 Penalties. Any person, corporation, company or firm, whether as
principal, agent, employee or otherwise, who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any of the
rules, regulations or provisions provided and set forth in this chapter or who
refuses or neglects to comply with or obey any of the rules, orders or
regulations issued hereunder, shall upon conviction be fined not less than $50
nor more than $750 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
(Ord. 980, passed - - )
§ 150.02 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD OF APPEALS or ELECTRICAL COMMISSION. Includes and means the Board of
Appeals of the village.
   CODE OFFICIAL or BUILDING OFFICIAL. Means and includes the title of Building
Commissioner of the village.
(Ord. 980, passed - - )
§ 150.03 FEES.
   The village is hereby authorized to charge the fees set forth in Schedule I
for inspections which are conducted by the village. In the event of a conflict
between Schedule I and the fees set in §
150.01(B), the fees in Schedule I shall be used.
SCHEDULE I
Inspection Fee
SCHEDULE I
Inspection               Fee
Fence                    $30
Shed                     $30
Concrete patio           $40
Deck                     $40
   Footing inspection $25
   Final inspection   $25
Porch                    $40
   Footing Inspection $25
   Final Inspection   $25
Driveway/sidewalk        $20
Concrete/asphalt         $20
   Residential        $80
   Commercial
Sign                     $40
   Final inspection   $25
Re-inspection            $25
 
(Ord. 1226, passed 12-14-20)
BUILDING DEMOLITION
§ 150.10 DEMOLITIONS OF BUILDINGS.
   (A)   A person obtaining a permit to demolish a building from the village is
hereinafter referred to as "permittee".
   (B)   A permittee shall obtain a permit for demolition of a building or
structure from the Building Commissioner. The permit shall require such
information as the Building Commissioner deems necessary. Before a permit shall
be issued, the permittee shall submit proof to the Building Commissioner that
all the utilities connected to this structure or premises have been notified to
the impending demolition.
   (C)   The permittee is responsible to first notify all utility companies of
the demolition prior to beginning the project. All rules and regulations of the
utility companies along with the Village and the County Code must be complied
with before, during and after the demolition project.
   (D)   The permittee shall fill only with sand or clean dirt up to the level
grade of the existing surrounding area. The top layer of fill shall be a
minimum of 12 inches soluble soil, capable of encouraging vegetation. Prior to
backfilling, the premises shall be inspected by the Building Commissioner to
verify compliance with all village ordinances. Backfilling prior to obtaining
the necessary inspection by the Building Commissioner may result in removal of
the fill material at the property owner's expense in order to verify
compliance. After demolition of the building and removal of the debris created
thereby, the real estate premises shall be graded, seeded and maintained in
conformity with the established street grades at curb level (where there are
curbs) or street level (where there are no curbs) at the subject building site.
Finish grading shall be made and maintained so as to avoid the accumulation of
water on the subject real estate premises or the illegal diversion of water
onto adjoining real estate premises.
   (E)   The permittee shall comply with all regulations of the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.
   (F)   Lumber, lathe, or other organic materials will not be permitted in the
fill.
   (G)   Material which is not suitable for fill material shall not be used,
but shall be removed from the site of the work and disposed of at the
permittee's expense.
   (H)   All of any materials to be disposed of shall be disposed of at a State
of Illinois approved disposal area.
   (I)   Any authorized material remaining on the premises at the completion of
the work will delay final acceptance until such material has been removed.
   (J)   The premises shall be left in an orderly condition, clean and free of
debris and or building materials.
   (K)   The burning of materials is not authorized or permitted. All
combustible materials shall be removed from the premises.
   (L)   Care shall be taken by a permittee to prevent the occurrence of voids
in the fill or undue settlement after the fill has been placed. Basement floors
shall be removed and cavities (such as but not limited to those created by
basements, cisterns, septic tanks or cellars) shall be backfilled with dirt
(and not with debris or other types of combustible or noncombustible fill
material).
   (M)   The operation of the permittee shall be done in such a manner as to
avoid hazard to persons and properties, interference with the use of adjacent
buildings, and the interruption of free passage to and from such buildings.
   (N)   After work is started on the building, it should be continued promptly
and expeditiously. The permittee shall satisfactorily complete the work within
30 days from the date of issuance of the permit. If the work is not completed,
the village shall be entitled to make a claim to have the bonding company
complete the job.
   (O)   The permittee shall, at all times, reserve and comply with the federal
and state laws, local ordinances, and regulations which affect the conduct of
his work.
   (P)   The permittee shall be solely responsible for all claims and
liabilities arising from or based upon the violation of any such laws,
ordinances, or regulations, whether by himself or his employees.
   (Q)   The permittee shall provide the village with a performance bond in the
amount to be determined by the Building Commissioner and the bond is to be
approved by the Building Commissioner to guarantee that he shall comply with
all the terms of this section.
(Ord. 1079, passed 5-16-11)
§ 150.11 FEE.
   The fee for obtaining a permit to demolish shall be $100.
(Ord. 1079, passed 5-16-11)
COMMERCIAL DESIGN
§ 150.20 COMMERCIAL DESIGN.
   The following commercial design section shall apply to commercial land plats
designated B-1 Community Business and B-2 Highway Business District.
   (A)   Design guidelines.
      (1)   The massing (volume and shape) of a building should complement the
massing of existing surrounding buildings.
      (2)   The scale of the building (including height, size, bulk,
aesthetics, and intensity) should blend in with the existing area.
      (3)   Architectural design should create visual interest through the use
of building materials, colors, and textures.
      (4)   (a)   When large structures are required, mass should be broken up
through setbacks, building effects, varied heights, and other architectural
design techniques.
         (b)   The Zoning Administrator shall have the authority to recommend a
building’s mass and its compatibility to surrounding buildings.
      (5)   Monotony of design in single and multiple building projects is
discouraged.
      (6)   Architectural treatments (e.g. building material, colors, facade
design, roof lines, and screening) shall be consistent and compatible on all
sides. The design of all walls in a single color with little or no detailing is
discouraged.
      (7)   Exterior mechanical, electrical, rooftop equipment, generators, and
the like shall be screened from public view.
      (8)   Dumpsters are to be located behind the structure and are required
to be surrounded by a trash enclosure. The trash enclosure material shall be
compatible to the site design.
   (B)   Construction materials and exterior facade requirements:
      (1)   All exterior walls shall consist of a minimum of 60% masonry and/or
a combination of glass and masonry on each face. Masonry materials include
concrete masonry units (cmu), brick, and natural stone. In addition, all
exterior walls from ground level to a minimum of 6'0" above ground level must
consist of masonry and/or glass. Smooth faced units are not permitted unless as
an accent. All concrete masonry units shall be integrally colored (no standard
grey block materials are permitted).
      (2)   Other materials including synthetic stone, cast stone, EIFS, metal
for detailing, copper, slate, and plaster stucco will be allowed as accent
materials only.
      (3)   Exterior construction materials not allowed are: synthetic
materials (vinyl siding, vinyl wrapped details including gutters and
downspouts), plastics, corrugated metal and aluminum siding, unfinished
concrete, wood shingles, rough sawn or untreated wood.
      (4)   No transition in material can be made at an outside corner of a
building. All materials must turn the corner to a point where the corner looks
solidly finished. Material changeover at corners gives a look of thinness and
should be avoided.
      (5)   The Zoning Administrator has the authority to recommend or deny any
additional construction materials upon review.
   (C)   Existing structures, remodels, and expansions.
      (1)   Any existing commercial building addition or expansion that exceeds
50% of the existing square footage shall follow the requirements of this
section for both the addition and the existing building.
      (2)   Additions and expansions of less than 50% of the existing building
shall follow the first three divisions of the design guidelines of this
section. These addition and expansion plans will also need to be submitted to
the Zoning Administrator for review and approval.
(Ord. 1121, passed 4-21-14)
CHAPTER 151: SUBDIVISION CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
151.01   Title
   
151.02   Scope
   
151.03   Purpose
   
151.04   Interpretation
   
151.05   Application of chapter
   
151.06   Suitability of land for subdivision development
   
151.07   Definitions
   
151.08   When subdivision plats will not be required
   
151.09   Disclaimer of liability
Preliminary Plat
   
151.20   Procedure
   
151.21   Preliminary plat requirements
   
151.22   Minimum standards of design
   
151.23   Approval of preliminary plan
Engineering Plans
   
151.35   Engineering plan procedure
   
151.36   Minimum standards of improvement
   
151.37   Approval of design plans
Final Plats
   
151.50   Procedure
   
151.51   Final plat requirements
   
151.52   Approval of final plat; requirements
   
151.53   Guarantees
Administration and Enforcement
   
151.65   Enforcement officer; duties
   
151.66   Subdivision variances
   
151.67   Amendments
   
151.68   Advisory report; action by Village Board of Trustees
   
151.69   Schedule of fees
   
151.70   Recording of final plat
   
151.71   Vacation of plats
   
151.72   Maintenance of improvements
Parks Land/Cash Contribution
   
151.80   Intent; scope
   
151.81   Compliance
   
151.82   Minimum greenspace requirement
   
151.83   General requirements for land contributions
   
151.84   Improvements required for land dedication
   
151.85   Criteria for a contribution in lieu of park site
   
151.86   Land/cash contribution requirement
   
151.87   Minor subdivisions
Masonry Coverage
   
151.90   Definitions
   
151.91   Masonry coverage requirements and procedure
   
Appendix A:   Schedules and bonds
   
Appendix B:   Figures
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 151.01 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known, referred to, and cited as “The Subdivision
Code.”
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.02 SCOPE.
   (A)   For the purpose of present and future development of the village and
for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, morals and welfare of
persons living within the territory governed, the provisions and regulations
hereafter contained shall govern the subdividing and platting of lands lying
within the corporate limits of the municipality and within all unincorporated
territory located within one and one-half miles of the municipality, as now or
hereafter existing, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. Within the
area of jurisdiction of the village, the provisions of the state statutes are
hereby adopted as part of the Official Plan of the village.
   (B)   This chapter prescribes procedures for the subdivision or
resubdivision of land within the area of jurisdiction of the village and
comprises the procedures, requirements, standards and specifications with
respect thereto.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.03 PURPOSE.
   In accordance with state law, this chapter regulates the subdivision and
development of land in order to assist in achieving the following specific
objectives:
   (A)   To preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare;
   (B)   To implement the Village Comprehensive Plan and the Official Map;
   (C)   To provide pleasant living environment by furthering the orderly
layout and development of land;
   (D)   To avoid legal and other problems by requiring that subdivided land be
properly monumented and recorded;
   (E)   To conserve and increase the value of land, improvements and buildings
throughout the village;
   (F)   To preserve the village's natural beauty and topography to the maximum
feasible extent;
   (G)   To protect against injury or damage caused by pollution, storm water
runoff, or erosion and sedimentation;
   (H)   To provide safe and convenient access to new developments and to avoid
traffic congestion and unnecessary public expenditures by requiring the proper
location, design and construction of streets and sidewalks;
   (I)   To insure the proper installation and maintenance of adequate water
mains, sanitary sewers, storm water sewers and other utilities and services;
and
   (J)   To insure that in conservation areas, adequate parks and similar
facilities can be made available to serve the residents of new developments.
(Ord. passed - - )
Statutory reference:
   For provisions governing Plan Commissions, see ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-
4 through 11-12-12
   For provisions governing plats and surveys, see ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, § 1
et seq.
§ 151.04 INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   This chapter is intended as minimum requirements to provide for
coordinated, efficient and economic development of the village, to insure the
adequacy of street and utility facilities, and to promote the public health,
safety and welfare.
   (B)   Thus, in accordance with state law, whenever this chapter imposes
higher standards than the County Subdivision Ordinance and the Plat Act,
Chapter 109, the higher standards shall supersede the county regulations in the
unincorporated territory located within the subdivision jurisdiction of the
village.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.05 APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   No lot, tract or parcel of land in a subdivision as defined in §
151.07 may be conveyed unless a final plat of the property has been approved
according to the requirements and provisions of this chapter and recorded in
the office of the County Recorder of Deeds, except in those instances listed in
§
151.08 when subdivision plats will not be required.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.06 SUITABILITY OF LAND FOR SUBDIVISION DEVELOPMENT.
   Land unsuitable for subdivision development due to drainage, flood hazard
area, hillside area, rock formation or any other condition(s) constituting a
danger to health, life or property shall not be approved for subdivision
development unless the subdivider presents evidence or data satisfactory to the
Plan Commission, establishing that the methods proposed to meet any such
condition(s) are adequate to avoid any danger to health, life, or property.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.07 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. All definitions
not otherwise noted, but contained in
Ch. 152, Zoning Code and this Code of Ordinances are hereby adopted by
reference.
   AREA, GROSS. The entire area within the boundary lines of the territory
proposed for subdivision, including the area to be dedicated for street and
alley rights-of-way and public use.
   BARRIER (NATURAL or ARTIFICIAL). Any street, highway, river, pond, canal,
railroad, levee, embankment or screening by a fence or hedge.
   COMMISSION. The Plan Commission of the village.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The Plan or any portion thereof adopted by the village
for the coordinated physical development, including, among other things, plans
and programs regarding the location, character and extent of highways,
transportation routes, bridges, public buildings or uses, utilities, schools,
residential, commercial or industrial land uses, parks, forests, dams, drainage
facilities and projects affecting the conservation of natural resources of the
village.
   CUL-DE-SAC. A short, minor local street, having only one end open for
vehicular traffic, and the other end permanently terminated by a turnaround for
vehicles.
   DESIGN. The arrangement of uses on the land and use of land for easements,
lots and rights-of-way, including material, alignment, grade and width of these
elements.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA. All land subject to periodic inundation from overflow or
natural waterways when subjected to the maximum possible runoff from three
inches of rain per hour as calculated by approved engineering methods subject
to periodic ponding.
   HILLSIDE AREA. An area with an average slope of 20% or more.
   IMPROVEMENT. Refers to site grading, street work and utilities (including
water, sewer, electric, gas and storm water), to be installed or agreed to be
installed by the subdivider on land to be used for public or private streets,
and easements or other purposes as are necessary for the general use of lot
owners in the subdivision.
   IMPROVEMENT PLAN. The engineering plans showing types of materials and
construction details for the physical structures and facilities to be installed
both in or in conjunction with the subdivision.
   LAND USE PLAN. The long-range plan for the desirable use of land in the
village as officially adopted and as amended from time to time by the Village
Board of Trustees or appropriate corporate authority.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building,
or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials and
which abuts upon a street, alley or other appropriate means of access.
   PARKING LANE. An auxiliary lane of a street used primarily for vehicular
parking.
   PLANS. All of the drawings, including plats, cross-sections, profiles,
working details and specifications, which the subdivider prepares or has
prepared to show the character, extent and details of improvements required in
§§
151.35 through
151.37, and which plans shall conform to any requirements of the Plan
Commission as to scale and details for submittal to the appropriate officials
of the village for consideration, approval or disapproval.
   PLAT. The maps, drawings, charts and other documents complying with all
applicable provisions of this chapter which constitute the plan for subdivision
and which the subdivider submits to the village for consideration of approval.
   PLAT, FINAL. A plat prepared to the requirements of §§
151.50 through
151.53 and if approved will be submitted to the County Recorder of Deeds for
recordation.
   PLAT, PRELIMINARY. A plat drawn upon tracing paper or other material from
which reproduction can be made and conforming to the requirements of §§
151.20 through
151.23.
   PREMISES. A lot, together with all the buildings and uses thereon.
   PUBLIC SEWER and WATER FACILITIES. Those water and/or sewer facilities of
the village, county, the state, the federal and/or of a sanitary sewer district
and/or privately owned public facilities which comply with applicable public
health standards.
   RE-SUBDIVISION. See SUBDIVISION.
   ROAD, COUNTY. A term denoting a tract of land which is used primarily for
the purpose of vehicular movement and includes all of the facilities and
improvements within the rights-of-way. This tract of land must have been
presented to and accepted by the County Superintendent of Highways.
   ROADBED. The graded portion of a street upon which the base course, surface
course, shoulders and median are constructed.
   ROADWAY. The entire improved portion of the street, including shoulders,
parking lanes, travel way, curbs and gutter which lies between the right-of-way
lines.
   SETBACK LINE. The line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line
establishing the minimum space to be provided as the front, side or rear yard.
   STREET. A general term denoting a public or private way for the purpose of
vehicular travel. The term includes all facilities which normally occur within
the right-of-way; it shall also include such other designation for a street as:
a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue, boulevard,
lane, place, drive, court, or as otherwise designated, but excluding an alley
or a way for pedestrian use only.
   STREET, ARTERIAL. A street designed or utilized primarily for high vehicular
speeds and heavy volumes of traffic on a continuous route, with intersections
at grade, and which may have direct access to abutting properties, and on which
geometric design and traffic control measures are used to expedite the safe
movement of through traffic.
   STREET, COLLECTOR. A street which carries or is proposed to carry
intermediate volumes of traffic from local streets to arterial streets and
which may or may not be continuous.
   STREET, LOCAL (MINOR). A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties, providing for minimum speeds and traffic volumes.
   STREET, MARGINAL ACCESS or SERVICE ROAD. A local street parallel and
adjacent to arterial streets providing access to abutting properties.
   SLOPE. The degree of natural inclination of the existing ground.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed which requires permanent or temporary
location on the ground or is attached to something having a permanent or
temporary location on the ground.
   STUB. A street that is temporarily terminated, but that is planned for
future continuation.
   SUBDIVIDE. See SUBDIVISION.
   SUBDIVIDER. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, estate
or other group or combination acting as a unit, dividing or proposing to divide
land in a manner that constitutes a subdivision as herein defined.
   SUBDIVISION. The division of land into two or more lots or parcels for the
purpose of either immediate or future sale, rental or building development, or
any other uses, or the establishment or dedication of a public street or alley
through a tract of land regardless of size. The term SUBDIVISION shall also
include all re-subdivisions of land or lots.
   SUBDIVISION, MINOR. A division of land into two, but not more than four
lots, all of which front upon an existing street, not involving any new streets
or other rights-of-way, easements, improvements or other provisions for public
areas and facilities.
   TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area of land.
   TRAVEL WAY. That portion of a street used for the movement of vehicles,
exclusive of shoulders and auxiliary lanes.
   VACATE. To terminate the legal existence of right-of-way or subdivision, and
to so note on the final plat recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds.
   VARIANCE, SUBDIVISION. A relaxation in the strict application of the design
and improvement standards set forth in this chapter.
   ZONING ADMINISTRATOR. The Zoning Administrator or the person designated by
the Village Board of Trustees to enforce and administer the provisions of this
chapter or his duly appointed representative(s).
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.08 WHEN SUBDIVISION PLATS WILL NOT BE REQUIRED.
   (A)   The provisions of these regulations do not apply and no subdivision
plat is required in any of the following instances, however, all of the
resulting divisions shall conform to
Chapter 152, Zoning Code.
      (1)   The division or subdivision of land into parcels or tracts of five
acres or more in size which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (2)   The division of lots or blocks of less than one acre in any
recorded subdivision which does not involve any new streets or easements of
access;
      (3)   The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining
and contiguous land;
      (4)   The conveyance of parcels of land or interests therein for use as a
right-of-way for railroads or other public utility facilities and other pipe
lines which does not involve any new streets or easements of access;
      (5)   The conveyance of land for highway or other public purposes or
grants or conveyances relating to the dedication of land for public use or
instruments relating to the vacation of land impressed with a public use;
      (6)   Conveyances made to correct descriptions in prior conveyances;
      (7)   The sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following the
division into no more than two parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
existing on July 17, 1959, and not involving any new streets or easements of
access. However, a plat of survey shall be prepared by a registered surveyor
and submitted to the Plan Commission;
      (8)   The sale of a single lot of less than five acres from a larger
tract when a plat of a survey is made by a registered surveyor; provided that
this exemption shall not apply to the sale of any subsequent lots from the same
larger tract of land, as determined by the dimensions and configuration of the
larger tract on October 1, 1973, and provided also that this exemption does not
invalidate any local requirements applicable to the subdivision of land;
      (9)   The division of land for cemetery usage.
   (B)   Under the circumstances when subdivision plats are not required as
described above, the Plan Commission reserves the right to request a plat of
survey or other documentation if there is a need for said survey or
documentation in order to verify conformance to
Chapter 152, Zoning Code and/or to insure that the division of property is in
accordance with the purpose and objectives of this chapter as listed in §
151.03.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.09 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, council member, board member, agent or employee of the village shall
render himself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or
property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his
duties under this chapter. (See Local Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act,
ILCS Ch. 745, Act 10, § 1-101 et seq.)
   (B)   Any suit brought against any official, council member, board member,
agent or employee of this village as a result of any act required or permitted
in the discharge of his duties under this chapter shall be defended by the
Village Attorney until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Ord. passed - - )
PRELIMINARY PLAT
§ 151.20 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Pre-application conference. Before submitting a preliminary plan and
plat, the applicant is encouraged to confer with the Zoning Administrator and
the Plan Commission and other official units of government affected thereby as
well as those providing services to the area in question to initiate pre-
planning activities and obtain information and guidance before entering into
binding commitments or incurring substantial expense in the preparation of
detailed plans, surveys and other data.
   (B)   Applicability of subchapter.  
      (1)   No land within the subdivision jurisdiction of the village, other
than land that is specifically exempted from the requirements of this chapter,
as provided in §
151.08 shall be subdivided or developed except in compliance with the
regulations of this chapter and the applicable provisions of state law. No lot
in any subdivision shall be conveyed until:
         (a)   The portion of the subdivision in which the lot is located has
been improved in accordance with the requirements of this subchapter or until a
performance bond or other security has been posted to assure the completion of
such improvements; and
         (b)   The final plat of the subdivision has been approved by the
Village Board of Trustees and recorded in the office of the County Recorder of
Deeds.
      (2)   No building permit shall be issued to allow construction on any lot
conveyed in violation of this section.
   (C)   Minor subdivisions. Minor subdivisions as defined in §
151.07 may be exempted from the procedures and requirements for preliminary
plats and the subdivider may proceed to filing of the final plat for review.
Final plat procedures and requirements shall be as specified in §§
151.50 and
151.51(A)·
   (D)   Preliminary plan and plat.
      (1)   Subdivider. The subdivider shall file with the village at the
office of the Zoning Administrator ten copies of the preliminary plan and plat
at least ten days prior to the regularly scheduled Plan Commission meeting.
Such application shall include the following:
         (a)   Requested information. A written request to the Plan Commission
for preliminary review of such subdivision and a general description of the
location and size of the tract to be platted; the intent as to character type
and use of the property and structures to be developed; the deed restrictions
proposed, if any; a statement of mineral rights; the extent and character of
the improvements to be made by the subdivider, the zone district classification
(s) of the territory and compliance of the proposed subdivision thereto. If
appropriate, a description of any unique hardship or difficulty limiting the
physical development of the property under consideration and a description of
any past history of the property under consideration which is pertinent
thereto.
         (b)   Documentation. The necessary documentation in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter. (See §
151.21)
         (c)   Filing fee. A filing fee sufficient to cover the engineering
inspection fees to be incurred by the village.
      (2)   Procedure.  
         (a)   Distribute copies. The Zoning Administrator shall immediately
distribute a copy to the Village Board of Trustees' Water and Sewer Committee
(s); a copy to the School Superintendent(s); a copy to the Soil and Water
Conservation Service; a copy to the Village Engineer; a copy to the Mayor; two
copies to the Plan Commission; and a copy to the Fire Chief.
         (b)   Time constraints. The Commission shall review the preliminary
plat within 60 days from the date of application or the filing by the
subdivider of the last item of required supporting data, whichever date is
later, unless such time is extended by written mutual consent, and shall
determine whether the preliminary plat shall be approved as submitted; shall be
approved subject to certain conditions or modifications; or shall be
disapproved.
         (c)   Plan Commission review. The action of the Plan Commission shall
be noted in writing and if such preliminary plat is disapproved or is
conditionally approved, the Commission shall furnish written notice of such
action to the applicant setting forth the reasons for disapproval or
conditional approval and specifying with particularity the aspects in which the
preliminary plat fails to conform to this Code of Ordinance including the
comprehensive plan.
         (d)   Board of Trustees review. The Village Board of Trustees shall
accept or reject the preliminary plat within 30 days after its next regularly
scheduled meeting following the action granting approval of the preliminary
plat by the Commission, unless such time is extended by written mutual
agreement of the Village Board of Trustees and the applicant, or such
preliminary plat will be deemed as approved. The Village Board of Trustees
shall indicate by letter whether the preliminary plat is approved or
disapproved as submitted. If the preliminary plat is disapproved, the letter
shall state the reasons for disapproval.
         (e)   Office approval. A certified copy of the letter of approval or
disapproval by the Village Board of Trustees shall be attached to the
preliminary plat and shall be filed with the Village Clerk; one such copy shall
be filed with the Zoning Administrator, and one copy shall be returned to the
subdivider. Approval of the preliminary plat shall not qualify the preliminary
plat for recording with the County Recorder of Deeds.
         (f)   Rights and privileges of subdivider. Preliminary plat approval
shall confer upon the subdivider the following rights and privileges:
            1.   That the preliminary plat approval will remain in effect for a
one-year period. The applicant may, during this period, submit all of or part
or parts of the preliminary plat for final approval. In the event that the
subdivision is being developed in stages, the applicant may, by written mutual
agreement with the Plan Commission, have final approval of the last part of the
plat delayed for a period not to exceed three years from the date of the
preliminary plat approval. Any part of a subdivision which is being developed
in stages shall contain a tract of land at least one block in length.
            2.   That the general terms and conditions under which the
preliminary plat approval was granted will not be changed.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.21 PRELIMINARY PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   Every preliminary plat shall be prepared by a land surveyor registered in
the state. The preliminary plat to be provided by the subdivider shall meet and
include the following specifications and supporting data:
   (A)   Proposed name of the subdivision and location.
   (B)   Small key map showing the relation of the proposed subdivision to
section or U.S. survey lines and to platted subdivisions and dedicated streets
within 300 feet of the proposed subdivision.
   (C)   Names and addresses of the owner, subdivider, land planning consultant
and the Illinois Registered Land Surveyor who prepared the preliminary plat.
   (D)   Existing and proposed streets or alleys and rights-of-way on and
adjoining the site of the proposed subdivision; showing the names and including
street roadway and right-of-way widths, approximate gradients, types and widths
of pavement, curbs, sidewalks, crosswalks, planting strips and other pertinent
data, including classification of all streets as to function as established
herein.
   (E)   All lot lines adjacent to and abutting the subdivision.
   (F)   Layout of lots, showing approximate dimensions, numbers, lot area and
zone district classification(s).
   (G)   Parcels of land, if any, proposed to be dedicated or reserved for
schools, parks, playgrounds or other public, semi-public or community purposes
and use(s) of the area to be subdivided.
   (H)   Easements, existing and proposed, showing locations, widths and
purposes.
   (I)   Building setback line and dimensions.
   (J)   Location and size of existing public utilities and drainage ways or
facilities within or adjoining the proposed subdivision and the location and
size of nearest water trunk mains, interceptor sewer lines and other pertinent
utilities.
   (K)   Location, type and approximate size of utility improvements to be
installed.
   (L)   Tract boundary lines showing dimensions, bearings, angles and
references to known land lines.
   (M)   The gross area and net area acreage of the proposed subdivision, the
acreage of streets, and of any areas reserved for the common use of the
property owners within the subdivision and/or for public use.
   (N)   Where the topography has a significant bearing upon the street grades,
the plan of public utilities and drainage ways or facilities in the proposed
subdivision and when it would be difficult for the Plan Commission or the
Village Board of Trustees to understand the relation of the plan to the
existing topographic conditions, contour lines at not greater than two-foot
intervals shall be shown. Contour lines shall be shown for all hillside areas
and other areas of significant slope.
   (O)   Location of major water courses, ponding areas, natural drainage ways
and flood hazard areas.
   (P)   The preliminary plan shall be drawn to a scale of not greater than 100
feet to one-inch. However, if the resulting drawing would be over 42 inches
square, a scale of up to 200 feet to one-inch may be used.
   (Q)   North arrow and date.
   (R)   Whenever a large tract is intended to be developed in stages, and only
part of that tract is to be submitted for final plat approval, a preliminary
plat for subdivision of the entire tract shall be submitted.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.22 MINIMUM STANDARDS OF DESIGN.
   The subdivider shall conform to the following principles and standards of
land subdivision in the design of each subdivision or portion thereof. No
preliminary plat shall be approved unless it conforms to the following minimum
standards of design.
   (A)   Streets and alleys.
      (1)   The street and alley arrangement shall be such as to not impose
undue hardship upon the owners of adjoining property when they plat their own
land and seek to provide for convenient access thereto. Reserve strips
controlling access to streets are prohibited, except where their control is
placed with the Village Board of Trustees.
      (2)   The arrangement of rights-of-way in a subdivision shall provide for
the continuation of the existing streets or rights-of-way in adjoining areas,
unless the Plan Commission deems such continuation undesirable for reasons of
topography or design. Where subdivision streets or rights-of-way are
continuations or extensions of existing streets or rights-of-way, the width
thereof shall be of the same or greater width as the existing street or right-
of-way, except that in no case shall the street or right-of-way in the
subdivision be of less width than hereinafter provided.
      (3)   Where, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, it is desirable to
provide future street access to adjoining areas, the streets and rights-of-way
in the subdivision shall be extended to the property line. If deemed necessary
by the Plan Commission, any temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a
temporary turn-around. In no case shall access be denied to any parcel or part
of a parcel of ground by the subdividing of land.
      (4)   Streets shall intersect, as nearly as possible at right angles.
      (5)   Local street curb intersections shall be rounded by radii of at
least 15 feet; intersections involving collector or arterial streets shall have
radii of not less than 25 feet.
      (6)   Street jogs with center line offsets of less than 125 feet are
prohibited.
      (7)   Unless topography indicates a need for a greater length, dead-end
streets designed to be so permanently shall be no longer than 500 feet and
shall terminate in a circular open space having a radius at the outside of the
pavement of at least 45 feet (see
Appendix B, Figure 3) and a diameter at the outside of the right-of-way of at
least 100 feet.
      (8)   Local streets shall be designed so as to discourage through
traffic.
      (9)   No local (minor) street grade shall be in excess of 7% and no
collection street or arterial street grade shall be in excess of 5%, except as
otherwise approved by the Plan Commission due to adverse topographic
conditions. For adequate drainage, the minimum grade of any new street shall
not be less than ½%.
      (10)    The Plan Commission shall not approve streets which will be
subject to frequent inundation or flooding.
      (11)    Alleys shall be avoided in a single-family and two-family
district, except as required by this section, however they may be required in
multiple-family districts and commercial or industrial districts, unless other
definite and assured provision is made for service access, such as off-street
loading, unloading and parking consistent and adequate for the use proposed.
      (12)    Dead-end alleys shall not be permitted, except where provided
with adequate turn-around facilities at the dead-end, or where such dead-end
alleys provide the only access to off-street parking.
      (13)    Alleys, where provided shall have a right-of-way of not less than
20 feet.
      (14)    The minimum right-of-way of local streets, including marginal
access streets and cul-de-sacs, shall be 50 feet.
      (15)    The minimum right-of-way of secondary or collector streets shall
be 60 feet.
      (16)    The minimum right-of-way of arterial or primary streets shall be
80 feet.
      (17)    Intersections of more than two streets at one point shall be
avoided.
      (18)    Where the subdivision abuts in or contains an existing or
proposed arterial street, the Plan Commission may require that marginal access
streets be provided in order that no lots front on such existing or proposed
arterial street.
      (19)    Dedication of half-streets shall be discouraged, but may be
permitted whenever there is no other logical method of platting. However,
wherever there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to
the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be
platted, unless otherwise permitted by the Plan Commission.
   (B)   Drainage. No plat shall be approved for any subdivision which is
subject to flooding unless the plat conforms to the applicable requirements of
this chapter. (See Chapter 6, Article VI, Flood Plain Code.)
      (1)   No plat shall be approved for any subdivision or part thereof which
is subject to periodic flooding or which contains inadequate drainage
facilities or which makes adequate drainage of streets impossible. However, if
the subdivider agrees in writing to make improvements at his expense which
will, in the opinion of the Plan Commission, make the area safe for human
occupancy and use further provide adequate drainage for streets, then the
preliminary and final plat may be approved.
      (2)   Storm water drainage shall be discharged to marshlands, swamps,
retention basins or other treatment facilities. Diversion of storm water to
marshlands or swamps shall be considered by the Plan Commission for existing or
planned surface drainage. Marshlands and swamps used for storm water shall
provide for natural or artificial water level control.
      (3)   No existing ditch, stream, drain or drainage canal shall be
deepened, widened, rerouted or filled without written permission from the
village.
      (4)   Where artificial channels must be constructed to augment the
natural drainage system, such channels as well as the natural drainage ways may
be planned as part of a recreation trail system. Channels shall be designed to
be aesthetically compatible for recreational trail use.
      (5)   The drainage system shall be constructed and operational during
construction or as approved by the village.
      (6)   The natural drainage system shall be used as far as is feasible for
the storage and flow of runoff.
      (7)   No plat shall be recorded for any subdivision situated within 500
feet of any surface drain or watercourse serving a tributary area of 640 acres
or more until such plan or map has been reviewed by the Department of
Transportation, either independently or in cooperation with federal, state or
local agencies, for the purpose of determining, for the protection of persons
and property, the flood hazards involved, and a report thereon filed by that
Department with the County Recorder.
   (C)   Erosion and sediment control. The following standards shall be applied
in the subdivision and construction of land areas:
      (1)   The development shall conform to the natural limitations presented
by topography and soil so as to create the least potential for soil erosion.
      (2)   Natural plant covering shall be retained and protected so far as is
consistent with development of the site.
      (3)   When soil is exposed, the exposure shall be for the shortest
feasible period of time.
      (4)   Land shall be developed in increments of workable size such that
adequate erosion and siltation controls can be provided as construction
progresses. The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at any one
period of time.
      (5)   Erosion and siltation control measures shall be coordinated with
the different stages of development. Appropriate control measures shall be
installed prior to development when necessary to control erosion.
      (6)   Provision shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and after
development.
      (7)   Sediment basins, debris basins, desilting basins or silt traps
shall be installed and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
undergoing development.
      (8)   Temporary vegetation or where appropriate mulching or other
nonviable cover shall be used to protect areas exposed during development.
      (9)   Where the topsoil is removed, sufficient arable soil shall be set
aside for respreading over the developed area. The soil shall be restored to a
depth of four inches and shall be of a quality at least equal to the soil
quality prior to development.
      (10)   Permanent, final plant covering or structures shall be installed
as soon as possible.
   (D)   Easements.
      (1)   Easements of not less than ten feet in width shall be provided on
each side of all rear lot lines, and alongside lot lines where necessary for
storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water and other mains, and for electric and
telephone lines or for other public utilities. Easements of greater width may
be required along or across lots when necessary for the extension of main
sewers or other utilities or where both water and sewer lines are located in
the same easement. A two-foot easement shall be required on one side of and
adjacent to an alley to accommodate pole lines.
      (2)   Adequate easements for storm water drainage shall be established
along any natural drainage, channel and in such other locations as may be
necessary to provide satisfactory disposal of storm water from streets, alleys
and all other portions of the subdivision. The location and minimum widths of
such easements shall be determined by the Zoning Administrator.
      (3)   No tree, shrub or building shall be placed or erected in any
easement for utility or drainage purposes or within the right-of-way of any
street, except at the owner's risk as to all costs for demolition, removal or
reconstruction, and the proper authorities may have free access to and use of
the easements at any time.
   (E)   Blocks; crosswalks.
      (1)   No block shall be longer than 1,800 feet or less than 500 feet in
length, except where the continuity of the existing neighborhood would be
disrupted.
      (2)   All blocks, whenever it is deemed essential to provide access to
schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities a shall
have a crosswalk with a right-of-way of at least ten feet in width near the
center of the block. (See §
151.22(C)(2))
      (3)   The length, width and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due
regard to building sites, land use, zoning requirements, access, safety and
convenience.
      (4)   Where a subdivision adjoins an arterial or collector, the greater
dimension of the block shall generally front or back upon such arterial or
collector to avoid unnecessary ingress or egress.
   (F)   Parks and other public areas.
      (1)   Where any area is specifically designated on the Comprehensive Plan
of the village, for a public park, playground, school or other public use, and
is owned by the subdivider, such area shall be reserved for such use on all
subdivision plans and plats; and the acquisition of such area may then be
secured by the Village Board of Trustees or arrangements be made for its
acquisition within a period not to exceed one year from the date of approval of
the final plan. The value of such lands shall be established by three qualified
appraisers; one of whom shall be appointed by the Plan Commission, one
appointed by the subdivider, and one of whom shall be mutually-agreed upon by
the other two.
      (2)   Should the Village Board of Trustees decide to take such premises,
then and in that case, it shall make arrangements to pay the subdivider the
appraised value therefor as determined by the above described appraisers, or a
sum that is mutually agreed upon. The Village Board of Trustees may accept any
donation of land as above described should the subdivider desire to contribute
the same to the village.
   (G)   Utilities.
      (1)   Source of domestic water supply and type of sewage disposal.
      (2)   Storm water drainage.
         (a)   Complete storm sewer system, including pipe sizes, inlets and
inverts.
         (b)   A proposed surface water drainage pattern for each individual
lot, block and street.
      (3)   All easements as required shall be indicated.
      (4)   Protective covenants. An outline of all proposed protective
covenants shall accompany the preliminary plan and shall include a protection
against the obstruction of any surface water drainage easement.
   (H)   Lots.
      (1)   Minimum size. All lots in a subdivision shall conform to the
minimum lot area and dimensions requirements of the zoning district in which
the subdivision is located; land that is under water or reserved for street
improvements shall not be counted in determining compliance with requirements.
(See
Chapter 152, Zoning Code.)
      (2)   The lot arrangement and design shall be such that all lots will
provide satisfactory and desirable building sites, properly related to
topography and the character of surrounding development.
      (3)   All side lines of lots shall be at right angles to straight street
right-of-way lines and radial to curved street right-of-way lines, except where
a variation of this rule will provide a better street and lot design.
      (4)   All remnants of lots below minimum lot area size left over after
subdividing of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than
allowing to remain as unusable land, except when designated for utility
purposes or accepted for public space for park or other public uses.
      (5)   Lots which cannot be served by either a public or private sanitary
sewer, and/or a public water system, shall comply with the applicable
provisions of the applicable Zoning Code or shall be not less than one acre in
size per lot or household unit, whichever is greater. Such lots shall have a
width of not less than 125 feet or a depth in excess of three times its width,
unless otherwise permitted and approved by the Plan Commission.
      (6)   Lots with double frontage should be avoided where possible. Corner
lots and lots with double frontage shall have extra dimension sufficient to
permit the establishment of front building setback lines on the adjoining
streets.
      (7)   The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot
with satisfactory access to public streets. The Plan Commission may require
additional reservation of land to insure adequate access to prevent land
locking of the adjoining territory.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.23 APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   Checklist completed. In order to qualify for approval, the preliminary
plan shall be accompanied by a properly executed checklist as shown in
Appendix A, § 1.
   (B)   Changes or revisions. The Plan Commission and/or Zoning Administrator
may recommend or the Village Board of Trustees may require such changes or
revisions as are deemed necessary in the interests and needs of the community.
   (C)   Approval - tentative. The approval of a preliminary plan by the Plan
Commission and the Village Board of Trustees is tentative only, involving
merely the general acceptability of the layout as submitted.
   (D)   Certificate. Approval shall consist of a certificate to that effect on
the preliminary plan signed by the Chairperson of the Plan Commission and by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. passed - - )
ENGINEERING PLANS
§ 151.35 ENGINEERING PLAN PROCEDURE.
   Within 12 months after receiving approval of the preliminary plan by the
Village Board of Trustees, there shall be submitted to the Zoning
Administrator, by the subdivider, four copies of the engineering plans and
specifications as required in §
151.36. Such plans and specifications shall be signed and sealed by the
registered professional responsible for their preparation. The Zoning
Administrator shall immediately refer two copies to the Plan Commission and two
copies to the Mayor and shall notify the Village Board of Trustees of this
action at the next regular Village Board of Trustees meeting. In the event of a
special problem, the Plan Commission shall notify the owner or subdivider of
the time and place at which he shall be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
The Plan Commission shall make its recommendation to the Village Board of
Trustees within 45 days after receipt of the engineering drawings and
specifications. In the event of disapproval of the engineering plans and
specifications by the Plan Commission, the same shall be immediately returned
so marked to the Zoning Administrator for return to the subdivider, and may be
refiled with the Zoning Administrator after necessary revisions are made.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.36 MINIMUM STANDARDS OF IMPROVEMENT.
   Utility and street improvements shall be provided by the subdivider in each
new subdivision in accordance with the standards and requirements described in
this section. The requirements set forth below shall be considered as minimum
requirements and nothing contained herein shall be construed to mean that the
subdivider cannot construct or provide improvements of a higher type.
   (A)   Reference monuments.
      (1)   Permanent monuments shall be of concrete 4 inches x 4 inches x 30
inches, with a one-half- inch iron pin cast in the center, set in such a manner
that they will not be moved by frost and shall be placed in the field as
required by state law.
      (2)   All lot corners shall be marked by one-half-inch iron pins not less
than 30 inches in length and driven into the ground and shall not protrude
above the ground surface more than one and one-half inches.
      (3)   These monuments must be placed at all corners, at the end of all
curves, at the point where a curve changes its radius, at all angle points
along a meander line, the points to be not less than 20 feet back from the
normal water elevation of a lake or from the bank of a stream, except that when
such corners or points fall within a street or proposed future street, the
monuments must be placed in the right- of-way line of the street. All internal
boundaries, corners and points must be monumented in the field by like
monuments as defined above.
   (B)   Street improvements. All streets shall be graded as hereinafter
provided:
      (1)   (a)   All new streets, which are created and dedicated for use
within a subdivision shall be graded, drained and surfaced in accordance with
the minimum requirements hereinbelow set forth and in a manner which will
provide complete and adequate drainage of all the streets, alleys, and public
grounds which may be necessary in order to provide adequate and satisfactory
drainage along the side of any existing public street which lies adjacent to
the subdivision.
         (b)   In general, all such new streets within the subdivision and all
work to be undertaken thereon shall be designed and constructed according to
the specifications adopted by the State Department of Transportation; as the
same are in effect at the time the preliminary plat and plans for such
improvement work are submitted for approval.
      (2)   Grading roadway and side slopes. The roadway shall be considered to
be that part of the improvement which lies between the right-of-way lines, and
which roadway shall not be less than 50 feet in width on local streets and 60
feet on collector streets.
      (3)   Combination concrete curb and gutter. Combination concrete curb and
gutter shall be built in accordance with the detail shown on
Figure 3 of Appendix B of this chapter. The minimum distance from back to back
of curbs shall be 36 feet on local streets and 40 feet on collector streets.
      (4)   Street construction standards.  
         (a)   All streets within the jurisdictional authority of the village
other than state highways shall be improved with pavements bounded by integral
concrete curbs and gutter, in accordance with the following criteria:
 
Street Type           Dedicated Street Pavement Width Pavement Type
                      Width
Arterial (primary)    80 feet          50 feet        (See division (4)(b)
                                                      below)
Collector (secondary) 60 feet          40 feet        (See division (4)(c)
                                                      below)
Local (minor)         50 feet          32 feet        (See division (4)(c)
                                                      below)
Cul-de-sac            50 feet          30 feet        (See division (4)(c)
                                                      below)
 
         (b)   Arterial street pavements shall consist of a minimum of eight
inches unreinforced concrete pavement of six inches of lime stabilized
subgrade.
         (c)   Local and collector street pavements (including cul-de-sacs)
shall consist of a minimum of six inches reinforced concrete pavement on a
compacted subgrade.
         (d)   1.   All concrete utilized in the construction of street, and
curb and gutters shall have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 PSI at 28
days. The subdivider shall provide the Zoning Administration at no expense to
the village, concrete tests verifying the compressive strength. The Zoning
Administrator shall also have the right to request other tests including air
entrainment and slump tests as he deems necessary.
            2.   All compacted subgrade shall have a minimum density not less
than 95% of the Standard Proctor maximum dry density. All fills should be
placed in maximum eight-inch loose lift thickness and mechanically compacted to
at least 95% Standard Proctor. Field density tests must be performed on each
lift by a qualified soils technician to verify compliance with the density
requirement. Adjustment of moisture content shall be undertaken as necessary to
achieve the desired compaction.
            3.   The Zoning Administrator as he deems necessary may also
require the contractor proof roll the compacted subgrade with a fully loaded
tandem truck prior to placing any pavement.
            4.   All granular material used in the road right-of-way shall be
compacted to 92% of the materials Standard Proctor maximum dry density.
         (e)   The subdivider shall be required to improve arterial or primary
streets only to the width required by the current and immediate needs of his
subdivision consistent to the standards and specifications herein contained.
(See
Appendix B to this chapter)
      (5)   Alleys. Alleys, where permitted or required, shall be constructed
as specified for local streets.
      (6)   Utility lines. Underground utilities in streets or rights-of-way or
in easements shall be installed prior to the construction of such streets and/
or alleys. Wherever possible, utilities will be placed in rear lot easements
with street placement permitted in only the most unusual circumstances.
   (C)   Storm sewers and other drainage appurtenances. In addition to the
installation of curbs or gutters along the streets, as required by division (B)
(3) of this section, storm sewer systems will be constructed throughout the
entire subdivision to carry off water from all inlets and catch basins, and
shall be connected to an adequate outfall. Such sewers shall provide for an
extension to land lying within the upland drainage area, whether such land is
within the subdivision or not. Storm sewers shall be designed by the rational
method; and copies of the design computations shall be submitted with the
plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across or
around any intersection, nor for a distance of more than 600 feet in the
gutter. Shorter inlet spacings may be required as deemed necessary by the
Zoning Administrator. The storm water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of the sanitary sewer system. Surface water drainage patterns shall
be shown for each and every individual lot and block. The developer will be
required to provide adequate stormwater detention for the development or
provide supporting hydraulic calculations to justify the elimination of
stormwater detention for consideration by the Zoning Administrator. The Zoning
Board, upon the recommendation of the Zoning Administrator, may require the
installation of storm sewers or stormwater detention facilities.
   (D)   Public utility engineering requirements. All proposed water and
sanitary sewer facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements and
recommendations of the Environmental Protection Agency of the State of Illinois
and the Zoning Administrator. When a proposed subdivision is reasonably
accessible to a public sewer system and/or distribution system, the subdivider
shall provide the subdivision with a complete sanitary sewer system and/or
water distribution system to be connected to the proper public system(s).
   (E)   Sanitary sewers.
      (1)   All sewer plans and installations shall conform to the standards
and specifications set forth in the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer
Main Construction in Illinois, as established by the Illinois Society of
Professional Engineers.
      (2)   Sanitary sewer lines shall be installed to serve all properties in
the subdivision, except subdivisions where individual sewage disposal systems
are permitted by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (3)   Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than necessary to
serve the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plan are required to
serve the future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, as determined by
the Village Board of Trustees, the village shall then reimburse the subdivider
for the difference in cost of the smaller size pipe and the larger size pipe;
said larger size to be determined by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (4)   Each lot in the subdivision shall be provided at the property line
with a connection to the public sanitary sewer system. The construction of the
sewer system shall conform to the approved plans and specifications, and all
work should be properly inspected and approved by the Zoning Administrator.
(NOTE: This prevents the street from being torn-up after construction.)
   (F)   Water system.  
      (1)   All water main plans and installations, including all appurtenances
thereto, shall conform to the Standard Specifications for Water and Sewer Main
Construction in Illinois, as established by the Illinois Society of
Professional Engineers.
      (2)   Water distribution facilities including all pipe, fittings,
hydrants, valves, vaults, and the like, shall be installed to serve all
properties within the subdivision.
      (3)   Where water mains of larger capacity than necessary to serve the
subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plan are required to serve the
future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, as determined by the Village
Board of Trustees, the village shall then reimburse the difference in cost of
the smaller size and the larger size pipe, the larger size to be determined by
the Village Board of Trustees.
      (4)   The construction of the water system shall conform to the approved
plans and specifications and all work shall be properly inspected and approved
by the Village Engineer. Water service line shall be extended to each lot in
the subdivision prior to the village accepting the streets for maintenance.
      (5)   Fire hydrants shall be located and installed by the subdivider with
the approval of the Fire Chief, as part of the water distribution system.
Installation of hydrants shall be accomplished in such a manner that each lot
is within 400 feet of the fire hydrant when measured along the center line of
the right-of-way. No fire hydrant shall be placed on a main smaller than six
inches in diameter. Hydrants installed shall be of the type approved by the
Chief of the Fire Department.
   (G)   Street names and signs.
      (1)   Street names. The names of new streets shall be sufficiently
different in sound and spelling from the names of existing streets in the city
to avoid confusion. A street which is planned as a continuation of an existing
street shall bear the same name as the existing street.
      (2)   Street name signs. Street name signs shall be erected by the
developer at all intersections within or abutting the subdivision with the
approval of the Street Superintendent. Signs shall be embossed steel U.S.
Standard Street Signs (or the equivalent thereof) measuring six inches by 24
inches, with lettering at least four inches high. All street name signs shall
be mounted on two-inch-diameter galvanized pipe set in concrete to a depth of
at least three feet and extending above the surface to a height of at least
seven feet.
   (H)   Public utilities. All utility lines for telephone and electric service
shall be placed in rear line easements when carried on overhead poles.
   (I)   Sidewalks.
      (1)   Concrete sidewalks not less than four inches in thickness and four
feet in width may be constructed within the street right-of-way and adjacent to
the property line.
      (2)   In the event a crosswalk is required in accordance with §
151.22(E), a concrete sidewalk not less than four inches in thickness and four
feet in width shall be constructed.
      (3)   All applicable standards contained in the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) shall apply.
(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 684, passed - - )
§ 151.37 APPROVAL OF DESIGN PLANS.
   (A)   Checklist. In order to qualify for approval, the engineering plans
shall be accompanied by a properly executed checklist as shown in
Appendix A, § 2 of this chapter.
   (B)   Changes or revisions. The Plan Commission may recommend or the Village
Board of Trustees may require such changes or revisions as are deemed necessary
in the interest and needs of the community.
   (C)   Approval; tentative. The Plan Commission may grant approval of the
total required engineering plans by approval of plans covering only a portion
of the land improvements (such as, sanitary sewers and water) so as to
facilitate immediate installations. This partial approval shall consist of a
certificate on the plans covering each of the required improvements signed by
the Plan Commission.
   (D)   Letter of approval. Final approval of the complete set of engineering
plans shall consist of a letter of approval from the Plan Commission, listing
thereon:
      (1)   Type of improvement(s) covered by the plan.
      (2)   Name of designing engineer.
      (3)   Date of preparation and revision, if any.
(Ord. passed - - )
FINAL PLATS
§ 151.50 PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Subdivider. Within six months after receiving approval of the
engineering plans and specifications by the Plan Commission, or a period of
time beyond six months that may be granted by the Village Board of Trustees,
there shall be submitted to the Zoning Administrator by the subdivider, the
original drawing, one transparency print and four copies of the final plat,
which shall also contain all required signed certifications, other than signed
certificates of approval by the Plan Commission, the Village Board of Trustees
and the Zoning Administrator. It shall contain the necessary documents
concerning the form of guarantees or performance bond to be used. The final
plat shall retain the overall characteristics of the preliminary plan and may
include all or part of the area shown on the preliminary plan. The Zoning
Administrator shall refer the original drawing and two copies of the final plat
to the Plan Commission, and one copy of the final plat to the Superintendent of
Utilities, at least ten days prior to their next regularly scheduled meeting
for recommendation as to final approval. In the event of a special problem, the
Plan Commission shall notify the owner or subdivider as to the time and place
of the Plan Commission meeting at which time he will be afforded an opportunity
of being heard.
   (B)   Plan Commission action. The Plan Commission shall review the final
plat and plans and transmit their report of findings and recommendations to the
Village Board of Trustees within 30 days of the filing date of the final plat.
The action of the Plan Commission, whether approval or disapproval of the final
plat, as well as the date of the action, shall be noted in writing and attached
to the final plat. If the final plat is disapproved, the reasons why shall be
so stated.
   (C)   Board of Trustees action. The Village Board of Trustees shall take
action on the final plat within 60 days from the date of the subdivider’s
filing of the last required document or other paper or within 60 days from the
date of the subdivider’s filing application for approval of the final plat,
whichever date is later, unless such time is extended by written mutual
consent.
   (D)   Disapproval. If the final plat is disapproved by the Village Board of
Trustees, the reasons for such action shall be noted in writing by resolution,
stating the reasons for disapproval, specifying with particularity the aspects
in which the final plat fails to conform with the village's ordinances.
   (E)   Posting performance bond.
      (1)   If the final plat is approved by the Village Board of Trustees, the
final plat shall be held by the Village Clerk until such time the subdivider
posts a performance guarantee bond as required by §
151.53.
      (2)   Upon receipt of the performance guarantee or bond, the Mayor shall
affix his signature to the final plat and attach thereto a notation that the
final plat has received final approval of the Village Board of Trustees; the
Clerk shall attest the signature of the Mayor and affix the seal and attach a
certified copy of the Village Board of Trustees's resolution of approval to the
approved final plat. If such performance guarantee or bond is not posted by the
subdivider within 60 days from the date of approval of the final plat by the
Village Board of Trustees, approval of such final plat shall expire and become
null and void.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.51 FINAL PLAT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Requirements; subdivider. The final plat to be provided by the
subdivider shall meet the following specifications:
      (1)   The final plat may include all or only a part of the preliminary
plat which has received approval.
      (2)   The final plat shall be drawn on new linen tracing cloth, mylar or
a polyester-base film with waterproof black ink to a scale of not greater than
100 feet to one-inch. However, if the resulting drawing would be over 42 inches
square, a scale of up to 200 feet to one inch may be used.
      (3)   (a)   Four black or blue line prints shall be submitted with the
original tracing of the final plat, or in order to conform to modern drafting
and reproductive methods, four black or blue line prints and reproducible cloth
or film positives of the final plat shall be submitted.
         (b)   Prints filed with the village shall include: one black or blue
line print made after recording of the final plat and bearing the official
stamp attesting the fact of the recording; and one reproducible print or film
positive of the final plat, as approved.
      (4)   All dimensions shall be shown in feet and decimals of a foot and/or
meters.
      (5)   All surveys for a final plat shall be made under the active and
personal direction of an Illinois Registered Land Surveyor, and the following
basic information shall be shown:
         (a)   Accurate boundary lines, with dimensions and bearings or angles
which provide a survey of the tract, closing with an error of closure of not
more than one foot in 5,000 feet.
         (b)   Accurate distances and directions to the nearest established
official monument. Reference corners shall be accurately described on the final
plat.
         (c)   Accurate metes and bounds description of the boundary and the
included area of the subdivision to the nearest one-hundredth of an acre.
         (d)   Accurate locations of all existing and recorded streets
intersecting the boundaries of the tract, shown by heavy solid lines.
         (e)   Right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way
and property lines and areas of lots and other tracts, with accurate
dimensions, bearings and curve data, including radii, arcs and chords, points
of tangency, and central angles.
         (f)   Name and right-of-way width for each street or other right-of-
way.
         (g)   Location, dimensions and purposes of any easement, shown by
light, dashed lines.
         (h)   Number and address to identify each lot or site.
         (i)   Purpose for which sites, other than residential lots are
dedicated or reserved.
         (j)   Lot dimensions and areas of each lot and building setback lines
and dimensions.
         (k)   Location, type, material and size of all monuments and lot
markers.
         (l)   Names of owners and mortgagees accepting the plat with owner or
owners personally signing all plans.
         (m)   Names of owners of record of adjoining unplatted lands.
         (n)   Reference to recorded subdivision plats within 300 feet of
adjoining platted land by record name, date and number.
         (o)   Restrictions of all types which will run with the land and
become covenants in the deeds for lots. Restriction lines should be shown by
medium, dashed lines.
         (p)   Title or name of subdivision; section, township and range
numbers in which the subdivision is located; and north arrow, scale and date.
         (q)   Certification as required by division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Appropriate certificates. The following shall be completed as required
by this chapter:
   OWNER'S CERTIFICATE
   We,                           , the Owners of ( ), have caused the said
tract to be surveyed and subdivided in the manner shown, and said subdivision
is to be hereinafter known as                                     . All rights-
of-way and easements shown hereon are hereby dedicated to the use of the public
forever, including the release and waiver of the right of homestead under the
Homestead Exemption laws of the State of Illinois.
   Dated this     day of                     , 19   .
                                                 (SEAL)
                                                 (SEAL)
   NOTARY PUBLIC'S CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of             )
   I,                             , a Notary Public, in and for said County, in
the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that                               ,
personally known to me to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the
foregoing instrument as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and
acknowledged that they signed and delivered this plat as their own free and
voluntary act, for the uses and purposes therein set forth.
   Given under my hand and notarial seal this       day of                19  ,
at                              .
                                          
   Notary Public
   SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of              )
   I,                             , a registered Illinois Land Surveyor, do
hereby certify that this plat is a correct representation of a survey and
subdivision made under my direct supervision at the request of
                     , for the purpose of subdividing the tract into lots as
shown.
                                      
   Illinois Land Surveyor
                                      
   Registration Number
                                      
   Date
   COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of              )
   I,                             , County Clerk of               County, do
hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no unpaid forfeited
taxes and no redeemable tax sales against any of the land included in the
attached plat.
   I, the undersigned, County Clerk of St. Clair County, Illinois, do hereby
certify that I have examined the above plat and I have searched the records of
my office to ascertain whether all redeemable sales for unpaid taxes or special
assessments have been paid as required by law upon all of the property embraced
within said plat, and I hereby certify that I find no redeemable tax sales or
unpaid forfeited taxes against any of the real estate included in this plat,
and I do hereby approve this plat for assessment purposes.
   I further certify that I have received all statutory fees in connection with
the attached plat.
   This plat has been reviewed for “911” implementation this              day
of                  , 19   .
   Given under my hand and seal at               , this       day of
               19  .
                                      
   County Clerk
                                      
   Date
   CERTIFICATE OF VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of              )
   I,                               , Mayor of the City of               , do
hereby certify that the plat shown herein was duly presented to the Village
Board of Trustees and approved at a meeting of same held on  (date) ,
19       .
                                      
   Mayor
                                      
   City Clerk
   FLOOD HAZARD CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of              )
   We, the undersigned, do hereby certify that no part of this plat to be
recorded is situated within five hundred feet (500') of any surface drain or
watercourse serving a tributary area of six hundred forty (640) acres or more,
or, if this plat is within five hundred feet (500') of any surface drain or
watercourse, we do hereby certify that this plat has been reviewed by the
Illinois Department of Transportation Division of Water Resources and their
reports are on file with the Recorder of Deeds of                 County.
   By:                                      
      Owner(s)
   By:                                      
      Illinois Land Surveyor
                                      
   Registration Number
                                      
   Date
   PLAN COMMISSION CERTIFICATE
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of              )
   Approved this        day of                 , 19    .
                                       (Chairman)
                                       (Secretary)
   Plan Commission
   SUPERINTENDENTS OF WATER, SEWER AND STREETS
State of Illinois )
) ss
County of              )
   We, the Superintendents, do hereby certify that the required improvements
have been installed or the required guarantee bond has been posted for the
completion of all land improvements.
                                      
   Water Superintendent
                                      
   Sewer Superintendent
                                      
   Street Superintendent
Dated this       day of               , 19     .
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.52 APPROVAL OF FINAL PLAT; REQUIREMENTS.
   In order to qualify for approval, the final plat shall be accompanied by the
following:
   (A)   A properly executed checklist as shown in
Appendix A, § 3.
   (B)   Detailed specifications for all required land improvements other than
those specifications submitted and approved with the engineering plans.
   (C)   A copy of the Illinois Environmental Agency's permit for the sanitary
sewer installation.
   (D)   A copy of the Illinois Environmental Agency's approval for the water
main installation.
   (E)   An affidavit executed by the owner and/or subdivider accepting the
responsibility for the installation of the improvements as shown on the
approved engineering plans and covered by the specifications and permits
required above. This affidavit shall include a stipulation by the subdivider of
the installation of all land improvements in the presence of a registered
engineer.
   (F)   A certified estimate of cost of all required land improvements
prepared by a registered engineer.
   (G)   A description of the bond or guarantee collateral intended to be
submitted as required below.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.53 GUARANTEES.
   (A)   Guarantees to city. After the Village Board of Trustees has approved
the Final Plat with respect to the above qualifications, the subdivider shall
be so notified by the Zoning Administrator. Final approval and signature by the
Mayor and the Zoning Administrator shall be contingent upon the receipt by the
village of guarantee by the owner and/or subdivider to the village for the
completion of all land improvements yet remaining to be installed. Within 60
days of the approval of the final plat, and before construction begins, one of
the following shall be completed naming the village as the insured for
guaranteed party for a minimum period of two years:
      (1)   Deposit with the village a subdivider's bond in the amount of the
110% estimated cost of the land improvements; the bond need never exceed one
and one-half times the estimated cost of the improvements remaining to be
completed; or
      (2)   Deposit with the village cash in the amount of 110% of the
estimated cost of the land improvements; the amount of cash need never exceed
one and one-half times the estimated cost of the improvements remaining to be
completed. Subdivider shall execute an undertaking in lieu of a bond provided
for in
Appendix A, § 5, and shall also deposit with the village an irrevocable
commitment from a financial institution with such terms as are acceptable to
the Village Board of Trustees; or
      (3)   Deposit with the village a lien to be recorded in the County
Recorder's Office on all property being subdivided, with the provision that
partial release may be obtained when the loaning company executes with the
village an agreement to withhold one and one-half times the estimated cost of
the land improvements yet remaining to be installed, in escrow, until such time
as all land improvements have been completed and accepted by the village. All
expenses incurred in determining the amounts apportioned against the land and
the cost of releasing each lot or tract shall be paid by the subdivider; or
      (4)   Deposit with the village, other collateral equivalent to one and
one-half times the estimated cost of land improvements yet remaining to be
installed, such collateral to be approved by the Village Board of Trustees.
   (B)   Construction time constraints. All required land improvements shall be
installed and completed within a period of two years after the recording of the
final plat. Failure of the subdivider to complete all of the improvements
within this two-year period shall result in forfeiture of the guarantee
collateral unless an extension of time is requested by the subdivider and
granted by the Village Board of Trustees. In the event of failure to complete
the improvements in the required period, as stated above, the Village Board of
Trustees may direct that no further building permits be issued for property in
such subdivision pending satisfaction of the Village Board of Trustees in
regard to the status of the required land improvements.
   (C)   Inspection.
      (1)   All required land improvements to be installed under the provisions
of this chapter shall be checked during the course of construction, by or at
the direction of the Zoning Administrator or his designated representative.
      (2)   The cost of any re-inspection of any required land improvement
found to be faulty or not in accordance with the approved plans and
specifications shall be paid by the subdivider to the village. The testing of
any concrete, asphalt, soil, or other materials and workmanship shall be done
at the direction of the village and at the expense of the subdivider.
   (D)   Release of bond. The subdivider's bond or guarantee collateral shall
be released only upon fulfillment of the following conditions:
      (1)   The completion of all required land improvements.
      (2)   The submission of four copies of acceptable “as-built” drawings of
all land improvements.
      (3)   An affidavit to the effect that:
         (a)   All materials, labor and other costs have been paid, or
arrangements have been made for payment so as to hold the village free from any
obligations for payment of any costs of the land improvements; and
         (b)   That the subdivider accepts responsibility for the maintenance
and repair of all land improvements for two years after the date of the
acceptance resolution by the Village Board of Trustees.
      (4)   Final acceptance, by resolution by the Village Board of Trustees of
all land improvements.
(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 708, passed 8-19-96; Am. Ord. 1297, passed 6-23-25)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 151.65 ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; DUTIES.
   The Zoning Administrator referred to herein as the “Administrator” is hereby
authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter. This broad responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to, the
following specific duties:
   (A)   To review and forward preliminary and final plats to the Plan
Commission;
   (B)   To transmit improvement plans to the Village Engineer for his review;
   (C)   To issue stop orders as necessary when the Village Engineer determines
that approved improvements are being constructed in violation of this chapter;
   (D)   To pursue actions authorized in this chapter when a developer fails to
complete required improvements;
   (E)   To evaluate and make decisions concerning proposed minor changes in
approved final plats;
   (F)   To review and forward applications for subdivision variances to the
Plan Commission;
   (G)   To periodically review the provisions of this chapter to determine
whether revisions are needed, and to make recommendations on such matters to
the Plan Commission as necessary;
   (H)   To maintain up-to-date records of matters pertaining to this chapter,
including, but not limited to, preliminary plats, as-built records of completed
improvements, final plats, variances and amendments; and
   (I)   To provide information to subdividers/developers and to the general
public on matters related to this chapter.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.66 SUBDIVISION VARIANCES.
   Any subdivider/developer desiring a variance from the requirements of this
chapter shall file a written application therefor with the Zoning Administrator
at the same time that he files his preliminary plat. The application shall
fully explain the grounds for the variance request, and specify the section(s)
of this chapter which, if strictly applied, would cause great practical
difficulties or hardship. The Administrator shall prepare an advisory report on
variance application and submit it, together with the completed application to
the Plan Commission.
   (A)   Review by Plan Commission. The Plan Commission shall review the
variance application and the Administrator's comments, and submit their
advisory report to the Village Board of Trustees, together with their
recommendation on preliminary plat approval. The Plan Commission's advisory
report shall be responsive to all the variances standards set forth in division
(B) below.
   (B)   Action by Village Board of Trustees; variance standards. At the same
meeting at which they take action on the application for preliminary plat
approval, the Village Board of Trustees shall decide by resolution whether to
grant or deny the requested subdivision variance. A copy of their decision,
clearly stating their reasons therefor and the exact terms of any variance
granted shall be attached to both the preliminary and final plats. The Village
Board of Trustees shall not grant any subdivision variance unless, based upon
the information presented to them, they determine that:
      (1)   The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of
this chapter;
      (2)   Strict application of the subdivision design and improvement
requirements would result in great practical difficulties or hardship to the
applicant, not a mere inconvenience;
      (3)   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from the subdivision
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship;
      (4)   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his own making;
      (5)   The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not
applicable to other tracts, and therefore, a variance would be a more
appropriate remedy than an amendment; and
      (6)   The variance, if granted, will not substantially impair
implementation of the Village Community Plan, including the Official Map.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.67 AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to this chapter may be proposed by the Zoning Administrator, any
member of the Village Board of Trustees, any Plan Commission member, or any
party in interest. Every amendment proposal shall be filed on a prescribed form
in the Administrator's office. The Administrator shall promptly transmit each
proposal, together with any comments or recommendations he may wish to make to
the Plan Commission.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.68 ADVISORY REPORT; ACTION BY VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   Within a reasonable time the Plan Commission shall submit an advisory report
to the Village Board of Trustees. The Village Board of Trustees shall act on
the proposed amendment at their next regularly scheduled meeting following
submission of this report. The Village Board of Trustees may either pass or
reject the proposed amendment or may refer it back to the Plan Commission for
further consideration.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.69 SCHEDULE OF FEES.
   All fees indicated in tabular form below shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
The fees are intended to defray the administrative costs connected with the
processing/conducting of the listed item; they do not constitute a tax or other
revenue-raising device.
 
Procedure                 Fee
Filing preliminary plat   $25 plus engineering fees*
Filing improvements plans 25 plus engineering fees*
Improvements inspection   Actual engineering
Filing final plat         50
Filing variance request   50
Filing amendment proposal 50
 
*Costs incurred by the village for engineering review.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.70 RECORDING OF FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   The Village Clerk shall not accept a final plat for filing with the
County Recorder of Deeds unless the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The final plat conforms to all requirements specified by the
Village Board of Trustees as conditions of approval.
      (2)   The final plat meets the design standards and engineering
specifications set forth herein.
      (3)   The final plat meets all requirements of the laws of the state.
      (4)   The subdivider or applicant establishes sufficient proof of his
intent and ability to post a guarantee or performance bond or bonds with the
village as required by §
151.53(A) to the estimated construction cost of all improvements intended to be
dedicated to the village for maintenance and operation.
   (B)   No subdivision plat or re-plat of land within the jurisdiction of the
village shall be filed for record or recorded in the Office of the County
Recorder of Deeds, unless and until the approval of the Village Board of
Trustees is endorsed thereon by the Village Clerk.
   (C)   No lot shall be sold for such subdivision plat or re-plat until it has
been approved by the Village Board of Trustees and filed for record in the
Office of the Recorder of Deeds as herein provided.
   (D)   The developer shall file the approved final plat and ordinance with
the County Recorder of Deeds, not more than 30 days from the date of posting of
and not prior to the posting of the performance guarantee or bond as required
by §
151.53(A) and (B); two copies of such Final Plat and ordinance shall be kept in
file by the Village Clerk; one such copy filed with the Zoning Administrator;
and one copy shall be returned to the subdivider.
   (E)   The Village Board of Trustees shall not permit any public improvements
under its jurisdiction to be constructed or maintained within an area that has
been subdivided after the adoption of this chapter unless such subdivision has
been approved in accordance with the requirements contained herein.
   (F)   No building and zoning occupancy permit shall be issued by the Zoning
Administrator, city or county for the construction of any building, structure
or improvement to the land or any lot within the subdivision as defined in §
151.07, until all requirements herein have been fully complied with.
(Ord. passed - - )
§ 151.71 VACATION OF PLATS.
   In accordance with state law, any plat or part thereof may be vacated by the
owner of the tract, at any time before the sale of any lot therein, by a
written vacation instrument to which a copy of the plat is attached. If there
are public service facilities in any street, other public way, or easement
shown on the plat, the instrument shall reserve to the village or other public
entity or public utility owning such facilities the property, rights-of-way,
and easements necessary for continuing public service by means of those
facilities and for maintaining or reconstructing the same. The vacation
instrument shall be approved by the Village Board of Trustees in the same
manner as plats of subdivision and shall also be approved by the County
Superintendent of Highways, the Highway Commissioner of the appropriate
township, and the public utilities involved. In the case of the platted tracts
wherein any lots have been sold, the written vacation instrument must also be
signed by all the owners of lots in said tracts.
(Ord. passed - - )
Statutory reference:
   Provisions regulating the vacation of plats, see ILCS Ch. 765, Act 205, §§
6, 7 and 8
§ 151.72 MAINTENANCE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The subdivider/developer shall maintain all the improvements in the
subdivision until they have been accepted by and dedicated to the village or
other appropriate entity.
   (B)   Prior to dedication, the subdivider/developer shall post a maintenance
bond with the Village Clerk in the form approved by the Village Attorney.
      (1)   The bond shall be in the amount determined by the Village Engineer
to be sufficient to guarantee the satisfactory condition of the required
improvements for a period of one year from the date of their acceptance and
dedication. If, at any time during the one-year period, the improvements are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired/replaced at the subdivider's/
developer's expense. If the subdivider/developer fails or refuses to pay such
costs within 90 days after demand is made upon him by the Zoning Administrator,
the village shall use the maintenance bond to make the necessary repairs/
replacements.
      (2)   If the cost of the repairs/replacements exceeds the bond amount,
the subdivider/developer shall be liable for the excess.
      (3)   It shall be the subdivider's responsibility to request from the
village in writing, a final inspection of the improvements not later than 60
days prior to the end of the two-year maintenance bond agreement.
      (4)   In any event if the subdivider fails to request a final inspection
in writing 30 days before the end of the guarantee period, the guarantee period
shall be extended until 30 days after such time as the notice is received and
the improvements are deemed satisfactory by the village.
   (C)   If at any time during the guarantee period the improvements are found
to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the subdivider's
expense.
(Ord. passed - - )
PARKS LAND/CASH CONTRIBUTION
§ 151.80 INTENT; SCOPE.
   (A)   An intent of the subdivision code shall be to maintain the existing
high quality of life for present and future residents by preserving open spaces
for public parks without raising taxes and by placing the responsibility for
these services on the subdivision developments that create the need for
recreational and other open space and that cause the impact on existing
resources. The subsequent provisions are intended to provide the Village of
Millstadt with a financing mechanism for developing and maintaining a safe and
clean park system, which meets the recreational and leisure needs of the
residents of the village.
   (B)   As a condition of approval of any subdivision, as defined herein,
authorizing new residential lots or units, to the extent the requirements of
this code have not already been satisfied, within the corporate limits of the
village, or within the planning jurisdiction of the village (being one and one-
half miles outside the corporate limits), the subdivider shall dedicate real
property on-site, or equivalent real property off-site acceptable to the
village, or make a cash payment in lieu of land dedication, or a combination of
both, at the option of the village, for parks and open space to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the development or
redevelopment. Such dedication or payment shall be (“land/cash contribution”)
in a total amount sufficient to satisfy the criteria and formula contained
within this code.
   (C)   Unless otherwise agreed in writing between the developer and village,
any land to be dedicated for park or recreational purposes shall be platted,
dedicated and improved as part of the first phase of any subdivision.
Dedication deeds and plats shall be in such a form as required by the Village
Attorney and required by the village for acceptance. Nothing herein shall be
deemed to require the village to accept any dedication of land until express
action by the village accepting such dedication for maintenance purposes.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.81 COMPLIANCE.
   No subdivision approval for activity subject to this code shall be granted
without compliance to this code, except where it may otherwise be required by
law; provided, however, the “land/cash contribution” requirement established
herein shall not apply to any subdivision that has already received preliminary
plat approval by the village as of March 1, 2009 and for which the final plat
is thereafter consistent with the approved preliminary plat.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.82 MINIMUM GREENSPACE REQUIREMENT.
   The minimum land/cash contribution requirement for each subdivision shall be
as follows:
   (A)   (1)   Land dedication:
         (a)   Single Family Residence Districts (R-l, R-2) - 4% of the total
area.
         (b)   Multi-Family Districts (R-3, R-4, R-5) - 8% of the total area.
         (c)   All other districts - 8% of the total area.
      (2)   Requirements are based on population density and impact.
   (B)   Cash contribution: $30,000.00 per acre.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.83 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LAND CONTRIBUTIONS.
   Unless otherwise waived, real property to be dedicated to the village shall
conform to the following criteria. The village reserves the right to reject at
will any parcel offered for dedication.
   (A)   Location. The location of any dedicated land shall only be as approved
by the village, consistent with the following guidelines:
      (1)   Locations shall generally conform with the village’s Park Master
Plan and the general location of park sites;
      (2)   Neighborhood park sites shall be accessible to the public and
designed to serve a population within one-half to one mile radius from the
site;
      (3)   Park sites shall be located in conjunction with and adjacent to
school sites whenever possible and desirable; and
      (4)   Community parks are intended to serve a broader area and should be
located and designed to offer a greater variety of facilities and activities.
These parks should typically be located on arterial or collector streets.
   (B)   Storm water and surface water detention or retention areas. Stormwater
and surface water detention and retention areas may be accepted at the
discretion of the village and not count toward the total land dedication.
   (C)   Wetlands and other natural areas. Wetlands and other natural areas
will be considered acceptable only when they are considered significant in
size, quality, and uniqueness, contain endangered plants or animal species, or
are adjacent to existing natural areas currently owned by the village. Wetland
areas will be accepted at the discretion of the Village Board. Any such wetland
area accepted by the village shall not count toward the total land dedication
required herein; provided that exceptional wetland designs or accompanying
amenities may be given partial or full credit toward the land/cash contribution
requirements at the discretion of the Board.
   (D)   Dimensions. Sites shall be generally square to rectangular in shape
with dimensions generally proportionate to the ratio of depth of between one to
one and three to two (1:1 and 3:2). These criteria shall not apply to sites
contemplated for extraordinary types of facilities such as, but not limited to,
trails and shore line frontages.
   (E)   Street frontage. Park space shall have a minimum street frontage of 50
feet and should generally be centrally located within a development.
   (F)   Access. Access to park sites and connections to other park sites are
to be provided by way of open access ways between homes and/or from public
right-of-way. The access ways shall be a minimum of 50 feet.
   (G)   Drainage. Except for stormwater and surface water drainage facilities
servicing the park facilities constructed on the site, detention or retention
basins for stormwater drainage from the surrounding development shall not be
located on or adjacent to park sites unless approved by the village.
   (H)   Long, narrow strips of open space are discouraged, except where
designated to protect linear sources such as streets or trails or to provide
connections between larger open space areas.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.84 IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED FOR LAND DEDICATION.
   Park sites to be dedicated by developer shall include the following land
improvements:
   (A)   Utilities. Each dedicated park site shall be provided with the
following utilities to the property line:
      (1)   Sanitary sewers adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of eight
inches in diameter. If the sanitary sewer is across the right-of-way from the
park site, the developer shall provide a capped six inch minimum diameter
service line, accessible by a manhole where necessary, and as approved by the
village.
      (2)   Water lines adjacent to the site shall be a minimum of six inches
in diameter. If the water line is across the right-of-way from the park site,
the developer shall provide a capped one-inch minimum diameter water line back
to the property line, as approved by the village, unless otherwise requested
and approved by the village for a special facility.
      (3)   Storm sewers shall be provided at appropriate locations to properly
drain the park site, as approved by the village.
      (4)   Other utilities, such as electric, gas and telephone shall be
provided adjacent to or at the property line of the park site. The utility
extension for any development adjacent to the park site shall be at the cost of
the developer and the village shall be responsible solely for utility
extensions necessary to construct a park facility. The village shall not be
responsible for utility extensions for any other purpose.
   (B)   Grading. Except for natural areas designated by the village for
retention in a non-disturbed state, each dedicated park site shall be graded to
drain at a minimum of 2% for open areas and slopes on berms, when berms are
required, and shall not exceed 4:1 (3:1 or steeper shall be deemed
unacceptable). Grading shall include, but not be limited to, berms for
separation, screening or aesthetics, placement of six inches of topsoil and
fine grading. Grading and berming shall be in accordance with plans approved by
the village.
   (C)   Other site developments. The developer shall be required to provide
other site developments for the land to be dedicated for park purposes, which
site developments shall include, but not be limited to, the following and be
subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   Seed the entire park site with a blend approved by the village.
Seeding shall include placement, watering as necessary and mowing until such
time as a full stand of turf is established and accepted by the village, but
not less than one full growing season.
      (2)   The developer may, at the discretion of the Board, make a cash
contribution in lieu of the required improvements to park land in an amount as
established by the village in its sole discretion.
      (3)   Developer shall install all public walks, curbs, pavement, sewers
and utilities along all park site frontages as per village subdivision
regulations and as the village may require.
      (4)   Developer shall install curb and aprons, if necessary, for
maintenance access areas, when parking is not required, as per village
specifications.
      (5)   At such time as the developer applies for development permits, a
bond or irrevocable letter of credit satisfactory to the village in its sole
discretion in the amount of 100% percent of the value of all park improvements
shall be delivered to the village and inure to the benefit of the village.
      (6)   Unless otherwise agreed, the above-listed park improvements shall
be completed at such a time as 50% of the residential building permits for the
development have been issued.
      (7)   The storage of overburden on a park site and the use of the park
site as a borrow pit is prohibited, though temporary storage shall be granted
in some cases. Terms of such temporary storage shall be determined by the
village. No foreign material shall be added to a park site, except as approved
by the village.
      (8)   The developer shall supply the village with a complete survey of
the site and as-built drawings, showing engineering and utilities. The
developer shall mark the corners of the property with permanent monuments.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.85 CRITERIA FOR A CONTRIBUTION IN LIEU OF PARK SITE.
   (A)   Where the development is small and the resulting park site is too
small to be practical or when no available land is appropriate for a park site
as determined by the village, the village may require the subdivider or the
developer to pay a cash contribution partly or wholly in lieu of land
dedication. A cash contribution in lieu of park site dedications shall be based
on acres of land on site improved as specified herein that otherwise would have
been dedicated as a park site. Such improvements shall include consideration of
grading, streets, water, and sewer systems, curbs and gutters, sidewalks,
electrical service, street trees and streetlights.
   (B)   The minimum cash contribution shall be $30,000 per acre.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.86 LAND/CASH CONTRIBUTION REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   The dedication of land required hereunder shall be made prior to the
final platting of 50% of the lots approved in the preliminary plat, and cash
contributions required hereunder shall be made on a pro-rata basis at the time
of application for a building permit for each lot in the development; provided
that if land dedication or fee in lieu obligations are not satisfied in full on
or before the date of the approval of the first final plat, then such
obligation shall be included in and secured by the improvement guarantee (bond
or irrevocable letter of credit) held by the village. Further, the dedications
or contributions required hereunder shall be applicable and due when a division
of property or development or redevelopment of property occurs which creates
lots or dwelling units in addition to the number of lots or dwelling units
existing as of the date these requirements are hereby established and in such
cases shall be paid upon application for a building permit for each additional
dwelling unit. In the case of land dedication, the developer shall agree to
maintain the property in accordance with all the laws of the village until such
time as the land is formally accepted by the village. Improvements to any
dedicated land shall be secured by a bond or letter of credit in an amount and
form acceptable to the village in its sole discretion at the time the final
plat is presented for approval.
   (B)   These requirements are not intended to apply to lands of subdividers
or developers who have entered into an agreement with the village for
annexation of land, or for the use of land in a planned development, where such
agreement would be violated by imposition of these requirements to such land;
provided that these requirements shall be fully enforceable against those lands
where the annexation agreement or the planned unit development agreement may
have expired and become void because the lands affected were not developed
within the time provided for in said agreements.
   (C)   Title insurance, survey, assessment plats. Each deed or other
instrument conveying land to the village shall be accompanied by:
      (1)   A commitment for a standard Form B ALTA owner’s policy of title
insurance issued by a title insurer licensed to do business in Illinois to
insure the village’s title to such real estate in an amount equal to its value
computed hereunder, subject only to the general real estate taxes which are not
due and payable at the time of delivery of the deed, covenants, conditions and
restrictions of record which do not prohibit or materially interfere with the
use of the subject real estate for park and recreational use;
      (2)   A current land survey of the subject real estate with all corners
staked, prepared by an Illinois registered land surveyor and certified to the
village as meeting or exceeding the minimum requirements of both an American
Land Title Association (ALTA) survey and the Illinois Land Survey Standards;
and
      (3)   Except in instances where the real estate to be conveyed has
assigned to it a permanent index number or numbers which do not cover any other
real estate, an assessment plat and tax division petition in form acceptable to
the appropriate county authorities so that the land to be conveyed can be
assigned its own permanent real estate index number for exemption purposes. All
documents described herein shall be in form satisfactory to the village in its
sole discretion.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
§ 151.87 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS.
   Minor subdivisions shall be exempted from the land/cash contribution
requirements established hereunder.
(Ord. 1025, passed 4-20-09)
MASONRY COVERAGE
§ 151.90 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Masonry or masonry products as used herein shall be limited to brick or
stone. BRICK shall mean a fire clay or manufactured cement-based product
installed per industry standards. STONE shall mean natural stone or a
manufactured cement-based architectural product made to match the appearance of
natural stone installed per industry standards.
(Ord. 1050, passed 3-15-10)
§ 151.91 MASONRY COVERAGE REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURE.
   (A)   Minimum construction requirements. All single-family dwellings located
in residential subdivisions platted after the enactment of this subchapter
shall be constructed in compliance with the following exterior building
materials requirements:
      (1)   A minimum of 25% of the dwellings to be located on the lots in the
subdivisions shall have a minimum of 50% of the exterior walls including a full
front facade constructed of masonry from the ground level (the building
foundation) to the building's eaves (excluding gables, dormers, openings for
windows and doors, and trim).
      (2)   A minimum of 50% of the dwellings to be located on the lots in the
subdivision shall have a minimum of a frill front facade constructed of masonry
from the ground level (the building foundation) to the building's eaves
(excluding gables, dormers, openings for windows and doors, trim).
      (3)   The exterior walls of 25% of the dwellings to be constructed on
lots located in the subdivision may be constructed of building materials other
than masonry.
      (4)   Monotony of design shall be avoided.
         (a)   All architectural designs and styles shall be complimentary. No
two detached single-family dwellings of substantially similar or identical
front elevation or facade shall be constructed or located on adjacent lots. In
determining whether single-family dwellings constructed or located on adjacent
lots are substantially similar, there shall be at least one major change as
herein defined between the dwellings. Major changes shall consist of the
following:
            Roof treatment-hip, gable, 25% or greater change in slope
            Location of garage entry-side and front
            Type of masonry treatment-extended porticos and the like
            Material treatment-full single masonry versus masonry combination
            Overall facade-Mediterranean versus colonial as an example
            Masonry arches
            Masonry bay projections
         (b)   In addition, three minor changes as herein defined shall
constitute a major change.
            Minor changes shall consist of the following:
            Vertical or horizontal siding
            Colors of materials
            Door treatment-garage and entry
            Window styles-casement, double hung and the like
            Shutter treatment
            Ornamental treatment-light fixtures, pediments, fascias, etc.
            Reversing plan
            Garage door design
            Masonry wing arms
   (B)   Variations from masonry coverage requirements.  Notwithstanding the
exterior wall masonry building coverage requirements contained in the preceding
division (A), when by reason of exceptional topographical conditions or other
extraordinary or exceptional situation or condition of a specific piece of
property, which condition is not generally prevalent in the area, the strict
application of the requirements contained in division (A) above would result in
peculiar and exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional and undue
hardship upon the owner of such property, the owner may seek a variance by
filing an application for variance under §
152.211 of the Village's Zoning Code. In reviewing and granting a variance to a
property owner pursuant to the provisions herein, economic hardship caused to a
property owner resulting from the cost of exterior building wall masonry
construction as compared to the cost of alternative exterior building wall
material shall not be a factor to be considered by either the Zoning Board or
the Village Board. Such economic hardship caused to a particular property owner
shall not constitute a peculiar and exceptional practical difficulty or
exceptional and undue hardship upon the property owner justifying relief from
the strict application of the requirements of division (A) herein.
   (C)   Plat requirements.  Each preliminary subdivision plat and final
subdivision plat (including plats for subdivisions to be platted and developed
in phases or additions) submitted to the village for Village Board approval
shall depict on the plat drawing and shall state in a note or chart on the plat
which lots shall be restricted to a minimum of a full front facade masonry
exterior wall coverage, a minimum of 50% masonry exterior wall coverage
including a full front facade, and which lots shall be unrestricted as to a
masonry exterior wall requirement. For ease of reference, the following code
(or abbreviations) shall be depicted on the lots on the plat drawing and used
on the chart with reference to the subject restrictions:
      (1)   (MF) for full front facade masonry;
       (2)   (M50) for a minimum of 50% masonry including a full front facade;
      (3)   (MO) for unrestricted lots. Plat submittals which lack the number
of building lots to fully satisfy the exterior wall masonry restriction
percentages required by division (A) above, shall be required to favor the more
restrictive over the less restrictive or unrestrictive building lots exterior
wall masonry requirement. So that, for example:
         (a)   If there are only three building lots in a subdivision, two of
the building lots shall be subject to the minimum of a full front facade (MF)
masonry wall restriction and the remaining one building lot will not be subject
to an exterior wall masonry construction restriction (MO).
         (b)   If there are only five building lots in a subdivision, three of
the building lots shall be subject to the minimum of a full front facade (MF)
masonry wall restriction, one of the building lots shall be subject to the
minimum of the 50% masonry wall (M50) restriction including a full front
facade, and the remaining one building lot will not be subject to an exterior
wall masonry construction restriction (MO).
         (c)   If there are only six building lots in a subdivision, three of
the building lots shall be subject to the minimum of a full front facade (MF)
masonry wall restriction, two of the building lots shall be subject to the
minimum of the 50% masonry wall (M50) restriction including a full front
facade, and the remaining one building lot will not be subject to an exterior
wall masonry construction restriction.
      The application of the exterior wall masonry requirement percentages
required by division (A) above shall be determined by the number of lots in a
subdivision and not by the square footage of the bulk area of a subdivision or
by some other method of measurement. The developer shall be required to select
the location of the restricted and the unrestricted lots, in accordance with
the requirements of division (A) above, at the time of the developer's first
subdivision plat submittal to the village (that is, at the time of preliminary
plat submittal for other than minor subdivisions and at the time of final plat
submittal for minor subdivisions).
      The exterior wall masonry requirement restriction that attaches to each
building lot in a subdivision shall be a minimum construction requirement and
shall run with the land to which the restriction pertains. After final platting
of a subdivision, a restricted lot may be exchanged for an unrestricted lot or
less restricted lot in the subdivision as follows: The Village Building
Commissioner may approve, in writing, the transfer of a masonry coverage
requirement from a restricted lot to an unrestricted lot or a less restricted
lot provided the masonry coverage requirement of division (A) herein for the
subdivision shall continue to be maintained.
(Ord. 1050, passed 3-15-10)
APPENDIX A: SCHEDULES AND BONDS
Section
   
1.   Checklist for preliminary plan
   
2.   Checklist for engineering plans
   
3.   Checklist for final plat
   
4.   Surety bond for improvements
   
5.   Cash bond
§ 1. CHECKLIST FOR PRELIMINARY PLAN.
                                                                                                   
(Name of Subdivision)
                                                                                                
(Date of Submission)
                                                                         (Due
Date of Recommendation - 60 Days)
(NOTE: To properly execute this checklist, the subdivider or his engineer
shall:
(A)   Insert the required information.
(B)   Denote compliance with applicable ordinances by placing his initials in
all spaces where applicable.
(C)   Denote those items which the subdivider considers “not applicable” to
this particular subdivision by the abbreviation “N.A.”).
         1.   Six copies of preliminary plan submitted.
         2.   Plans conform to §
151.21 (A).
         3.   Plan scale is not less than one inch to 100 feet.
         4.   Minimum profile scale is one inch to 100 feet horizontal and one
inch to ten feet vertical.
         5.   A title sheet is included with each set of preliminary plans.
         6.   Name of proposed subdivision shown.
         7.   Location given by town, range, section or other legal
description.
         8.   Name and address of owner, trust, corporation, or subdivider
having control of project is shown.
         9.   Name and seal of registered engineer or surveyor who prepared
topographic survey is shown.
         10.   Name and address of the designer of the plan is shown.
         11.   North direction is shown.
         12.   Date of preparation and date of revisions if any, is shown.
         13.   A location map is included indicating:
            a.   A scale of not less than one inch to 1,000 feet.
            b.   Boundary lines of adjoining land within an area bounded by the
nearest arterial streets or other natural boundaries.
            c.   Use of surrounding land.
            d.   Ownership of the surrounding land.
            e.   Alignment of existing streets.
            f.   Section and corporate lines.
         14.   Boundary lines of proposed subdivision is clearly shown.
         15.   Total approximate acreage is shown.
         16.   Existing zoning classification is indicated.
         17.   The following existing items, if within the boundaries of the
subdivision, or located 100 feet or less outside the boundaries are shown:
            a.   Previously platted streets and other rights-of-way with
improvements, if any, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   widths
               3.   names
            b.   Railroad rights-of-way, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   dimensions
            c.   Utility rights-of-way, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   widths
               3.   types
                  a.   sewer
                  b.   water
                  c.   electric
                  d.   other
            d.   Parks and other open spaces, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   area
            e.   Easements, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   width
               3.   purpose
            f.   Permanent buildings and structures, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   setback lines
               3.   names of owners
            g.   Section and corporate lines
            h.   Sanitary sewers, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   size
               3.   manholes
               4.   invert elevations at manholes
            i.   Water mains, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   size
               3.   valves, indicating:
                  a.   valve manhole, or
                  b.   valve box
               4.   fire hydrants and auxiliary valves
            j.   Culverts, indicating:
               1.   type
               2.   location
               3.   size
               4.   invert elevation
            k.   Storm sewers, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   size
               3.   catch basins
               4.   invert elevations
            l.   Watercourses, indicating:
               1.   type
               2.   high water width and elevation
               3.   width of easement
               4.   location of easement
            m.   Marshes, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   dimensions
               3.   soil bearing capacity
            n.   Rock outcrops, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   dimensions
            o.   Monuments and survey markers, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   type
         18.   Topographic data is given in feet above mean sea level within
the tract and to a distance of 100 feet beyond, indicating:
            a.   Existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two
feet.
            b.   Proposed contours at vertical intervals of not more than two
feet.
            c.   Bench mark, indicating:
               1.   location
               2.   description
               3.   elevation
         19.   Soil bearing data is given, if required by the Superintendent of
Streets, indicating:
            a.   Location of tests
            b.   Depth of tests
            c.   Soil bearing capacity
            d.   Moisture content
         20.   The following proposed items, if within the boundaries of the
subdivision or located 100 feet or less outside of the boundaries, are shown:
            a.   Layout of streets, indicating:
               1.   Arterial (Primary) streets, indicating:
                  a.   80 foot right-of-way width
                  b.   50 foot roadway width
               2.   Collector (secondary) streets, indicating:
                  a.   60 foot right-of-way width
                  b.   40 foot roadway width, back-to-back
               3.   Local (minor) streets, indicating:
                  a.   50 foot right-of-way width
                  b.   36 foot roadway width, back-to-back of curbs
               4.   Cul-de-sac streets, indicating:
                  a.   50 foot right-of-way width
                  b.   30 foot roadway width, back-to-back of curbs
                  c.   The length does not exceed 500 feet unless there are
less than 16 lots abutting the cul-de-sac street.
                  d.   Terminus is circular, or nearly so, and right-of-way is
at least 120 feet in diameter.
                  e.   Terminus roadway width is 90 feet in diameter.
               5.   Through street shown extended to boundaries of subdivision
               6.   Storm water runoff pattern on paving
            b.   Names of streets
                  1.   Not duplicating the name of any street heretofore used
in the village or its environs, unless the street is an extension of an already
existing street, in which case, the name shall be used.
            c.   Street improvement plan showing location of all new street
improvements, including those to the center line of previously dedicated
rights-of-way, abutting the subdivision, in accordance with present standards
of the village.
            d.   Utility easements:
                  1.   Located at the rear of each lot and other necessary
locations
                  2.   Not less than ten feet in width on each lot
                  3.   Purpose is indicated
                  4.   Storm water runoff is indicated
            e.   Centerline profiles of all streets showing gradients not less
than 0.4% and not more than:
                  1.   5.0% on collector streets
                  2.   7.0% on minor streets
            f.   Pedestrian ways, when required, indicating: (§
151.22 (E))
                  1.   Location at approximately the center of the blocks in
excess of 900 feet in length
                  2.   Width not less than ten feet
                  3.   Shrub or tree hedge at side boundary lines
            g.   Block layout, indicating: (§
151.22 (E))
                  1.   Blocks do not exceed 1,800 feet in length
                  2.   Additional access ways to parks, schools, etc., are
shown in accordance with the Plan Commission's requirements
                  3.   Blocks fit readily into the overall plan of the
subdivision, with due consideration given to:
                     a.   topographical conditions
                     b.   lot planning
                     c.   traffic flow pattern
                     d.   public open space areas
                  4.   Block numbers
                  5.   Blocks intended for commercial, industrial or
institutional use are so designated.
            h.   Lot layout, indicating:
                  1.   Lot dimensions
                  2.   Lot areas, not less than those stipulated in the
appropriated district regulations of the Zoning Code. (Areas may be listed by
Schedule)
                  3.   Building setback lines shown and properly dimensioned
                  4.   Proposed land use
                  5.   Lot numbers
                  6.   Corner lots are sufficiently larger than interior lots
to allow maintenance of building setback lines on both street frontages and
still allow a buildable width equal to that of the smallest interior lot in the
block
                  7.   All lots abut a publicly dedicated street for a distance
of not less than the minimum width of the lot
                  8.   Lots are as nearly rectangular in shape as is
practicable
                  9.   Lots are not less than the provision of the Zoning Code
                  10.   Lot lines are substantially at right angles to the
street lines and radial to curved street lines
                  11.   Double frontage lots only where:
                     a.   lots back upon an arterial street and front on an
access street
                     b.   topographic or other conditions make subdividing
otherwise unreasonable
                     c.   lots can be made an addition 20 feet deeper than
average
                     d.   a protective screen planting is indicated on one
frontage
                  12.   Lots abutting or traversed by a watercourse, drainage
way, channel way, channel, or stream, indicating:
                     a.   additional width and depth to provide an acceptable
building site
                     b.   width of easement is at least 15 feet wider on each
side of water at high water level
                  13.   Due regard for natural features, such as:
                     a.   trees
                     b.   watercourses
                     c.   historic items
                     d.   other similar conditions
            i.   Areas intended to be dedicated for public use, indicating:
                  1.   Plan conforms to general development plan of the
municipality
                  2.   Purpose
                  3.   Acreage
            j.   Source of domestic water supply, indicating:
                  1.   Connection to existing water mains
                  2.   Location of site for community water plant
            k.   Provision for sewage disposal, indicating:
                  1.   Connection to existing sanitary sewer mains
                  2.   Location of site for community sewage disposal plant
            l.   School sites, indicating:
                  1.   Location
                  2.   Dimensions
                  3.   Acreage
            m.   Topographic information, indicating:
                  1.   Proposed changes in elevation of land showing that any
flooding would be relieved
                  2.   Adequate installation of storm sewers would remove the
possibility of flooding
            n.   Sanitary sewer layout, indicating:
                  1.   Location
                  2.   Size
                  3.   Invert elevations at manholes
                  4.   Manhole locations
            o.   Water main layout, indicating:
                  1.   Location
                  2.   Size
                  3.   Looped pattern where practicable
                  4.   Fire hydrants, spaced apart not more than 400 feet
            p.   Storm sewer layout, indicating:
                  1.   Location
                  2.   Catch basins not more than 600 foot intervals
                  3.   Storm water is not carried across or around any
intersection
                  4.   Surface water drainage pattern for individual lot and
block
            q.   Street light layout, indicating:
                  1.   Locations and typical street light detail, or
                  2.   Statement by subdivider that street lights will be
installed in accordance with standards of the municipality
         21.   An outline of proposed covenants accompanies the plans,
indicating the intention of the subdivider to have the covenants recorded with
the final plat.
            a.   Protective against obstruction against drainage easements
         22.   Typical street cross-section showing base construction,
surfacing, concrete curb and sidewalk in accordance with the land improvements
code.
         23.   Indication that sidewalks will be installed along all lot lines
coincidental with street rights-of-way.
         24.   Indication on drawing or by certificate that subdivider is aware
of his responsibility for installation of street signs and for seeding and tree
planting in all parkways.
Completed by: (Name)
                                                                                                                                
(Address)
                                                                                                                                    
(Date)
Reviewed by: (Zoning Administrator)
                                                                                                                                    
(Date)
Considered by Plan Commission on: (Date)
                                                                                                                              
(Chairman)
(Ord. passed - - )
Click_here_to_view_Chapter_151,_Appendix_A,_§_1_in_a_PDF_document.
§ 2. CHECKLIST FOR ENGINEERING PLANS.
                                                                                                             
(Name of Subdivision)
                                                                                                               
(Date of Submission)
                                                                                     
(Due Date of Recommendation - 45 Days)
(NOTE: To properly execute this checklist, the subdivider or his engineer
shall:
(A)   Insert the required information.
(B)   Denote compliance with applicable ordinances by placing his initials in
all spaces where applicable.
(C)   Denote those items which the subdivider considers “not applicable” to
this particular subdivision by the abbreviation “N.A.”).
         1.   Plans have been submitted within 12 months of the date of
approval by the Village Board of Trustees of the Preliminary Plan.
         2.   Four copies of engineering plans have been submitted.
         3.   Plans conform to §
151.51 (A).
         4.   A title sheet is included with each set of plans, and includes:
            a.   Name of subdivision and unit number
            b.   Type of work covered
            c.   Location map showing relation of area to be improved to
existing streets
            d.   An index of sheets
            e.   A summary of quantities
            f.   Name, address, and seal of registered engineer preparing the
plans.
            g.   Date of preparation and revisions, if any, is shown
         5.   Plan and profiles.
            a.   Horizontal scale is not less than one inch to 50 feet.
            b.   Vertical scale is no less than one inch to five feet.
      6.   Final grading plan of the Planned Development is provided.
         7.   Cross sections are plotted on Federal Aid Sheets, Plate III.
         8.   North direction is shown for each separate plan view.
         9.   An adequate number of bench marks are shown with elevations
referenced to mean sea level, to facilitate checking of elevations.
         10.   Delineation is shown of all easements necessary to serve all
lots with underground and overhead utilities, and to allow for perpetual
maintenance to these facilities.
         11.   An application for Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
permit for the sanitary sewer extension accompanies the plans.
         12.   Sanitary sewer plans and specifications are complete and conform
to the standards and requirements of the Codes applicable thereto and denote
all of the following: (See
Chapter 38 )
            a.   All properties in the subdivision are served and house service
connections are provided.
            b.   The minimum size main is eight-inch I.D.
            c.   The plan conforms to the overall municipal plan for any trunk
sewers traversing the subdivision.
            d.   The distance between manholes does not exceed 400 feet.
            e.   The invert elevation of each manhole is shown.
            f.   The grade of each section of sewer is shown by percentage in
accordance with accepted engineering practice.
            g.   Extra strength pipe and extra strength manhole wall
construction is specified and shown on the plans and in the estimates of
quantities where the depth of installation exceeds eight feet.
            h.   Profile of existing and proposed ground surfaces.
            i.   Risers are shown for individual house service laterals where
depths of main exceeds 12 feet.
            j.   Provisions provided for air and mandral testing of all
sanitary sewers.
         13.   An application for State Environmental Protection Agency
approval of the water main installation accompanies the plans.
         14.   Water distribution plans and specifications are complete and
conform to the codes applicable thereto and include all of the following:
            a.   All properties in the subdivision are served.
            b.   The minimum size main is eight-inch I.D.
            c.   The plan conforms to the municipality's overall plan for any
trunk lines which might traverse the subdivision.
            d.   Valve and hydrant spacing and location conform to the approved
preliminary plan.
            e.   Materials and joint specifications comply with the
municipality's standards.
            f.   Specifications include provisions for testing and
sterilization of all new water distribution facilities.
               1.   Valve cover
               2.   Standard cover
               3.   Standard hydrant installation
         15.   Street plans, including storm sewers are complete and conform to
the codes applicable thereto and include all of the following:
            a.   The location of streets and width of pavements conform to
those indicated on the approved preliminary plan.
            b.   Plan shows curb, gutter and sidewalk locations, and include
the following information:
               1.   Corner curb radius is not less than 15 feet.
               2.   Curve data for all horizontal curves.
               3.   Direction of flow along all curbs.
               4.   No surface water is carried across or around any street
intersection, nor for a distance greater than 500 feet. The spacing for inlets/
catch basis shall be calculated so that the runoff from the design storm shall
not encroach upon the pavement by more than ten feet from back of curb;
provided, that under no circumstances shall such spacing exceed 500 feet.
            c.   Cross-sections are submitted as necessary to indicate
feasibility of proposed street elevations in relation to adjacent lot
elevations, and include sidewalk location.
            d.   Profiles are submitted for all paving centerlines and storm
sewers and indicate:
               1.   Catch basin invert elevations
               2.   Minimum pipe size is 12-inch I.D.
               3.   The grade of each section of sewer is shown by percentage
in accordance with accepted engineering practice.
               4.   Storm sewer elevations do not conflict with any other
underground utilities.
               5.   Storm sewer is connected with an adequate outfall.
               6.   Curve data is given for vertical road curves.
            e.   The storm sewer system is designed to provide sufficient
capacity for the drainage of upland areas contributing to the storm water
runoff on the street.
               1.   Storm sewer design computations are submitted with plans.
               2.   Ten-year design storm shall be used in calculating all
storm sewers, encroachments, and appurtenances.
               3.   All storm water detention facilities shall accommodate both
the ten- and one- hundred design storm.
            f.   A surface water drainage pattern is shown for each block.
            g.   Material specifications comply with standards of the
municipality and include:
               1.   paving base materials
               2.   paving surface materials
               3.   concrete
               4.   pipe materials
            h.   Typical cross-sections and details include the following:
               1.   Collector street
               2.   Minor or cul-de-sac street
               3.   Concrete curb and gutter
               4.   Concrete sidewalk
               5.   Standard manhole
               6.   Standard cover
               7.   Catch basin
         16.   Street light plans are complete and include the following:
            a.   Pole locations
            b.   Spacing
            c.   Average maintained footcandle illumination (calculated).
               1.   type of base and pole
               2.   bracket or arm
               3.   luminaire, indicating type of lamp and wattage
               4.   mounting height
         17.   Parkway improvement specifications are complete and include
provisions for:
            a.   Removal of stumps and trees that cannot be saved, boulders and
all other similar items.
            b.   Grading, installation of topsoil and seeding or sodding.
         18.   Street signs are shown to be installed at all street
intersections not previously marked.
Completed by: (Name)
                                                                                                                               
(Address)
                                                                                                                                    
(Date)
Reviewed by: (Engineer)
                                                                                                                                    
(Date)
Considered by Plan Commission on: (Date)
                                                                                                                              
(Chairman)
(Ord. passed - - )
Click_here_to_view_Chapter_151,_Appendix_A,_§_2_in_a_PDF_document.
§ 3. CHECKLIST FOR FINAL PLAT.
                                                                                                             
(Name of Subdivision)
                                                                                                               
(Date of Submission)
                                                                                     
(Due Date of Recommendation - 30 Days)
(NOTE: To properly execute this checklist, the subdivider or his engineer
shall:
(A)   Insert the required information.
(B)   Denote compliance with applicable ordinances by placing his initials in
all spaces where applicable.
(C)   Denote those items which the subdivider considers “not applicable” to
this particular subdivision by the abbreviation “N.A.”).
         1.   Plat has been submitted within six months after the approval of
the engineering plan.
         2.   Plat has been submitted within three years after the approval of
the preliminary plan (unless an extension of time has been requested of and
granted by the Village Board of Trustees).
         3.   One original drawing of the final plat has been submitted.
         4.   One transparency print of the final plat has been submitted.
         5.   Four copies of the final plat have been submitted.
         6.   Plat is drawn with black or blue ink on heavy linen tracing cloth
or polyester film.
         7.   North direction is shown.
         8.   Scale is shown (minimum one inch equals 100 feet).
         9.   Section corners and section lines are accurately tied into
subdivision by distances and angles.
         10.   Official survey monuments are shown as required.
         11.   All necessary easements are shown and dimensioned.
         12.   Building setback lines are shown and dimensioned in accordance
with the Zoning Code.
         13.   Lot areas are in accordance with the applicable zoning
regulations (to include lot number and address.)
         14.   Street names are shown.
         15.   Areas to be dedicated or reserved for public use are shown and
described and the purpose is designated.
         16.   Protective covenants are lettered on the plat or are
appropriately referenced.
         17.   Required certificates are shown and signed:
            a.   Surveyor's certificate (including legal description).
            b.   Owner's certificate.
            c.   Notary certificate.
            d.   County Clerk certificate.
            e.   Flood Hazard certificate.
            f.   Plan Commission certificate.
            g.   Village Board of Trustees certificate
            h.   Superintendents of Water, Sewer and Streets Certificate.
         18.   The following items have been submitted with the final plat:
            a.   Detailed specifications for all required land improvements not
previously submitted and approved with the engineering plans.
            b.   A copy of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency permit
for the sanitary sewer installation.
            c.   A copy of the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
approval of the water main installation.
            d.   An affidavit by the subdivider acknowledging responsibility
for the proper installation of all required land improvements.
            e.   A certified estimate of cost of all required land improvements
prepared by a registered engineer.
            f.   A description of the bond or guarantee collateral intended to
be submitted after contingent approval is granted by the municipality.
Completed by: (Name)
                                                                                                                                
(Address)
                                                                                                                                    
(Date)
Reviewed by: (Zoning Administrator)
                                                                                                                                    
(Date)
Considered by Plan Commission on: (Date)
                                                                                                                              
(Chairman)
(Ord. passed - - )
Click_here_to_view_Chapter_151,_Appendix_A,_§_3_in_a_PDF_document.
§ 4. SURETY BOND FOR IMPROVEMENTS.
   “KNOW all men by these presents that we,
                                                                        , (name
of individual, corporation, etc.), as principal, and the
                                 (name of bonding company), a corporation,
authorized to do business in the State of              as surety, are held and
firmly bound unto this Village of                         in the penal sum of
           Dollars, lawful money of the United States for the payment of which
we and each of us bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators,
successors and assigns jointly by these presents:
   'The condition of this obligation is such that whereas, the said
                                                            (name of
individual, corporation or principal) has agreed to construct and/or install at
its expense the following improvements:
   Street base and paving
   Concrete curb and gutters
   Water mains, appurtenances, and house services
   Storm sewers, appurtenances, and house services
   Sanitary sewers, appurtenances and house services
   Concrete sidewalks   )   Optional
   Street lights         )   Optional
   Site improvements   )   Optional
all in accordance with the specifications and codes of the village and
contained in plans and specifications prepared by
                                  (named engineer), and approved by the Village
Board of Trustees, at the following location:
                                                                                                                            
   (DESCRIPTION OF PROPERTY)
   'And has agreed to maintain such improvements constructed under this bond
for a period of one (1) year from the date of acceptance of the same by the
Village Board of Trustees.
   'NOW, THEREFORE, If the said principal shall well and truly perform in all
respects in strict accordance with the requirements, and shall save the Village
Board of Trustees harmless from all loss, cost or damage, by reason of their
failure to complete said work, or maintain said improvements, relating to the
above described work, then this obligation to be void, otherwise to remain in
full force and effect."
(Ord. passed - - )
Click_here_to_view_Chapter_151,_Appendix_A,_§_4_in_a_PDF_document.
§ 5. CASH BOND.
   The Plan Commission may permit a developer to file in lieu of the surety
bond called for in §
151.53(A), a cash bond guaranteeing that the improvements will be completed as
follows:
   Undertaking in Lieu of Completion Bond.
   WHEREAS, the statutes of the State of Illinois grant to a municipal
corporation the right to require that a developer constructing certain
improvements within that community guarantee the construction of such
improvements by a completion bond or other security acceptable to the
community; and
   WHEREAS,                                           desires to construct a
residential development within the                       of
                      , and that said municipality is willing to accept an
undertaking from a financial institution in the nature of an irrevocable
commitment in lieu of such completion bond.
   NOW, THEREFORE, are the following representations made by the owner and/or
developer to the                       of                  , as follows:
   1.   THAT                            is the owner and/or developer of the
property legally described in Clause 2 of this undertaking, and shall
hereinafter be referred to as “OWNER”; and, THAT the                      of
                        shall hereinafter be referred to as “MUNICIPALITY”.
   2.   THAT the OWNER is the legal title holder of the following described
property:
      [LEGAL DESCRIPTION]
   3.   THAT THE OWNER shall be required to install and guarantee the
installation of streets, sidewalks, street lights, sanitary sewers, storm
sewers, water lines, recreational facilities (including structures), and common
landscaping. In order to guarantee that such facilities shall be installed, the
OWNER shall submit to the municipal engineer such specifications and estimated
engineering costs as shall be required to meet with his approval. In aiding the
municipal engineer in determining the amount of reasonably anticipated costs
for the construction of such improvements, the OWNER may submit to the engineer
signed contracts for the construction of such improvements. The municipal
engineer, upon being satisfied that the design of the required improvements are
in accordance with the ordinances of the MUNICIPALITY and in accordance with
good engineering practices, shall estimate and certify an amount which shall
represent one hundred and ten percent (110%) of the reasonably estimated cost
of completing the required improvements for which the MUNICIPALITY is requiring
a completion guarantee.
   4.   [THAT except for the issuance of building permits for a reasonable
number of models], the OWNER shall not be entitled to the issuance of [further]
building permits until and unless said OWNER shall submit to the MUNICIPALITY,
an irrevocable financial commitment from a bank, savings and loan, or mortgage
company approved by the MUNICIPALITY in the amount certified by the Municipal
Engineer.
   5.   THAT the written irrevocable financial commitment shall be furnished to
the MUNICIPALITY from a banking or lending institution in the form marked
Appendix “A” and appended to this agreement.
   6.   THAT the OWNER guarantees the workmanship of the public improvements to
be installed upon the site for a period of one (1) year after their donation to
the MUNICIPALITY. Upon final completion of the streets, sidewalks, street
lights, sanitary sewers, storm sewers, and water mains the OWNER shall execute
a Bill of Sale for those items which are personal property. For a period of one
(1) year after the granting of the Bill of Sale in the case of personal
property and the acceptance for maintenance in the case of streets and
sidewalks, all necessary repairs to such facilities shall be the responsibility
of the OWNER.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF                             has hereunto set his hand and
seal this       day of                      , 19   .
                                         
   (OWNER)
   APPROVED by the             of                        this          day of
                 , 19  .
   BY:                                          
      (MUNICIPALITY)
(Ord. passed - - ; Am. Ord. 708, passed 8-19-96)
Click_here_to_view_Chapter_151,_Appendix_A,_§_5_in_a_PDF_document.
APPENDIX B: FIGURES
Figure
   
1.   Minimum sight lines at intersections
   
2.   Minimum reverse curves
   
3.   Typical curb and gutter
   
4.   Typical section; local streets, alley
   
5.   Inlets
FIGURE 1. MINIMUM SIGHT LINES AT INTERSECTIONS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1838.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - - )
FIGURE 2. MINIMUM REVERSE CURVES.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1841.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - - )
FIGURE 3. TYPICAL CURB AND GUTTER.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1844.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - - )
FIGURE 4. TYPICAL SECTION; LOCAL STREETS, ALLEY.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1847.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - - )
FIGURE 5. INLETS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1850.jpg]
 
(Ord. passed - - )
Click_here_to_view_Chapter_151,_Appendix_B,_Figure_5_in_a_PDF_document.
CHAPTER 152: ZONING CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
152.001   Title
   
152.002   Purpose
   
152.003   Jurisdiction
   
152.004   Interpretation; conflict with other provisions
   
152.005   Disclaimer of liability
   
152.006   Construction of terms
   
152.007   Definitions
Zoning Districts; Zoning Map
   
152.020   District classification
   
152.021   Zoning map
   
152.022   Boundary lines
   
152.023   Annexed territory
General Zoning Regulations
   
152.035   General prohibition
   
152.036   Unlisted uses prohibited
   
152.037   Lot to meet minimum requirements
   
152.038   Access required
   
152.039   Front setbacks
   
152.040   Intrusions into yards
   
152.041   Exceptions to height limits
   
152.042   Sewers; septic tanks
   
152.043   Accessory uses
   
152.044   Planned developments
   
152.045   Parabolic or dish-type antennas
   
152.046   Single side yard; special-use permit
   
152.047   Home kitchen operations and regulations
“A” Agricultural District
   
152.055   Purpose
   
152.056   Lot and building requirements
   
152.057   Permitted uses
   
152.058   Special uses
Residential Districts
   
152.070   “R-1” Single-Family Residence District (small lots)
   
152.071   “R-2” Single-Family Residence District (large lots)
   
152.072   “R-3” Two-Family Residential District
   
152.073   “R-4” Multiple-Family Residence District
   
152.074   “R-5” Mobile and Manufactured Housing District
Business Districts
   
152.085   “B-1” Community Business
   
152.086   “B-2” Highway Business District
Industrial District
   
152.100   “I” Industrial District
   
152.101   Use restriction
   
152.102   Lot and structure requirements
   
152.103   Permitted uses
   
152.104   Special uses
Off-Street Parking and Loading
   
152.115   Application of provisions
   
152.116   Existing parking/loading facilities
   
152.117   Parking lot design standards
   
152.118   Location of parking
   
152.119   Design and location of off-street loading facilities
   
152.120   Computation of required parking/loading spaces
   
152.121   Number of parking and loading spaces required
   
152.122   Prohibited parking
Signs
   
152.135   Definition
   
152.136   General prohibition
   
152.137   Computation of sign area allowance
   
152.138   Special situations
   
152.139   Signs to be nonhazardous; well-maintained
   
152.140   Illumination of signs
   
152.141   Revolving, rotating or moving signs prohibited
   
152.142   Nonconforming signs
   
152.143   Strictly prohibited signs
   
152.144   Signs permitted in any district
   
152.145   Sign regulations for specific district
   
152.146   Certificate of sign compliance
   
152.147   Violations
Additional Supplementary Regulations
   
152.155   Application of provisions
   
152.156   Agricultural activities
   
152.157   Fences, walls
   
152.158   Home occupations
   
152.159   Junk yards
   
152.160   Nursing homes
   
152.161   Recreational vehicles
   
152.162   Service stations
   
152.163   Swimming pools
   
152.164   Utility substations
   
152.165   Solar energy
Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
   
152.175   Purpose
   
152.176   Nonconforming lots
   
152.177   Nonconforming structures
   
152.178   Nonconforming uses occupying a structure
   
152.179   Nonconforming uses of land
   
152.180   Nonconformities under permit authority
Board of Zoning Appeals
   
152.190   Establishment of Board
   
152.191   Membership, appointment, compensation
   
152.192   Term of office; vacancies
   
152.193   Meeting; quorum
   
152.194   Records
Administration and Enforcement
   
152.205   Zoning Administrator; duties
   
152.206   Initial certificates of zoning compliance
   
152.207   Final certificates of zoning compliance
   
152.208   Corrective action orders
   
152.209   Emergency measures
   
152.210   Appeals
   
152.211   Variances
   
152.212   Special uses
   
152.213   Amendments
   
152.214   Complaints
   
152.215   Filing fees
   
152.216   Review and expiration
Telecommunications Facilities
   
152.300   Purpose
   
152.301   Definitions
   
152.302   Uses allowed
   
152.303   Registration and permits
   
152.304   Co-location and abandonment
   
152.305   Site selection and protocols
   
152.306   Design criteria
   
152.307   Exemptions
   
152.308   Severability and conflict resolution
   
152.999   Penalty
   
Appendix A:   Summary table of lot and building requirements
   
Appendix B:   Figures
   
Appendix C:   Lot terms
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 152.001 TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and cited as Zoning Code of the village.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.002 PURPOSE.
   In accordance with state law, this chapter regulates lots, structures and
uses in order to preserve, protect and promote the public health, safety and
welfare. More specifically, this chapter is intended to assist in achieving the
following objectives:
   (A)   To encourage the development of buildings and uses on appropriate
sites in order to maximize community-wide social and economic benefits while
accommodating the particular needs of all residents, and to discourage
development on inappropriate sites;
   (B)   To assist in implementing the Village Community Plan;
   (C)   To protect and enhance the character and stability of sound existing
residential, commercial and industrial areas, and to gradually eliminate
nonconforming uses and structures;
   (D)   To conserve and increase the value of taxable property throughout the
village;
   (E)   To ensure the provision of adequate lights, air and privacy for the
occupants of all buildings;
   (F)   To protect persons and property from damage caused by fire, flooding
and improper sewage disposal;
   (G)   To provide adequate and well-designed parking and loading space for
all buildings and uses, and to reduce vehicular congestion on the public
streets and highways;
   (H)   To ensure the proper design and improvement of mobile home parks;
   (I)   To promote the use of signs which are safe, aesthetically pleasing,
compatible with their surroundings, and legible in the circumstances in which
they are seen; and
   (J)   To provide for the efficient administration and fair enforcement of
all the substantive regulations in this chapter.
(ILCS Ch. 65, § 11-13-1, et seq.) (Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.003 JURISDICTION.
   This chapter shall be applicable only within the corporate limits of the
village.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.004 INTERPRETATION; CONFLICT WITH OTHER PROVISIONS.
   Every provision of this chapter shall be construed liberally in favor of the
village, and every requirement imposed herein shall be deemed minimal. Whenever
the requirements of this chapter differ from the requirements of any other
lawfully adopted and effective ordinance, regulation, deed restriction or
covenant, the more stringent requirement shall prevail.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.005 DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Except as may be provided otherwise by statute or ordinance, no
official, board member, agent, or employee of the village shall render himself
personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties under
this chapter.
   (B)   Any suit brought against any official, board member, agent or employee
of the village, as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge
of his duties under this chapter, shall be defended by the Village Attorney
until the final determination of the legal proceedings.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
Statutory reference:
   Local Governmental and Governmental Employees Tort Immunity Act, see ILCS
Ch. 745, Act, 10, § 1-101
§ 152.006 CONSTRUCTION OF TERMS.
   In construing the intended meaning of terminology used in this chapter, the
following rules shall be observed:
   (A)   Words denoting the masculine gender shall be deemed to include the
feminine and neuter genders.
   (B)   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense.
   (C)   Words used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
the plural the singular.
   (D)   The term SHALL is mandatory; the term MAY is discretionary.
   (E)   All distances shall be measured to the nearest integral foot: six
inches or more shall be deemed one foot.
   (F)   References to sections shall be deemed to include all divisions within
that section; but a reference to a particular division designates only that
division.
   (G)   A general term that follows or is followed by enumerations of specific
terms shall not be limited to the enumerated class unless expressly limited.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.007 DEFINITIONS.
   Words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in
section unless the context clearly indicates otherwise; terms not defined in
this section shall have their standard English dictionary meanings.
   ABUTTING. Having a common lot line or district line. Synonym for ADJACENT.
   ACCESS WAY. A curb cut, ramp, driveway or other means for providing
vehicular access to an off-street parking or loading area.
   ACCESSORY BUILDING. Accessory building shall include but not be limited to
play-houses, storage buildings, and garages. Accessory buildings shall not be
used for dwellings.
   ACCESSORY USE. Any structure or use that is:
      (1)   Subordinate in size or purpose to the principal structure or use
which it serves;
      (2)   Necessary or contributing to the comfort and convenience of the
occupants of the principal structure or use served;
      (3)   Located on the same lot as the principal structure or use served;
      (4)   Freestanding signs, etc. are not considered “structures” under this
definition; and
      (5)   Any accessory structure greater than 200 square feet shall be
constructed of material similar to the material used on the primary structure.
The Zoning Administrator may approve the use of other materials depending upon
the construction materials of surrounding properties.
   ADMINISTRATOR. The official appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Board of Trustees to administer this chapter, or his
representative. (Synonymous with ZONING ADMINISTRATOR.)
   AGRICULTURE. Any one or any combination of the following: the growing of
farm or truck garden crops, dairying, pasturage, horticulture, floriculture or
animal/poultry husbandry. The term AGRICULTURE encompasses the farmhouse and
accessory uses and structures customarily incidental to agricultural
activities.
   AISLE. A vehicular traffic way within an off-street parking area, used as a
means of access/egress from parking spaces.
   ALLEY. A public right-of-way which affords a secondary means of vehicular
access to abutting premises that front on a nearby street.
   ALTER. To change the size, shape or use of a structure.
   AMENDMENT. A change in the provisions of this chapter (including the
district map), properly effected in accordance with state law and the
procedures set forth herein.
   ANCHOR. Any approved device to which a mobile home is tied down to keep it
firmly attached to the stand on which it is placed.
   ASPHALTIC CONCRETE. A mixture of petroleum by-products and gravel used for
paving to form a smooth, permanent surface. ASPHALTIC CONCRETE does not mean
“oil and chip.”
   ATTACHED. As applied to buildings, ATTACHED means having common wall and/or
a common roof.
   BILLBOARD. Any single- or double-faced sign displaying messages or
advertising not associated with the premises on which the sign is located or to
which it is affixed.
   BLOCK. An area of land entirely bounded by streets, highways, barriers or
ways (except alleys, pedestrian ways, or exterior boundaries of a subdivision
unless exterior boundary is a street, highway or way), or bounded by a
combination of streets, public parks, cemeteries, railroad rights-of-way,
waterways or corporate boundary lines.
   BOARD OF APPEALS. The Board of Zoning Appeals of the village.
   BUFFER STRIP. An area of land, undeveloped except for landscaping, fences,
and the like, used to protect a use situated on one lot from the deleterious
effects of the use on the adjacent lot.
   BUILDING. Any covered structure permanently affixed to land and designed or
used to shelter persons or chattels.
   BUILDING HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the average grade at
the front wall of a building to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof
or to the deck line of mansard roof, or to the mean height level between eaves
and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs.
   BUILDING LINE. The line nearest the front of and across a lot, delineating
the minimum open space required between the front of a structure and the street
right-of-way line.
   BULK. Any one or any combination of the following structural or site design
characteristics:
      (1)   Size or height structure;
      (2)   Location of exterior walls at all levels in relation to lot lines,
streets, or other structures;
      (3)   Lot area;
      (4)   Yards or setbacks.
   CENTERLINE.
      (1)   The centerline of any right-of-way having a uniform width;
      (2)   The original centerline, where a right-of-way has been widened
irregularly;
      (3)   The new centerline, whenever a road has been relocated.
   CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, FINAL. A permit issued by the
Administrator indicating that a lot, or newly completed structure or use
complies with all pertinent requirements of this chapter and may, therefore, be
occupied or used.
   CERTIFICATE OF ZONING COMPLIANCE, INITIAL. A permit issued by the
Administrator indicating a proposed lot, structure or use is in conformity with
the requirements of this chapter.
   CLINIC. An establishment wherein licensed physicians or dentists practice
medicine or dentistry, but where overnight lodging for sick or injured persons
is not provided.
   CLUB/LODGE. A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide members
organized for some purpose(s) and paying regular dues and whose facilities are
restricted to members and their guests; not including a group organized solely
or primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial
enterprise.
   COMMERCIAL USE/ESTABLISHMENT. Any use or establishment wherein goods are
purchased or sold, whether to the consuming public (retail) or to other
businesses (wholesale).
   CONFORMING. In compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   CONVENIENCE/GASOLINE SERVICE STATION. A building or premises or portion
thereof used for retail sales of gasoline, oil and accessories of motor
vehicles and general convenience service goods to include the retail sale of
alcoholic beverages, not for consumption on the premises where it is sold.
   CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDER. A legally binding order issued by the Administrator
in accordance with the procedures set forth herein to effect compliance with
this chapter.
   DETACHED. As applied to buildings, DETACHED means surrounded by yards on the
same lot as the building.
   DEVELOP. To erect any structure or to install any improvements on a tract of
land, or to undertake any activity (such as grading) in preparation therefore.
   DIMENSIONS. Refers to both lot depth and lot width.
   DISTRICT, ZONING. A portion of the territory of the village wherein certain
uniform requirements or various combinations thereof apply to structures, lots,
and uses under the terms of this chapter.
   DRIVEWAY. A minor way commonly providing vehicular access to a garage or
off-street parking area.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof designed or used primarily as living
quarters for one or more families, but not including hotels, motels, or other
accommodations for the transient public.
   DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY.  A building or portion thereof containing three
or more dwelling units.
   DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY. A dwelling containing one dwelling unit and
intended for the occupancy of one family.
   DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY. A dwelling containing two dwelling units.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more rooms designed or used as living quarters by one
family. A DWELLING UNIT always includes a bathroom and a kitchen.
   EASEMENT. A right to use another person's real property for certain limited
purposes.
   ENCLOSED. As applied to a building, ENCLOSED means covered by a permanent
roof and separated on all sides from adjacent open space or other buildings by
fixed exterior walls or by common walls, with openings only for windows and
doors.
   ENLARGE. To increase the size (floor area, height, and the like) of an
existing principal structure or accessory use, or to devote more land to an
existing use.
   ERECT. To build, construct.
   ESTABLISHMENT. Either of the following:
      (1)   An institutional, business, commercial or industrial activity that
is the sole occupant of one or more buildings; or
      (2)   An institutional, business, commercial or industrial activity that
occupies a portion of a building such that:
         (a)   The activity is a logical and separate entity from the other
activities within the building and not a department of the whole; and
         (b)   The activity has either a separate entrance from the exterior of
the building, or a separate entrance from a common and clearly defined entryway
that has direct access to the exterior of the building.
   EXISTING. Actually constructed or in operation on the effective date of this
chapter.
   FAMILY.
      (1)   A single individual doing his own cooking and living upon the
premises as a separate housekeeping unit;
      (2)   A collective body of persons doing their own cooking and living
together upon the premises as a separate housekeeping unit in a domestic
relationship based upon birth, marriage, adoption or employment as domestic
servants; or
      (3)   A group of three unrelated persons doing their own cooking and
living together on the premises as a separate housekeeping unit pursuant to a
mutual housekeeping agreement (not including a group occupying a boarding or
rooming house, club, fraternity or hotel).
   FLOOR AREA, GROSS. The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several
floors of a building, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or
from the center of the common walls of attached buildings. GROSS FLOOR AREA
includes basement floors; attic floor space, halls, closets, stairwells, space
devoted to mechanical equipment, and enclosed porches.
   FREIGHT TERMINAL. As applied to motor carriers subject to the ILCS Ch. 625;
(Ill. Rev. Stat., Ch. 18), a station for commercial motor vehicles wherein said
motor trucks are stored, repaired or parked.
   FRONTAGE. The lineal extent of the front (street-side) of a lot or
establishment.
   GREENHOUSE. See NURSERY.
   HEREAFTER. Any time after the effective date of this chapter.
   HOME OCCUPATION. Any business, profession or occupation conducted for gain
entirely within a dwelling or on residential premises in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter.
   IMMOBILIZE. As applied to a mobile home, IMMOBILIZE means to remove the
wheels, tongue and hitch and/or to place on a permanent foundation.
   INTERSECTION. The point at which two or more public rights-of-way (generally
streets) meet.
   JUNK YARD. A tract of land, including any accessory structures thereon, that
is used for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling, packing,
disassembling, or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials
include vehicles, machinery, and equipment not in operable condition (or parts
thereof), and metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags and rubber tires. A lot on
which three or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a JUNK YARD.
A JUNK YARD includes an automobile wrecking yard.
   KENNEL. See Chapter 3 of Revised Code.
   LOADING SPACE. An off-street space used for the temporary parking of
commercial vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials.
   LOT. A tract of land intended as a unit for the purpose (whether immediate
or future) of transfer of ownership or development. A LOT may or may not
coincide with a LOT OF RECORD.
   LOT, CORNER. A lot having at least two adjacent sides that abut for their
full length upon streets. Both such side lines shall be deemed front lot lines.
   LOT, THROUGH. A lot having a pair of approximately parallel lot lines that
abut two approximately parallel streets.
   LOT AREA. The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side, and
rear lines of a lot.
   LOT COVERAGE. The portion of a lot that is occupied by buildings or
structures, including accessory buildings or structures.
   LOT DEPTH. The average horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line of a lot.
   LOT LINE, FRONT. The lot boundary abutting the street.
   LOT LINE, REAR. An interior lot line which is most distant from and most
nearly parallel to the front line.
   LOT LINE, SIDE. Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a
rear lot line.
   LOT OF RECORD. An area of land designated as a lot on a plat of subdivision
recorded with the County Recorder of Deeds, in accordance with state law.
   LOT SIZE REQUIREMENTS. Refers to the lot area, width and depth requirements
of the applicable district.
   LOT WIDTH. The measurement taken at the building line along a line as nearly
parallel to the front lot line as possible.
   MAINTENANCE. The routine upkeep of a structure, premises or equipment,
including the replacement or modification of structural components to the
extent necessary to keep the structure in sound condition.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which
is built on a permanent chassis in accordance with the National Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards, and designed to be used as a dwelling
by one family, including the plumb, air conditioning, heating, and electrical
systems contained within.
   MOBILE HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis in accordance with the National Manufactured Home
Construction and Safety Standards, and designed to be used as a dwelling by one
family, including the plumb, air conditioning, heating, and electrical systems
contained therein. (See MANUFACTURED HOME) A MOBILE HOME should not be confused
with a camping trailer or recreational vehicle.
   MOBILE HOME PARK. A parcel not less than five acres in area in single
ownership/control, developed with facilities for accommodating occupied mobiles
homes or modular homes in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
   MOBILE HOME SPACE. A portion of a mobile home park designed and improved for
the placement of one mobile home or one modular home and the private use of the
occupants thereof.
   MOBILE HOME STAND. The part of mobile home space beneath the mobile home
that includes the concrete slab on which the home is placed and to which it is
anchored.
   MOBILE or PORTABLE MARQUEE. A term used to describe any sign designed to be
moved from place to place, including (but not limited to) signs attached to
wood or metal frames designed to be self- supporting and movable; or paper,
cardboard or canvas signs wrapped around supporting poles.
   MODULAR HOMES. Any detached single-family dwelling that is transported to
the site where it will be permanently located in assembled form, and that fully
complies with the adopted Building Code.
   MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINALS. See FREIGHT TERMINAL.
   NONCONFORMING. As applied to a lot, structure, or use, NONCONFORMING means
lawfully existing on the effective date of this chapter, but not in compliance
with the applicable provision thereof.
   NUISANCE. Any thing, condition or conduct that endangers health, or
unreasonably offends the senses, or obstructs the free use and comfortable
enjoyment of property, or essentially interferes with the comfortable enjoyment
of life.
   NURSERY. A tract of land on which trees, shrubs and other plants are raised
for transplanting and/or sale, and including any structure in which said
activities are conducted.
   NURSERY SCHOOL. An establishment for the part-time care and/or instruction
at any time of day of four or more unrelated children of pre-elementary school
age.
   NURSING HOME. A building used as a medical care facility for persons who
need long-term nursing care and medical service, but do not require intensive
hospital care.
   OFFICE. Any building or portion thereof in which the business (usually
clerical and administrative affairs) of a commercial/service enterprise or
professional person is transacted.
   OVERLAY DISTRICT. A zoning district superimposed over one or more standard
(primary) zoning districts or portions thereof for the purpose of controlling
developmental problems caused by such factors as steep slopes, wet soils,
flooding, and the like.
   PARKING AREA/LOT, OFF-STREET. Land that is improved in accordance with this
chapter and used primarily for the storage of passenger motor vehicles, free of
charge or for compensation. An OFF-STREET PARKING LOT depending on the
circumstances of its use, may be either a principal use or an accessory use.
   PARKING LOT - COMMERCIAL. Land that is improved in accordance with this
chapter shall be limited to automobiles and trucks one-ton and under. Vehicles
over one ton can only use commercial parking lots for temporary parking unless
otherwise marked.
   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET. An area at least 20 feet long and ten feet wide
within an off-street parking area or garage, used for the storage of one
passenger motor vehicle.
   PERMITTED USE. Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a
particular district(s), provided it conforms with all the requirements
applicable to such district(s).
   PERSON. Any individual, firm, association, organization or corporate body.
   PREMISES. A lot and all the structures and uses thereon.
   PRINCIPAL BUILDING/STRUCTURE/USE. The main structure erected on or the main
use occupying a lot, as distinguished from an accessory (subordinate) structure
or use.
   PROPERTY LINE. See LOT LINE.
   PUBLIC UTILITIES. Utilities which are either government-owned or owned by an
established firm serving a wide geographical area and/or a substantial number
of persons.
   QUICK SHOP. Any small retail commercial or service establishment offering
goods/services primarily to the residents of a particular multiple-family
complex, mobile home park or similar development.
   RECONSTRUCT. As applied to nonconforming structures, RECONSTRUCT means to
rebuild after damage or destruction.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A term encompassing any type of vehicle used primarily
for pleasure, such as travel trailers, motor homes, boats, snowmobiles, and the
like.
   REFUSE. Garbage (food wastes) and trash, but not sewage or industrial
wastes.
   RELOCATE. To move to another portion of a lot or to a different lot.
   REPAIR. To restore to sound condition, but not to reconstruct.
   RESTRICTIVE. Tending to keep within prescribed limits.
   RETAIL. Refers to the sale of goods or services directly to the consumer
rather than to another business.
   RIGHT-OF-WAY, PUBLIC. A strip of land which the owner/subdivider has
dedicated to the village or to another unit of government for streets and
alleys.
   ROOF LINE. A horizontal line parallel to the average ground level of a
building along the front thereof, which line delineates the highest point of a
flat roof; or where the flat surface area of a gable, hip, mansard, or gambrel
roof is in view from the ground level, the line of demarcation between the flat
surface and the vertically structured facade; or the line along the front of a
building delineating the roof line between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.
   SCREENING. Trees, shrubs, walls, solid fences, and the like, used as a means
of view and noise control.
   SEMI-FINISHED MATERIALS. Materials which have been sufficiently processed at
heavy industrial facilities so that they are no longer in their raw state but
are readily usable by light industry for assembly or manufacture into consumer
goods.
   SERVICE BUILDING. A structure within a mobile home park or travel trailer
park that contains toilet facilities, clothes washers and dryers, and, in some
instances, a convenience store.
   SERVICE STATION. A building and premises or portion thereof designed and
used for the retail sale of gasoline or other automotive fuel, oil, and
automotive parts, supplies and accessories. A service station may include
facilities for washing vehicles and for making minor automotive repairs.
   SERVICE USE/ESTABLISHMENT. Any use or establishment where services are
provided for remuneration either to individuals or to other firms.
   SETBACK. The horizontal distance from the lot line in question to the side
of the structure facing that lot line or to the edge of the area of operation
of the principal use (in the case of a use which does not involve a structure).
   SIGN. Any object, device, display or structure, or part thereof, used to
advertise, identify, display, or attract attention to a person, establishment,
product, service, or event by any means including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination and the like. The term SIGN
includes, but is not limited to, every projecting sign, freestanding sign,
window sign, awning, canopy, marquee sign; changeable copy sign; illuminated
sign; moving sign; temporary sign; portable sign; pennants, banners, streamers,
or any other attention-getting devices; or other display whether affixed to a
building or erected elsewhere on the premises. The term SIGN excludes features
of a building which are an integral part of the building's design (such as, the
“castle-look” of a White Castle restaurant).
   SIGN, CANOPY/MARQUEE. Any sign affixed to, painted on, or suspended from an
awning, canopy, marquee or similar overhang.
   SIGN, FLUSH-MOUNTED. Any sign attached to or erected against a wall of a
structure with the exposed face of the sign in a plane approximately parallel
to the plane of the wall and not projecting more than 18 inches. A flush-
mounted sign displays only messages associated with the building to which the
sign is attached.
   SIGN, FREESTANDING. Any sign supported by one or more uprights, poles, or
braces placed in or upon the ground; or any sign supported by any structure
erected primarily for the display and support of the sign; provided that a
freestanding sign displays only messages associated with the premises on which
the sign is situated.
   SIGN, PROJECTING. Any sign which is suspended from or supported by a wall,
awning, canopy, marquee, and the like, and which is approximately perpendicular
thereto. A projecting sign displays only messages associated with the structure
to which it is attached.
   SIGN AREA. The entire area within a single continuous perimeter enclosing
the extreme limits of the message and the background thereof, calculated in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE. The maximum total sign area of all signs that an
establishment is permitted to display.
   SKIRTING. The covering affixed to the bottom of the exterior walls of a
mobile home to conceal the underside thereof.
   SPECIAL USE. A use that has unusual operational, physical or other
characteristics which distinguish it from the permitted uses of a district, but
which can be made compatible with the intended overall development within a
district. SPECIAL USES commonly must meet special standards not necessarily
applicable to permitted uses in the district, and are allowed only by permit.
   SPECIAL-USE PERMIT. A permit issued in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter to regulate development of a special use.
   STOP ORDER. A type of corrective action order used by the Administrator to
halt work in progress that is in violation of this chapter.
   STREETS. A public or private way for motor vehicle travel. The term STREET
includes a highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, pike, avenue,
boulevard, lane, place, drive, court, and similar designations, but excludes an
alley or a way for pedestrian use only.
   STREET, PRIVATE. Any street providing access to abutting property that is
not maintained by and dedicated to the village or other public entity.
   STRINGENT. Binding, exacting.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected on the ground, or attached to
something having a fixed location on the ground. All buildings are structures,
but not all structures are buildings.
   TOPOGRAPHY. The relief features or surface configuration of an area.
   USE. The purpose or activity for which land or a structure thereon is
designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
   UTILITY SUBSTATION. A secondary utility facility such as an electrical
substation, gas regulation station, telephone exchange facility, sewage
treatment plant, and the like.
   VACANT. As applied to a lot, vacant means that no structure is situated
thereon.
   VARIANCE. A relaxation of the strict application of the lot size, setbacks,
or other bulk requirements applicable to a particular lot or structure.
   VILLAGE. Either the territory or the local government of the village.
   WHOLESALE. Refers to the sale of goods or services by one business to
another business.
   WINDOW SIGN. Any sign visible from the exterior of a building or structure
which is painted directly on the surface of a window or affixed to or suspended
immediately behind the window for the purpose of informing the passerby of the
identity of the proprietor or business, or of the product or service which can
be obtained on the premises.
   YARD. Open space that is unobstructed except as specifically permitted in
this chapter and that is located on the same lot as the principal building.
   YARD, FRONT. A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line,
and the building line.
   YARD, REAR. A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line, and
the rear yard line.
   YARD, SIDE. A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line,
side yard line, and side lot line.
   YARD LINE. A line in a lot that is generally parallel to the lot line along
which the yard in question extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at
any point than the required depth or width of the yard.
   ZONING MAP. The map(s) and any amendments thereto designating zoning
districts, and incorporated into this chapter by reference.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 637, passed 5-17-93)
ZONING DISTRICTS; ZONING MAPS
§ 152.020 DISTRICT CLASSIFICATION.
   In order to implement the regulatory scheme of this chapter so as to achieve
the objectives enumerated at §
152.002, the entire village is hereby divided into the following zoning
districts:
District Designation Minimum Area*
District                  Designation Minimum Area*
Agricultural              A           10 acres
Conservation              C           None
Single-Family Residence   R-1         5 Acres
Single-Family Residence   R-2         3 Acres
Two-Family Residence      R-3         3 Acres
Multiple-Family Residence R-4         3 Acres
Mobile Housing            R-5         3 Acres
Community Business        B-1         1 Acre
Highway Business          B-2         2 Acres
Industrial                I           5 Acres
*The “minimum area” requirement (which is intended to prevent spot zoning)
refers to the smallest total area of contiguous parcels that can properly be
given the particular district classification. The minimum area requirement is
no satisfied merely because the acreage of numerous noncontiguous parcels,
when aggregated, happens to equal of exceed the minimum area indicated above.
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 1292, passed 3-24-25)
§ 152.021 ZONING MAP.
   (A)   The boundaries of the listed zoning districts are hereby established
as shown on the official zoning map of the village. This map, including all
notations and other information thereon, is hereby made a part of this chapter
by reference. The official zoning map shall be kept on file in the
Administrator's office.
   (B)   In accordance with the state law, if any changes are made in the
zoning districts or regulations during a calendar year, the Village Clerk shall
publish the revised official zoning map of the village not later than March 31
of the following year.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
Statutory reference:
   Provisions governing publication of the official zoning map, see ILCS Ch.
65, Act 5, § 11-13-19)
§ 152.022 BOUNDARY LINES.
   In determining with precision what territory is actually included within any
zoning district, the Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   (A)   Where a district boundary as indicated on the zoning map approximately
follows any of the features listed below on the left, the corresponding feature
on the right shall be deemed the district boundary:
      (1)   Center line of any street, alley or highway - such centerline.
      (2)   Lot line - such lot line.
      (3)   Railroad tracks - right-of-way line of such tracks.
      (4)   Stream - center of such stream.
      (5)   Section, fractional or survey lines - such lines.
   (B)   Whenever any street, alley or other public way is legally vacated, the
zoning districts adjoining each side of such vacated public way shall
automatically extend to the center of such way, and all territory included in
the vacated way shall thereafter be subject to all regulations of the extended
districts.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.023 ANNEXED TERRITORY.
   Whenever any territory is hereafter annexed into the village, the Village
Board of Trustees shall establish its zoning district classification at the
time of annexation.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 745, passed 4-19-99)
GENERAL ZONING REGULATIONS
§ 152.035 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Hereafter, within the village, it shall be unlawful to do any of the
following except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter:
   (A)   Erect, use, occupy, enlarge, alter, relocate or reconstruct any
structure or part thereof;
   (B)   To create any lot; or
   (C)   To use, occupy or develop any lot or part thereof except in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.036 UNLISTED USES PROHIBITED.
   Whenever any use is not specifically listed as permitted or special within a
particular zoning district, such use shall be deemed prohibited in that
district. However, if the Village Board determines that the unlisted use is
similar to and compatible with the listed uses, they may allow such use by
amending this chapter in accordance with §
152.213. The Village Board's decision shall become a permanent public record,
and any unlisted use that they approve shall thereafter have the same status as
listed uses.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.037 LOT TO MEET MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.
   Except as specifically provided otherwise elsewhere in this chapter, every
lot must meet the minimum area, minimum dimensions, and minimum setback
requirements of the district in which it is located independently; that is,
without counting any portion of an abutting lot.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.038 ACCESS REQUIRED.
   No building shall be erected on any lot unless such lot abuts, or has
permanent easement of access to, a public street or private street that
conforms to the standards set forth in
Chapter 151, Subdivision Code.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.039 FRONT SETBACKS.
   (A)   Corner and through lots. Every lot with multiple frontages (such as
corner or through lots) shall meet the front setback requirements of the
district in which it is located on every side having frontage.
   (B)   Built-up areas. Except as specifically provided otherwise in the B-
1 Community Business District and in all residential zoning districts where
lots having 50% or more of the frontage on one side of a street between
intersections (that is, in one block) are developed with buildings, and the
front setbacks of those lots do not differ by more than ten feet, the minimum
required front setback on that block shall be the average of the existing front
setbacks. However, in any built-up area, no front setback greater than 50 feet
shall be required.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.040 INTRUSIONS INTO YARDS.
   To the extent indicated below, the following features of principal buildings
may intrude into required yards without thereby violating the minimum setback
requirements (Service stations are not subject to these restrictions):
 
Features                                              Maximum Intrusion
Cornices, chimneys, planters or similar architectural 2 feet
features
Fire escapes                                          4 feet
Patios                                                No limit
Porches, if unenclosed and at ground level            6 feet
Balconies                                             4 feet
Canopies                                              4 feet
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.041 EXCEPTIONS TO HEIGHT LIMITS.
   (A)   Necessary appurtenances. Chimneys, church spires, parapet walls,
cooling towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers, antennas or other necessary
appurtenances commonly constructed above the roof line shall be permitted to
exceed the maximum height limitations of the district in which they are located
if they comply with all other pertinent ordinances of the village.
   (B)   Intersections. On corner lots, in the triangular portion of land
bounded by intersecting street lines and a line joining these street lines at
points 30 feet measured along the right-of-way lines, and not the centerline
intersection, no obstruction, whether natural or man-made, shall intrude into
the air space that is between two feet and ten feet above the level of the
adjacent street. (See
Appendix B, Figure 1)
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.042 SEWERS; SEPTIC TANKS.
   (A)   In all districts, property owners of all buildings and places where
people live, work or assemble shall provide for the sanitary disposal of all
sewage in accordance with the following requirements:
      (1)   Whenever the public sanitary sewerage system is reasonably
accessible (that is, when the distance from the property in question to the
nearest public sewer with available capacity does not exceed 600 feet, all
sewage shall be discharged into such system, whether or not a private sewerage
system already exists or is more convenient.
      (2)   Whenever the public sewerage system is not reasonably accessible as
determined by the Village Engineer, a private sewerage system shall be
installed and used. All private sewerage systems shall be designed,
constructed, operated and maintained in conformity with the following
requirements:
         (a)   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Licensing Act, ILCS Ch. 225,
Act 225, §§ 1 through 23, as amended from time to time;
         (b)   Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code No. 4.002, promulgated by
the Director of the Illinois Department of Public Health, as amended from time
to time;
         (c)   Pertinent, current regulations issued by the Illinois
Environmental Protection Agency; and
         (d)   Applicable codes and regulations of the village, particularly
Chapter 151, Subdivision Code.
   (B)   The Administrator shall not issue any initial certificate of zoning
compliance unless, following consultation with the Village Engineer, he is
satisfied that these requirements will be met.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
Cross-reference:
   Sewers and septic tanks, see
Ch. 51
§ 152.043 ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   When accessory uses permitted.  
      (1)   Any accessory use shall be deemed permitted in a particular zoning
district if such use:
         (a)   Meets the definition of ACCESSORY USE as set forth in §
152.007;
         (b)   Is accessory to a principal structure or use that is allowed in
a particular zoning district as a permitted or special use; and
         (c)   Is in compliance with the restrictions set forth in division (B)
of this section.
      (2)   If an accessory structure is attached to a principal structure, it
shall be considered part of such structure.
   (B)   Restrictions.
      (1)   Height. No accessory use shall be higher than 15 feet in the
Agricultural District or in any residential district, or 25 feet in any other
zoning district. Provided, that there shall be no height limit on agriculture-
related accessory structures.
      (2)   Setbacks. No accessory use in any zoning district shall be located
in any part of any yard (front, side or rear) that is required because of the
setback regulations of such district; provided that, except as specifically
provided otherwise, in the Agricultural District or in any residential
district, an accessory use may be located as close as five feet to any side or
rear lot line. Any accessory use must be behind the most rear building line of
the principal structure.
      (3)   Yard coverage. Accessory uses shall not cover more than 30% of a
required rear yard.
      (4)   Use as dwelling. Use of any accessory structure as a dwelling is
strictly prohibited throughout the village.
      (5)   Number. No lot shall contain more than one accessory use.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - - ; Am. Ord. 1237, passed 5-
24-21) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.044 PLANNED DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Definition. For the purpose of this chapter, PLANNED DEVELOPMENT “PD”
shall mean a development wherein, in accordance with an approved development
plan, common open space is reserved, various housing types and other structures
and uses may be mixed, and/or overall average density does not exceed the usual
zoning district limit.
   (B)   Objectives. This section authorizes development of planned
developments and establishes procedures in order to achieve the objectives
enumerated at §
152.002 and the following additional objectives:
      (1)   To provide a regulatory mechanism whereby the village can be
assured that upon completion, approved development projects will substantially
conform to the plans or models which constituted the basis for the issuance of
the necessary zoning and subdivision permits.
      (2)   To permit development of a wide variety of housing types and other
structures and uses in a single comprehensively planned project;
      (3)   To preserve the natural topography, scenic features, mature trees,
and historic structures existing on sites proposed for development;
      (4)   To encourage innovative site layouts and coordinated architectural
treatment of different housing types and other structures;
      (5)   To ensure the provision of usable common open space in planned
developments, and to spur installation of various amenities therein;
      (6)   To facilitate the economical installation of standard streets,
sewers, utilities and other improvements.
   (C)   Compliance with provisions. Except as specifically provided otherwise
in this section, planned developments, including all structures and uses
therein, shall, at a minimum, be built in conformity with all applicable codes
and ordinances including this chapter and
Chapter 151, Subdivision Code.
   (D)   Districts where allowed. Planned developments may be built in any
zoning district, but only upon the issuance of a special use permit by the
Village Board after a hearing before the Zoning Board of Appeals. (See §
152.212(A))
   (E)   Permissible deviation from code requirements. The planned development
concept is intended to afford both the developer and the village considerable
flexibility in formulating development proposals. Consequently, to the extent
indicated in this section, Planned Developments may deviate from generally
applicable code requirements without a variance. Any proposed deviation not
listed below, however, shall require a variance.
      (1)   Mixed uses. Planned developments may include all types of
residential structures and any other uses approved by the Village Board,
provided, that in approving such mixed uses, the Village Board may attach any
conditions necessary to protect the public welfare.
      (2)   Lot and structure requirements. In Planned Development the Village
Board may approve any reasonable deviation from the lot and structure
requirements of the particular zoning district so long as the different uses
within the “PD” are appropriately interrelated and property abutting the “PD”
is adequately protected from any potential adverse impacts of the development.
LOT AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS shall mean minimum individual lot area, width,
and depth; minimum setbacks; and maximum structure height.
      (3)   Accessory uses. In “PD” the Village Board may allow the developer
to disregard the usual restrictions on accessory uses other than the
prohibition against using an accessory structure as a dwelling.
      (4)   Location of parking/loading spaces. By permission of the Village
Board, off-street parking and loading spaces in planned developments need not
be located in accordance with generally applicable requirements. The minimum
number of such spaces, however, shall not be less than the number required as
per §
152.115 through
152.122.
   (F)   Procedures for planned developments.
      (1)   Required procedures. Every applicant for planned development
approval shall comply with the procedural requirements of this section. The
required procedures are as follows:
         (a)   Filing development plan with the Zoning Administrator;
         (b)   Provision by the developer of adequate assurance for the
completion of required improvements as per the development plan;
         (c)   Public hearing by the Zoning Board of Appeals as per the
requirements of §
152.212(A);
         (d)   Recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals regarding
approval/rejection of the development plan.
         (e)   Approval/rejection by the Village Board.
      (2)   Application, required information. Every applicant for approval of
a development plan shall submit to the Administrator, in narrative and/or
graphic form, the items of information listed below:
         (a)   Written documents.
            1.   Legal description of the total site proposed for development;
            2.   Names and addresses of all owners of property within or
adjacent to the proposed “PD.”
            3.   Statement of the planning objectives to be achieved by the
“PD” through the particular approach proposed by the applicant, including a
description of the character of the proposed development and the rationale
behind the assumptions and choices made by the applicant;
            4.   Development schedule indicating the approximate date when
construction of the “PD” or stages of the “PD” can be expected to begin and be
completed;
            5.   Statement of the applicant's intentions with regard to the
future selling or leasing of all or portions of the “PD”, such as land areas,
dwelling units, and the like;
            6.   Data indicating total number and type of proposed dwelling
units, gross and net acreage of parcel, acreage of gross and usable open space,
and area of any commercial uses.
         (b)   Graphic materials.
            1.   Existing site conditions including contours at ten-foot
intervals and locations of water courses, flood plains, unique natural features
and wooded areas;
            2.   Proposed lot lines and plot designs;
            3.   Proposed location, size in square feet, and general appearance
of all existing and proposed buildings (both residential and nonresidential)
and other structures and facilities;
            4.   Location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be
conveyed, dedicated, or reserved as common open spaces, public parks,
recreational areas, school sites, and similar public and semi-public uses;
            5.   Existing and proposed vehicular circulation system, including
off-street parking and loading areas and major points of ingress and egress to
the development (notations of proposed ownership, public or private, should be
included where appropriate);
            6.   Existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system, including
its relationship to the vehicular circulation system and proposed treatments of
points of conflict;
            7.   Existing and proposed utility systems including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers, and water, electric, gas and telephone lines;
            8.   General landscape plan indicating the treatment of both
private and common open spaces and the location of required buffer strips;
            9.   Enough information on land areas adjacent to the proposed “PD”
to indicate the relationships between the proposed development and existing and
proposed adjacent areas;
            10.   Any additional information required by the village to
evaluate the character and impact of the proposed “PD.”
      (3)   Criteria considered. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall compile a
written report recommending acceptance or rejection of the development plan. In
recommending what their decision should be, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall
consider the following criteria:
         (a)   The extent to which the proposed development is consistent with
the Comprehensive Plan and with the purposes of this chapter and of all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
         (b)   The extent to which the proposed development deviates from the
regulations that are generally applicable to the property (including but not
limited to, the use and lot and building regulations of the district), and the
apparent merits (if any) of the deviations;
         (c)   Whether the proposed design of-the “PD” makes adequate
provisions for vehicular and pedestrian circulation, off-street parking and
loading, separation of residential and commercial uses, open space,
recreational facilities, preservation of natural features, and so forth;
         (d)   The compatibility of the proposed “PD” with adjacent properties
and surrounding area; and
         (e)   Any other reasonable criteria that the Zoning Board of Appeals
may devise.
      (4)   Recommendation by Zoning Board. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall
either recommend approval or disapproval of the Development Plan. The Zoning
Board shall not recommend approval of any planned development plan unless:
         (a)   The developer has posted a performance bond or deposited funds
in escrow in the amount the Village Engineer deems sufficient to guarantee the
satisfactory completion of all required improvements; and
         (b)   The Village Attorney has stated that all legal instruments
(particularly the restrictive covenants) are satisfactory; and
         (c)   The proposed “PD”, as evidenced by the development plan,
complies with all applicable codes and ordinances. (Deviations to the extent
permitted under division (E) of this section shall not be deemed
noncompliance.)
   (G)   Changes in approved plans. No changes shall be made to any approved
“PD” development plan except as follows:
      (1)   Minor changes if required by engineering or other circumstances not
foreseen at the time the final development plan was approved.
      (2)   All other changes shall require a public hearing before the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
      (3)   No approved change shall have any effect until it is recorded with
the County Recorder of Deeds as an amendment to the recorded copy of the
development plan. (See §
152.213 for final procedures).
   (H)   Failure to begin development. If a substantial amount of construction
has not begun within the time stated in the approved construction schedule, the
development plan shall lapse upon written notice to the applicant from the
Zoning Administrator and shall be of no further effect. However, in his
discretion and for good cause, the Zoning Administrator may extend for a
reasonable time the period for the beginning of construction. If a final
development plan lapses as per this section:
      (1)   The special use permit shall be automatically revoked;
      (2)   Any zoning permits shall automatically become null and void; and
      (3)   All regulations applicable before the “PD” was approved shall
automatically be in full effect.
   (I)   Municipal exemption. In conjunction with any existing or proposed
development, the village shall be exempt from all of the provisions of this
section.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.045 PARABOLIC OR DISH-TYPE ANTENNAS.
   (A)   Parabolic or dish-type antennas located outside of the business or
residence shall meet the following requirements:
      (1)   Maximum number per business lot or residence lot shall be one.
Businesses selling these discs shall be allowed a maximum of three and only one
of these shall be allowed in front of the building.
      (2)   The parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be located in the rear
yard, except that when the main building is on a corner lot, the parabolic or
dish-type antenna cannot be closer to the adjoining side street than the main
building is permitted to be located.
      (3)   (a)   The parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be placed in the
rear yard except that if a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained from the
rear yard, the antenna may be located on the side yard of the property, subject
to the approval of the Zoning Administrator and subject to the other
requirements of this section. Roof mounted dishes will be located on the rear
portion of the roof.
         (b)   In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained
from the rear or side yard of the property, such antenna may be placed on the
roof of a structure subject to the approval of the Zoning Administrator and
subject to the other requirements of this section.
      (4)   Screening shall be as deemed necessary by the Zoning Administrator
for commercial installations.
      (5)   All parts of the parabolic or dish-type antenna structure must be a
minimum of five feet from all property lines of the lot.
      (6)   The parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be mounted on a steel pipe
support embedded in a concrete foundation, and the parabolic or dish-type
antenna when turned perpendicular to the ground, together with the base, shall
not extend more than 15 feet above the ground. In the event that a usable
signal cannot be obtained at a height of 15 feet, then the pole may be raised
to the minimum height necessary to obtain a clear signal for the installation.
The main diameter of the parabolic or dish-type antenna shall not exceed 11
feet.
      (7)   The base assembly shall be adequately anchored to the steel pipe
support so as not to constitute a hazard in winds of 80 miles per hour
velocity. Structural design for the parabolic or dish-type antenna base
assembly, steel pipe support and concrete foundation shall conform to the
applicable provisions in Article X and Article XII of the BOCA Basic Building
Code. All plans, computations and specifications required for such design work
shall be prepared by an architect or engineer, or the structural design shall
be warranted by the manufacturer or installer, and shall be reviewed and
approved by the Village Engineer.
      (8)   All petitions for relief from the provisions of this section shall
be heard by the Zoning Board of Appeals and approved by the Village Board.
      (9)   Observance of safe distances between the parabolic or dish-type
antenna, appendages thereto, and public utility wires in accordance with public
utility requirements shall be mandatory. Polar mount and drive motor systems
shall conform to the BOCA Electric Code requirements in existence at the time
of application for a permit.
      (10)    A zoning occupancy permit shall be required prior to erection of
any such parabolic or dish- type antenna.
      (11)    No parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be roof-mounted, unless
the dish is four feet or less in diameter and is mounted on the rear portion of
the roof.
      (12)    No parabolic or dish-type antenna shall be used or serve as a
sign for the purpose of advertisement by a business or commercial unit.
   (B)   Nuisance and injunction. Any violation of this section is hereby
declared to be a nuisance. In addition to any other relief provided by this
chapter, the Village Attorney may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction
for an injunction to prohibit the continuation of any violation of this
section. Such application for relief may include seeking a temporary
restraining order, temporary injunction and permanent injunction.
   (C)   This section shall not apply to any existing parabolic or dish-type
antennae which have been installed prior to the effective date of this section.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.046 SINGLE SIDE YARD; SPECIAL-USE PERMIT.
   Upon the application for and the Village Board granting a special-use
permit, a person may occupy a structure in a single-family district that has a
zero lot line for one side yard. The following regulations shall apply to that
district:
   (A)   Front yard. There shall be a front yard of not less than 25 feet in
depth.
   (B)   Side yard. The total of the side yards shall be 15 feet, provided that
only one side yard need be provided, so a building is permitted with a 15-foot
side yard on one side and with the side of the building on the lot line on the
other. On a corner lot, there shall be a side yard of not less than 25 feet on
the side of the building nearest the street. No part of any building shall
project over onto any neighboring lot unless an easement permitting the same
has been duly executed and recorded by the owner of the neighboring lot. Two
buildings on neighboring lots may be built touching each other with party walls
or adjacent walls, provided that such walls shall comply with all applicable
provisions of the village building ordinances relating to walls between
condominiums and apartments. No two buildings shall be built touching each
other unless the owners of each of the two lots involved sign an agreement.
   (C)   Lot coverage. Not more than 35% of any lot shall be occupied by
buildings of any kind.
   (D)   Lot area. Each dwelling hereinafter erected or structurally altered
shall be on a lot having an area of not less than 6,000 square feet and a width
of not less than 50 feet, however, any lot established before the effective
date of this amendment may be used as a building site even though it does not
comply with the requirements of this chapter.
   (E)   Accessory buildings. No accessory building shall encroach on any
required front yard. No accessory building on any corner lot shall encroach on
any side yard adjacent to the street. All accessory buildings greater than 200
square feet will be set upon a concrete foundation.
   (F)   Required floor areas. Each single-family residence in the single side
yard, single family district shall have a floor area of not less than 1,000
square feet. The areas of garages, open porches, cellars and basements shall
not be included.
   (G)   Minimum width. No principal building shall have a width of less than
20 feet, measured on the exterior walls. Attached garages and porches shall not
be included in measuring the width of the principal building.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
Cross-reference:
   Special-use permit procedure, see §
152.212(A)
§ 152.047 HOME KITCHEN OPERATIONS AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Village of Millstadt hereby adopts and incorporates herein the
terms and provisions of State Statutory Enactment ILCS Ch. 410, Act 625, § 3.6
entitled "Home Kitchen Operation" as if same were fully set forth herein
including its reference to other provisions of the Food Handling Regulation
Enforcement Act.
   (B)   The village hereby authorizes home kitchen operations within the
geographic boundaries of the village pursuant and subject to the terms,
provisions, limitations, rules, and regulations specified in said statutory
enactment.
   (C)   No person, firm, corporation, or other entity of any kind or nature
shall establish, or maintain a home kitchen operation without first having
obtained a license as herein required. No license shall be required for any
religious, charitable, or non-profit organization for fundraising purposes.
   (D)   The annual fee for such license shall be $25 and shall be for one
year, beginning the first day of May of each calendar year. Application for
said license shall be made to the Village Clerk.
   (E)   The St. Clair County Health Department shall have the power and
authority to inspect a home kitchen operation in the event of a complaint,
disease outbreak, or a failure to maintain sanitary conditions as defined by
the Department or any state agency.
   (F)   Any person, firm, corporation, or other entity of any kind or nature
violating the provisions of this section shall upon conviction be fined not
less than $75 nor more than $750 for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day on which a violation occurs or continues. Any
license granted under the provisions of this section may be revoked for any
violation hereof, and such revocation shall be in addition to any fine imposed
by virtue of this section.
(Ord. 1180, passed 9-24-18)
“A” AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
§ 152.055 PURPOSE.
   The “A” Agricultural District is established to protect predominately
agricultural land from intense and disorderly development. Territory located on
the periphery of the corporate limits is generally agricultural/undeveloped or
sparsely developed. As such areas are annexed to the village, it is the intent
of this district to preserve and maintain the present land uses until such time
that proper infrastructure can be extended to adequately serve such property to
accommodate orderly development which may be proposed by the owner.
(Ord. 754, passed 10-18-99)
§ 152.056 LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS.
   Every principal building erected in any “A” District shall conform to the
applicable requirement as outlined as follows:
   (A)   Minimum lot area:                           10 acres
   (B)   Minimum lot width: (at established building 400 ft.
   (C)   Minimum lot depth:                          500 ft.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks:                            
      (1)   From front lot line:                  25 ft.
      (2)   From side lot line:                   25 ft.
      (3)   From rear lot line:                   50 ft.
   (E)   Maximum building height:                    35 ft.*
 
*except silos, barns, and farm-related structures
(Ord. 754, passed 10-18-99)
§ 152.057 PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   Agricultural and farming related uses, including the production of
crops and/or livestock; livestock shall not be penned within 200 feet of a
residential district.
   (B)   Detached single family residences, including modular homes; one by
right plus one for each additional ten acres.
   (C)   Cemeteries/mausoleums.
   (D)   Sale of farm produce.
   (E)   Farm implement dealers; however, not assembly type uses.
   (F)   Nurseries, commercial greenhouses, and related uses.
   (G)   Essential governmental or public utility services.
   (H)   Open air non-commercial recreational uses including parks and
playgrounds.
   (I)   Radio and transmission towers provided that such facilities comply
with all applicable clear zones as established by FAA.
   (J)   Hunting and fishing and game preserves.
   (K)   Accessory buildings, land uses, and activities customarily associated
with any of the above uses.
(Ord. 754, passed 10-18-99; Am. Ord. 949, passed 10-2-06)
§ 152.058 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Country clubs and golf courses.
   (B)   Animal hospitals and veterinary offices.
   (C)   Commercial recreational and amusement facilities.
   (D)   Hospitals, nursing homes, etc.
   (E)   Commercial kennels and stables.
   (F)   Bed and Breakfast establishments;
   (G)   Churches and other places of worship.
   (H)   Schools and other educational facilities be it public or private.
   (I)   Livestock depots and sales yards.
(Ord. 754, passed 10-18-99)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
§ 152.070 “R-1” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (SMALL LOTS).
   (A)   In the “R-1” Single-Family Residence District, land is principally
used for or is best suited for detached single-family dwellings and related
educational, religious, and recreational facilities. The regulations for this
District are intended to stabilize and preserve sound existing single-family
neighborhoods, and to promote the development of subdivisions offering a range
of new conventionally-constructed single-family housing. Other types of
residences (mobile homes, manufactured homes, duplexes, apartments, and the
like) are strictly prohibited in this District.
   (B)   Special restrictions.
      (1)   One principal building per lot. In the “R-1” District, only one
principal building shall be situated on any lot.
      (2)   No mobile homes or manufactured homes.  
         (a)   No mobile home or manufactured home shall be brought into or
placed anywhere in the “R-1” District.
         (b)   No existing mobile home or manufactured home in the “R-1”
District shall be immobilized, unless a special use permit is granted.
         (c)   It shall be unlawful to replace any existing mobile home or
manufactured home located in the “R-1” District, without a special use permit
from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
   (C)   Lot and building requirements. Every principal building erected in the
“R-1” District shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width (at established building line): 50 feet.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks:
         (a)   From front lot lines: 25 feet.
         (b)   From either side lot line: 5 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 25 feet.
      (5)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
   (D)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Agriculture, including all uses commonly classified as such,
provided the requirements of §
152.156 are met.
      (2)   Government uses of the village.
      (3)   Conventionally constructed single-family dwellings and modular
homes.
      (4)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
152.043(A).
   (E)   Special uses. The following special uses may be allowed by special use
permit in accordance with §
152.212(A):
      (1)   Churches and related religious facilities.
      (2)   Government uses other than those of the village.
      (3)   Home occupations, but only in conformity with the requirements of §
152.158.
      (4)   Schools.
      (5)   Utility substations.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 637, passed 5-17-93; Am. Ord. 949, passed
10-2-06) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.071 “R-2” SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT (LARGE LOTS).
   (A)   The “R-2” Single-Family Residence District encompasses areas suitable
for detached single-family dwellings as well as related educational, religious,
and recreational facilities. The regulations for this District are intended to
stabilize and preserve sound existing single-family neighborhoods, and to
promote the development of subdivisions offering a range of new constructed
single-family housing. Other types of residences (mobile homes, manufactured
homes, duplexes, apartments, and the like) are strictly prohibited in this
District.
   (B)   Special restrictions. The provisions of §
152.070(B) shall be controlling in this district.
   (C)   Lot and building requirements. Every principal building erected in the
“R-2” District shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 10,800 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width (at established building line): 90 feet. Lots
located on a cul-de-sac (only those lots on the radius of the circle) will have
a minimum width of 70 feet for the front of the lot.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks:
         (a)   From front lot lines: 25 feet.
         (b)   From either side lot line: 10 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 25 feet.
      (5)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
   (D)   Permitted uses. Any use permitted in the “R-1” District. (See §
152.070(D))
   (E)   Special uses. 
      (1)   Any use allowed by special use permit in the “R-1” District. (See §
152.070(E))
      (2)   Nursing homes.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 637, passed 5-17-93; Am. Ord. 889, passed
6-7-04; Am. Ord. 949, passed 10-2-06) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.072 “R-3” TWO-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
   (A)   The “R-3” Two-Family Residence District encompasses areas suitable for
both single-family dwellings, including modular homes and duplexes, as well as
related educational, religious and recreational facilities.
   (B)   Single- or two-family dwelling. In the “R-3” District, only one
single-family or two-family dwelling may be situated on any lot.
   (C)   Lot and building requirements. Every principal building erected in the
“R-3” District shall conform to the following requirements:
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 10,800 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width (at established building line): 90 feet.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks:
         (a)   From front lot lines: 25 feet.
         (b)   From either side lot line: 10 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 25 feet.
      (5)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
   (D)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “R-2” District. (See §
152.071(D))
      (2)   Two-family dwellings.
   (E)   Special uses.
      (1)   Any use allowed by special use permit in the “R-2” District. (See §
152.071(E))
      (2)   Nursing homes.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 889, passed 6-7-04; Am. Ord. 949, passed
10-2-06)
§ 152.073 “R-4” MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   (A)   The “R-4” Multiple-Family Residence District is established to
stabilize and conserve existing neighborhoods that predominantly consist of
multiple-family dwellings and to promote the development of comparable new
areas in order to accommodate all persons desiring this type of residential
environment.
   (B)   Lot and building requirements. Every principal building in the “R-4”
District shall conform to the requirements indicated below:
NOTE: Detached single-family and two-family dwellings erected in the “R-4”
District shall comply with all applicable regulations of the “R-2” District.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 10,800 square feet or 2,400 square feet/unit,
whichever is greater.
      (2)   Minimum lot width (at established building line): 90 feet or 20
feet/unit, whichever is greater.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks:
         (a)   From front lot lines: 25 feet.
         (b)   From any side lot line: 10 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 25 feet.
      (5)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
      (6)   Minimum off-street parking: 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
   (C)   Permitted uses.  
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “R-2” District. (See §
152.071(D))
      (2)   Multiple-family dwellings.
   (C)   Special uses.
      (1)   Any use that may be allowed by special use permit in the “R-2”
District. (See §
152.071(E))
      (2)   Convenience shops (such as, small drugstore, food store,
laundromat).
      (3)   Quick shop as defined in §
152.007.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 889, passed 6-7-04) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.074 “R-5” MOBILE AND MANUFACTURED HOUSING DISTRICT.
   (A)   The “R-5” Mobile and Manufactured Housing District is primarily
intended to provide areas suitable for the placement of immobilized mobile
homes, manufactured homes, or modular homes on individual lots and for the
establishment of mobile home parks. This District is also intended to preserve
all other residential districts.
   (B)   Mobile and manufactured housing regulations. To prevent circumvention
of the mobile housing regulations set forth in Chapter 23 of the Revised Code
it shall be unlawful to locate a mobile home or manufactured home anywhere
outside the “R-5” District.
   (C)   Lot and building requirements.  NOTE: Special lot and building
requirements are applicable to mobile home parks. (See division (F) of this
section).
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet at the established building line.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 120 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks:
         (a)   From front lot lines: 25 feet.
         (b)   From either side lot line: 5 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 20 feet.
      (5)   Maximum building height: 35 feet.
   (D)   Permitted uses.
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “R-2” District. (See §
152.071(D))
      (2)   Immobilized mobile homes, manufactured homes or modular homes on
individual lots, provided the units conform to all applicable requirements of
this section and the Revised Code. (See Ch. 23; Revised Code)
   (E)   Special uses.
      (1)   Any use that is a special use in the “R-2” District. (See §
152.071(E))
      (2)   Mobile and manufactured homes in conformity with all applicable
requirements of this section.
      (3)   Multiple-family dwellings.
   (F)   Mobile and manufactured home parks. After the effective date of this
chapter, no mobile or manufactured home park shall be established except in
conformity with the requirements of this division:
      (1)   Minimum lot size, setback requirements:
         (a)   Minimum lot area: No mobile or manufactured home park shall be
located on a tract less than five acres in area.
         (b)   Minimum dimensions: No mobile or manufactured home park shall be
developed on any tract that is less than 250 feet in both width and depth.
         (c)   Minimum setbacks: No part of any mobile home, manufactured home
or other structure in any mobile or manufactured home park shall be situated
closer than 25 feet to any lot line of the park.
         (d)   Maximum height. No structure in any mobile home park shall be
more than 35 feet in height.
      (2)   Spacing of mobile or manufactured homes:
         (a)   Every mobile or manufactured home space shall meet the following
requirements:
            1.   Minimum area: 6,000 square feet.
            2.   Minimum width: 50 feet.
            3.   Minimum depth: 120 feet.
         (b)   Mobile homes, manufactured homes or modular homes within any
park shall be placed so that no part of any mobile home or modular home is
closer than:
            1.   Ten feet to any park street;
            2.   Twenty-five feet to any lot line of the park; or
            3.   Twenty feet to any part of any other mobile home, manufactured
home, or structure.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 637, passed 5-17-93; Am. Ord. 949, passed
10-2-06) Penalty, see §
152.999
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
§ 152.085 “B-1” COMMUNITY BUSINESS.
   (A)   The “B-1” Community Business District primarily encompasses the long-
established commercial areas of the village where a wide range of goods and
services is offered to the general public at retail or wholesale.
   (B)   Lot and building requirements.
      (1)   Minimum lot area: None.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 50 feet.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: None.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks: Generally, none required, except as necessary to
comply with applicable off-street parking and loading requirements. However,
any lot that abuts any residential district shall meet the front setback and
side setback (on the side abutting the residential use) requirements of such
residential district. (See §
152.039(B))
      (5)   Maximum building height: 45 feet.
   (C)   Permitted uses. The following shall be permitted uses:
      (1)   Churches and related facilities.
      (2)   Clubs and lodges.
      (3)   Commercial establishments, wholesale and retail.
      (4)   Government uses of the village.
      (5)   Medical/dental clinics.
      (6)   Offices.
      (7)   Service establishments.
      (8)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
152.043(A).
   (D)   Special uses. The following shall be special uses:
      (1)   Government uses other than those of the village.
      (2)   Utility substations.
      (3)   Any use permitted in the “R-4” District.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 1052, passed 3-15-10) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.086 “B-2” HIGHWAY BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   (A)   The “B-2” Highway Business District is intended to accommodate and
regulate strip commercial developments and compatible uses. Since such
businesses, both retail and wholesale, draw their patrons primarily from the
motoring public, they typically require direct access to major streets and
large lots for off-street parking and loading.
   (B)   Use restrictions.
      (1)   Repair indoors. All repair and maintenance services shall be
conducted within completely enclosed structures. Storage areas may be open to
the sky, but shall be enclosed by walls or solid fences at least eight feet
high.
      (2)   Refuse containers. All refuse generated by facilities located
within this District shall be stored in tightly-covered containers placed in
visually-screened areas.
      (3)   Screening. Along the side and rear lot lines of any lot abutting
any residential district, screening at least six feet high, which completely
blocks the view from the adjacent residential property shall be installed. The
screening shall be approved by the Zoning Administrator.
      (4)   Parking. See §§
152.115 through
152.122.
      (5)   Signs. See §§
152.135 through
152.145.
   (C)   Lot and building requirements. Every principal building erected in the
“B-2” Highway Business District, except for those areas specified in division
(F) of this section, shall conform to the requirements indicated below:
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 18,750 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the established building line.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks: 50 feet
         (a)   From front lot line: 50 feet.
         (b)   Side yards:
            1.   Minimum total setback from both side lot lines: 50 feet.
            2.   Minimum setback from either side lot line: 20 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 25 feet.
      (5)   Maximum structure height: 35 feet.
   (D)   Permitted uses. Provided all the use restrictions of this District are
observed (See division (B) of this section), the following uses are permitted:
      (1)   Any use permitted in the “B-1” District.
      (2)   Churches and related facilities.
      (3)   Clubs and lodges.
      (4)   Commercial establishments, any type, including drive-in facilities.
      (5)   Such uses as the following are especially appropriate in this
District:
         (a)   Bowling alleys;
         (b)   Furniture and appliance sales;
         (c)   Greenhouses;
         (d)   Lumber and building supplies sales;
         (e)   Mobile home and recreational vehicles sales;
         (f)   Motor vehicles sales.
      (6)   Government uses.
      (7)   Offices.
      (8)   Service establishments, any type, including drive-in facilities.
      (9)   Such uses as the following are especially appropriate in this
District:
         (a)   Animal hospitals;
         (b)   Banks and other financial institutions;
         (c)   Motels;
         (d)   Motor vehicles services;
         (e)   Restaurants;
         (f)   Service stations;
      (10)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
152.043(A).
   (E)   Special uses. Provided all the use restrictions of this District (see
division (A) are observed, the following uses may be allowed by special use
permit:
      (1)   Drive-in theaters.
      (2)   Bus terminals and bus transportation facilities.
      (3)   Research and development facilities not involving explosives,
flammable gases or liquids, or live animals.
      (4)   Utility substations.
      (5)   Warehousing and wholesaling or any goods except explosives,
flammable gases or liquids, or live animals.
      (6)   Any use permitted in the “R-4” District.
   (F)   Lot and building requirements for specified areas. Lot and building
requirements for the Business District for the long established commercial
areas of the village defined to be along Washington Street from Polk Street on
the west to Baltz Street on the east, and on Jefferson from VanBuren Street on
the south to Mill Street on the north shall conform to the requirements
indicated below:
      (1)   Minimum lot area: 14,750 square feet.
      (2)   Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the established building line.
      (3)   Minimum lot depth: 118 feet.
      (4)   Minimum setbacks:  
         (a)   From front lot line: 40 feet.
         (b)   Side yards:
            1.   Minimum total setback from both side lot lines: 50 feet.
            2.   Minimum setback from either side lot line: 20 feet.
         (c)   From rear lot line: 20 feet.
      (5)   Maximum structure height: 35 feet.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 637, passed 5-17-93; Am. Ord. 1052, passed
3-15-10) Penalty, see §
152.999
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
§ 152.100 “I” INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
   The “I” Industrial District is intended to provide for areas where light
industry, research facilities, warehouses, and wholesale businesses may locate
without detriment to the remainder of the community. In these areas, a
satisfactory correlation of factors required by such uses exists or can be
readily achieved.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.101 USE RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   No nuisances. No production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing,
repair, sale or storage of goods, materials or equipment shall unreasonably
interfere with the use, occupancy or enjoyment of neighboring properties or the
community as a whole. Unreasonable interferences include, but are not limited
to, excessive traffic congestion, loud or shrill noises, excessive emission of
smoke, emission of toxic gases, excessive glare and noxious odors.
   (B)   Activities enclosed. All production, processing, cleaning, servicing,
testing or repair activities shall be conducted within completely enclosed
buildings. Storage areas may be open to the sky, but shall be enclosed by walls
or fences, including gates, at least eight feet high.
   (C)   Buffer strips. Wherever any industrial use located in this District
abuts any residential district, a 20-foot wide view and noise control buffer
strip shall be installed. Such buffer strip shall consist of densely planted
shrubbery that is at least five feet high when planted and that can be expected
to reach a height of ten feet when full grown.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.102 LOT AND STRUCTURE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
   (B)   Minimum lot width: 125 feet at the established building line.
   (C)   Minimum lot depth: 150 feet.
   (D)   Minimum setbacks:  
      (1)   From front lot line: 25 feet.
      (2)   From any side lot line: 25 feet.
      (3)   From rear lot line: 25 feet.
   (E)   Maximum structure height: 60 feet.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.103 PERMITTED USES.
   Provided all the use restrictions of this District are observed, the
following uses are permitted:
   (A)   Assembly, manufacturing or processing of any commodity from semi-
finished materials, provided explosives, flammable gases or liquids, or live
animals are not involved.
   (B)   Freight and bus terminals and related mass transportation facilities.
   (C)   Any use permitted in the “B-1” or “B-2” Districts except single and/or
multi-family dwellings.
   (D)   Research and development facilities not involving explosives, or
flammable gases or liquids.
   (E)   Service stations.
   (F)   Warehousing or wholesaling of goods, except explosives, flammable
gases or liquids, or live animals.
   (G)   Utility substations or government uses.
   (H)   Accessory uses in accordance with §
152.043(A).
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.104 SPECIAL USES.
   All uses permitted in the “R-4” District (for example, dwellings).
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 152.115 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with this
subchapter for all structures and uses erected or established after the
effective date of this chapter.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.116 EXISTING PARKING/LOADING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Existing off-street parking or loading facilities located on the same
lot as the use served shall not be reduced or if already less than, shall not
be further reduced below the requirements and standards for similar new
structures or uses.
   (B)   When an existing structure or use is damaged or destroyed and
subsequently repaired or rebuilt, parking/loading facilities equivalent to any
maintained at the time of such damage or destruction shall be restored, but
additional parking/loading spaces need not be provided.
   (C)   Whenever the use of any structure or premises is intensified through
addition of dwelling units, increased floor area, greater seating capacity, and
the like, additional off-street parking and loading spaces commensurate with
such intensification shall be provided.
   (D)   Whenever the existing use of a structure is changed to a different
use, off-street parking or loading facilities shall be provided as required
herein for such new use.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.117 PARKING LOT DESIGN STANDARDS.
   All off-street parking lots shall conform to the standards indicated in the
divisions which follow:
   (A)   Spaces.  
      (1)   Every off-street parking space shall be at least ten feet wide and
20 feet long, and shall have at least seven feet of vertical clearance. Every
space shall be situated so that no part of any parked vehicle overhangs the
public right-of-way.
      (2)   Markings shall be laid and restored as often as necessary to
clearly delineate each parking space.
   (B)   Interior aisles. Aisles within parking lots shall be sufficiently wide
to permit safe and efficient vehicular movement in the aisles, and into and out
of parking spaces. Aisles designed for two-way traffic shall be at least 22
feet wide. One-way aisles designed for 60° parking shall be at least 18 feet
wide.
   (C)   Access ways.
      (1)   Parking lots shall be designed so that ingress to or egress from a
parking space is from an aisle or driveway, not directly from the public right-
of-way.
      (2)   No access way to any parking lot shall be located within 30 feet of
any corner formed by the intersection of the rights-of-way of two or more
streets. At intersections where traffic control devices are installed, the
Administrator may increase this requirement as necessary to prevent hazards.
      (3)   Parking lot access ways (as well as residential driveways) and
public streets shall be aligned to form, as closely as feasible, right angles.
      (4)   The access way to every parking lot located in any business
district or in the Industrial District shall be at least 24 feet wide unless
two one-way drives, each 12 feet wide, are provided.
      (5)   The access way to every parking lot located in any residential
district or in the Agricultural District shall be at least ten feet wide; but
if the parking area contains more than eight parking spaces or if the access
way is longer than 100 feet, access shall be provided either by one two-way
drive at least 20 feet wide or by two one-way drives, each at least ten feet
wide.
   (D)   Surfacing. Parking lots shall be graded and improved with a compacted
stone base at least four inches thick, surfaced with at least two inches of
asphaltic concrete or approved comparable material. (Note “oil and chip” is not
comparable material.)
   (E)   Lighting. Any light(s) used to illuminate any parking lot shall be
arranged or shielded so as to confine direct light rays within the lot lines of
the parking lot to the greatest extent practicable.
   (F)   Landscaping. In order to reduce heat and glare, to minimize blowing of
dust and trash, and to reduce the oppressive visual effects of large open
parking areas, landscaping shall be provided and maintained within every
parking lot that contains 20 or more parking spaces.
      (1)   A landscaping plan (either a separate document or an element of a
more inclusive development plan) shall accompany every application for an
initial certificate of zoning compliance to develop any parking lot that will
contain 20 or more spaces.
      (2)   The landscaping plan shall include the following information:
         (a)   Proposed type, amount, size, and spacing of plantings, including
trees, shrubbery and ground cover;
         (b)   Proposed size, construction materials and drainage of landscaped
islands; and
         (c)   Sketch indicating proposed spatial relationships of landscaped
areas, parking spaces, automobile circulation, and pedestrian movement.
   (G)   Interior landscaping for parking lots with 20 or more parking spaces.
Parking lots with 20 or more spaces shall also have interior landscaping which
satisfies the following minimum specifications. For the interior of the parking
lot, which excludes required landscape areas along rights-of-way alleys, and
perimeter areas, five percent of the area of each parking space shall be
calculated to determine the required area for parking lot landscaping. A
minimum of one shade tree shall be provided for every 15 parking spaces or
fraction thereof. One or more or more of the following alternatives shall be
used to landscape the parking lot:
      (1)   A continuous or interrupted raised landscape strip or island,
consisting of shade trees, shrubs, and ground cover, with a minimum width of
five feet, between rows of parking spaces.
      (2)   Raised landscaped islands of no less than 100 square feet and not
more than 200 square feet, with a minimum width of nine feet, to be located
throughout the lot so as to meet the objectives of this subsection and planted
with shade trees, shrubs, and ground cover.
      (3)   Raised landscaped islands of no less than nine feet in width and 20
feet in length, to be located at the end of or in between rows of parking
spaces, and to be planted with shade trees, shrubs, and ground cover.
   (H)   Commercial parking lot landscaping requirements. The following minimum
landscaping requirements shall be applicable to all commercial parking lots.
      (1)   General landscaping requirements.
         (a)   Landscaped areas shall not be used for any off-street parking,
and may be penetrated only by drives required to provide access to the
commercial lot.
         (b)   Trees shall be at least 2 1/2 inch caliper deciduous trees.
Shrubs shall be planted initially 18 inches tall and maintained to a maximum of
3 1/2 feet in height. All species are to be Illinois hardy within the specified
micro-climate area.
         (c)   Where quality woodland exists, existing growth shall e preserved
between the right-of-way and the parking lot, and on the interior, exclusive of
space required for sidewalks.
         (d)   With the exception of preserved quality woodland areas left in
the natural state, required ground cover may be accomplished with mulch, sod,
stones, or ground cover plat species.
         (e)   All plants are required to receive periodic maintenance to
ensure good health and appearance, including replacement of diseased or dead
species. All other ground cover is to receive periodic maintenance to ensure
good appearance.
      (2)   Perimeters adjacent to public right-of-ways. When a paring lot is
located adjacent to any public right-of-way, except an alley, the following
guidelines shall be sued to landscape the public right-of-way frontage of the
parking lot.
         (a)   Provide a 15 foot landscaped area from the right-of-way line,
exclusive of space required for sidewalks, to be planted with shade trees with
a minimum of one tree for every 50 feet of frontage or fraction thereof, and a
minimum of one shrub for every four feet of lot perimeter or fraction thereof.
Shade trees are not required to be planted four feet on center, but may be
clustered to provide an enhanced site landscaped appearance.
         (b)   In lieu of the provisions in division (H)(2)(a), a 2 1/2 foot
high earthen berm may be constructed with slopes not to exceed a grade of 25%
for lawn or turf areas, within a minimum width area of 25 feet, exclusive of
space required for sidewalks. Berms planted with ground cover and shrubs can be
steeper, but shall not exceed a grade of 50%. Shade trees are required with a
minimum of one tree for every 50 feet of frontage or fraction thereof, in all
berm design alternatives.
      (3)    Perimeters not adjacent to public right-of-way. Along the
perimeter of the parking lot, other than along a public right-of-way (but
including alley frontages), the following guidelines shall apply:
         (a)   Provide a minimum of a five foot wide landscaped area around the
perimeter of the parking lot planted with shade trees and low growing shrubs.
         (b)   Provide a minimum of one shade tree for every 50 feet of lot
perimeter or fraction thereof.
         (c)   Provide a minimum of one shrub for every four feet of lot
perimeter or fraction thereof. Shrubs are not required to be planted four feet
on center, but may be clustered to provide an enhanced site landscaped
appearance.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1046, passed 3-1-
10) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.118 LOCATION OF PARKING.
   All off-street parking shall be located in conformity with the following
requirements:
   (A)   For dwellings.
      (1)    Parking spaces accessory to any dwelling shall be located on the
same lot as the dwelling. Such parking spaces shall not be located in any front
yard except in the driveway, but may be located in the side or rear yards.
      (2)   Each parking space accessory to a multi-family dwelling shall be
unobstructed so that no vehicle need be moved in order to allow an other
vehicle to enter/exit the parking area; provided that this requirement shall
not be applicable to two-family dwellings.
   (B)   For business/industrial uses.
      (1)   Every off-street parking space accessory to any business or
industrial use shall be located within 500 feet of the use served; provided,
that no portion of any parking lot for nonresidential uses shall extend into
any residential district or into the Agricultural District except by written
permission of the Administrator.
      (2)   In any business district or in the Industrial District, off-street
parking facilities for different buildings or uses may be provided
collectively; but only if the total number of spaces so located together is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each use, and if all other
pertinent regulations are observed.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.119 DESIGN AND LOCATION OF OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   All off-street loading facilities shall conform to the minimum standards
indicated below:
   (A)   Size of space. Every off-street loading space shall be at least 12
feet wide and 45 feet long exclusive of aisle and maneuver space, and shall
have vertical clearance of at least 14 feet. In no case shall a vehicle being
loaded or unloaded overhang into the public right-of-way.
   (B)   Access way. Every off-street loading space shall have a safe means of
vehicular access to a street or alley. Such access way shall be at least 12
feet wide.
   (C)   Surfacing. Every off-street loading area shall be improved with a
compacted stone base at least seven inches thick, surfaced with at least two
inches of asphaltic concrete or approved comparable material. (No oil and
chips).
   (D)   Buffer strips. No loading space or area for vehicles over two ton
cargo capacity shall be developed closer than 50 feet to the lot line of any
lot located in any residential district or in the Agricultural District unless
such space/area is completely enclosed by walls, a solid fence, or closely
planted shrubbery at least ten feet in height and of sufficient density to
block the view from residential property.
   (E)   Location. Every off-street loading space shall be located on the same
parcel of land as the use served, and not closer than 50 feet to the
intersection of the rights-of-way of two or more streets, and not on any
required front yard.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.120 COMPUTATION OF REQUIRED PARKING/LOADING SPACES.
   In computing the number of parking spaces required by this chapter, the
Zoning Administrator shall apply the following rules:
   (A)   In computing parking space requirements based on the number of
employees, the maximum number of employees on the premises at any period of the
day shall be used. EMPLOYEE PARKING means one parking space shall be required
per one and one-half employees, unless otherwise stated.
   (B)   In computing parking or loading space requirements on the basis of
building floor area, the gross floor area shall be used.
   (C)   Whenever it is necessary to translate gross parking lot area into
number of parking spaces, 350 square feet of gross area shall be deemed one
parking space.
   (D)   If computation of the number of parking or loading spaces required by
this chapter results in a fractional space, any fraction of one-half or more
shall be counted as one space.
   (E)   No space or portion thereof needed to satisfy the minimum applicable
requirement for number of off-street parking or loading spaces shall be counted
as part of the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another
structure or use.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.121 NUMBER OF PARKING AND LOADING SPACES REQUIRED.
   Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be provided as indicated in
tabular form below. For any use that is not listed in the table, the same
amount of parking and loading space shall be provided as is required for the
most similar listed use. The Zoning Administrator shall make the determination
of similarity.
 
Use                       Parking Spaces Required    Loading Spaces Required
                                                     (if any)
Dwellings, Lodgings
                          1 space per lodging unit,  1 space if the use has
Motels, boarding houses   plus employee parking      20,000 sq. ft. or more of
                                                     floor area
Mobile homes and          2 spaces per unit          Not applicable
immobilized mobile homes
Multiple-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit Not applicable
 
Use Parking Spaces Required Loading Spaces Required (if any)
Dwellings, Lodgings
Use                      Parking Spaces Required    Loading Spaces Required (if
                                                    any)
Dwellings, Lodgings
Single-family and two-   2 spaces per dwelling unit Not applicable
family dwellings
Educational, Institutional, Recreational
Churches, assembly halls 1 space per 4 seats in the Not applicable
                         largest seating area
Libraries, museums       1 space per 500 sq. ft. of One review by the
                         floor area                 Administrator
                                                    To 50,000 sq. ft. of floor
Nursing homes            1 space per 5 beds         area - 1 space; 50,001 to
                                                    100,000 sq. ft. - 2 spaces
                         1 space for every 20
Schools (elementary and  students that the building On review by the
junior high)             is designed to             Administrator
                         accommodate, plus employee
                         parking
Commercial, Office, Service
                                                    To 10,000 sq. ft. of floor
Note: All commercial and                            area - 1 space; more than
service uses, unless     1 spaces per 300 sq. ft.   10,000 sq. ft. - space plus
specifically indicated   of floor area              1 additional space per
otherwise below.                                    50,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                                    area in excess of 10,000
                                                    sq. ft.
Banks, savings and loans                            (Both walk-in and drive-in)
                         1 space per 300 sq. ft. of To 30,000 sq. ft. of floor
   Walk-in            floor area, plus employee  area - none required;
                         parking                    30,001 to 100,000 sq. ft. -
   Drive-in           5 spaces per teller window 1 space

Beauty and barber shops  2 spaces per chair, plus   Not applicable
                         employee parking
                         4 spaces per bowling lane
                         plus additional spaces as  Not applicable, except as
Bowling alleys           required herein for        required for affiliated
                         affiliated uses such as    uses
                         restaurants and taverns
Car wash                 5 spaces per wash lane     Not applicable
 
Use Parking Spaces Required Loading Spaces Required (if any)
Commercial, Office, Service
Use                      Parking Spaces Required    Loading Spaces Required
                                                    (if any)
Commercial, Office, Service
                                                    To 25,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                                    area - 2 spaces; more than
                                                    25,000 sq. ft. of floor
Furniture and appliance  1 space per 600 sq. ft. of area - 2 spaces plus 1
stores                   floor area                 additional space per
                                                    25,000 sq. ft. of floor
                                                    area in excess of 25,000
                                                    sq. ft.
                         1 space per 150 sq. ft. of
                         floor area devoted to the
Home occupations         home occupation in         Not applicable
                         addition to the parking
                         requirements for the
                         dwelling
Offices generally, but                              To 30,000 sq. ft. of floor
not medical/dental       1 space per 300 sq. ft. of area - none required;
offices                  floor area                 30,001 to 100,000 sq. ft.
                                                    - 1 space
                         1 space per 200 sq. ft. of
Offices, medical/dental  floor area or 3 spaces per Not applicable
                         professional whichever is
                         greater
                         1 space per 5 seats plus 1
Mortuaries               space per funeral vehicle, 1 space per 10,000 sq. ft.
                         not less than 20 spaces    or more of floor area
                         per chapel or state room
Restaurants, refreshment
stands
                         1 space per 4 seats or 1   (Both sit-down and drive-
   Sit-down           space per 50 sq. ft. of    in): 1 space per structure
                         floor area, whichever is   having 10,000 sq. ft. or
                         greater                    more or floor area
   Drive-in           1 space per 25 sq. ft. of
                         floor area
                         2 spaces per service
Service stations         stall, plus employee       Not applicable
                         parking
                         1 space per 2 seats or 1   1 space per structure
Taverns                  space per 50 sq. ft. of    having 10,000 sq. ft. or
                         floor area, whichever is   more of floor area
                         greater
Theaters
   Indoor             1 space per 4 seats in the
                         largest seating area       Not applicable
   Drive-in           On review by the
                         Administrator
 
 
Use                      Parking Spaces Required    Loading Spaces Required (if
                                                    any)
Commercial, Office, Service
                         1 space per 600 sq. ft. of
                         enclosed floor area, plus:
                         up to 10,000 sq. ft. of    To 25,000 sq. ft. of floor
                         open lot area devoted to   area and open lot area - 2
Vehicles sales (auto,    sale/display of vehicles - spaces. More than 25,000
boats, trailers, and the 1 space per 2,5000 sq. ft. sq. ft. of floor area and
like)                    of open lot area. Above    open lot area - 2 spaces
                         10,000 sq. ft. - 4 spaces  plus 1 additional space per
                         plus 1 additional space    25,000 sq. ft. in excess of
                         per 5,000 sq. ft. of open  25,000 sq. ft.
                         lot area in excess of
                         10,000 sq. ft.
Industrial
                                                    To 20,000 sq. ft. of floor
                         Employee parking (1.5      area - 1 space; 20,001 -
                         spaces per employee) plus  50,000 sq. ft. - 2 spaces.
Any manufacturing,       1 space per company        50,001 - 90,000 sq. ft. - 3
warehousing or other     vehicle, plus 1 visitor    spaces; above 90,000 sq.
industrial use           space per 25 employees on  ft. - 3 spaces plus 1
                         the major shift            additional space per 50,000
                                                    sq. ft. of floor area in
                                                    excess of 90,000 sq. ft.
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.122 PROHIBITED PARKING.
   (A)   Semi-trucks and heavy duty commercial vehicles are hereby prohibited
from overnight parking on commercial lots and in any area zoned residential or
multi-family.
   (B)   Utility vehicles and trailers are prohibited from overnight parking in
any area zoned residential or multi-family.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
SIGNS
§ 152.135 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this subchapter SIGN AREA shall mean the area of the one
imaginary square or rectangle which would completely enclose all the letters,
parts or symbols of a sign. (See
App. B, Figures
3 and
4)
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.136 GENERAL PROHIBITION.
   Any sign not expressly permitted in this subchapter shall be deemed
prohibited.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.137 COMPUTATION OF SIGN AREA ALLOWANCE.
   Within the limitations and restrictions as further provided in this
subchapter, the total area of all signs which an establishment is permitted to
display shall be computed according to the following formula:
      Two square feet of sign area per one foot of street frontage;
provided, however, that no establishment in any district shall display more
than 100 square feet of sign on any street front.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 1197, passed 8-26-19)
§ 152.138 SPECIAL SITUATIONS.
   (A)   Except as specifically provided otherwise in this subchapter, if an
establishment has frontage on two or more streets, each side having such
frontage shall be considered separately for purposes of determining compliance
with the provisions of this subchapter. However, the area allowance for signs
shall not be aggregated so as to permit such establishment to display on any
one frontage a greater area of signs than would be permitted by application of
the formula set forth above.
   (B)   The side of an establishment adjacent to an off-street parking area
shall not be deemed frontage unless the establishment has no other frontage.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.139 SIGNS TO BE NONHAZARDOUS; WELL-MAINTAINED.
   (A)   No sign shall be erected, relocated or maintained so as to prevent
free access or egress from any door, window, fire escape or driveway.
   (B)   No sign shall be erected or maintained in such a manner that it
interferes with, obstructs the view of, or is likely to be confused with any
authorized traffic-control device.
   (C)   Every sign shall be designed and constructed in conformity with any
applicable provisions of the adopted Building Code.
   (D)   Every sign shall be maintained-in a neat and attractive condition by
its owner. The sign supports shall be kept painted to prevent rust or
deterioration.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.140 ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS.
   Illumination of signs is permitted, subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   No sign shall employ red, yellow or green lights in such a manner as
to confuse or interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (B)   No sign other than those providing time and temperature information
shall have blinking, flashing or fluttering lights or any other illuminating
device which has a changing light intensity, brightness or color.
   (C)   The light from any illuminated sign shall be shaded, shielded, or
directed so that it creates neither a nuisance to adjacent property nor a
traffic hazard.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.141 REVOLVING, ROTATING OR MOVING SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   Every sign that revolves, rotates or mechanically moves in any manner is
prohibited.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.142 NONCONFORMING SIGNS.
   (A)   A nonconforming sign means any lawfully-erected sign or billboard that
does not conform to one or more provisions of this subchapter or any amendment
thereto.
   (B)   Any nonconforming sign that does not pose an imminent peril to life or
property may lawfully remain subject to all the restrictions on the
enlargement, alteration, relocation or reconstruction of nonconforming
structures set forth in §§
152.205 through
152.216; provided as follows:
      (1)   Merely changing the message displayed on a nonconforming sign shall
not be construed as a prohibited alteration;
      (2)   Whenever any sign is nonconforming solely because it is appurtenant
to a nonconforming commercial/industrial use located in the Agricultural
District or in any residential district, the sign shall be treated in the same
manner as it would be if it were appurtenant to a commercial/industrial use
located in any business district or in the Industrial District.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -)
§ 152.143 STRICTLY PROHIBITED SIGNS.
   Except as specifically noted otherwise, henceforth, the following signs and
street graphics are strictly prohibited throughout the village.
   (A)   Mobile/portable marquees.
   (B)   Pennants, streamers, strings of light bulbs, spinners or similar
devices.
   (C)   Signs attached to trees, fences or public utility poles, other than
warning signs posted by government officials or public utilities.
   (D)   Defunct signs, including the posts or other supports therefor, that
advertise or identify an activity, business, product or service no longer
conducted on the premises where such sign is located.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.144 SIGNS PERMITTED IN ANY DISTRICT.
   Any sign or other street graphic enumerated in this section that complies
with the indicated requirements is permitted in any district of the village.
Such signs or street graphics shall not be debited against the displaying
establishment's sign area allowance (See §
152.137).
   (A)   Construction signs identifying the architects, engineers, contractors
and other individuals or firms involved with the construction, and/or
announcing the character or purpose of the building, but not advertising any
product. Such signs shall not exceed 16 square feet in area, shall be confined
to the site of the construction, and shall be removed within 14 days after the
intended use of the project has begun.
   (B)   Real estate signs, indicating the sale, rental or lease of the
premises on which they are located. Such signs on residential property shall
not exceed four square feet; on other property such signs shall not exceed 16
square feet. Not more than one real estate sign per street front shall be
erected on any lot. Such signs shall be removed within seven days of the sale,
rental or lease.
   (C)   Political signs, announcing candidates seeking public/political office
and/or political issues and other pertinent information. Not more than one such
sign shall be erected on any lot or premises. In the Agricultural District and
in any residential district, political signs shall not exceed 16 square feet;
in other districts, such signs shall not exceed 32 square feet. Political signs
shall be removed within seven days after the election to which they pertain, by
the party(s) responsible for their erection.
   (D)   Garage sale signs advertising a garage or yard sale to be held on
private residential property. Such signs shall not exceed four square feet, and
shall not be posted for longer than five days.
   (E)   Public interest signs and street banners publicizing a charitable or
nonprofit event of general public interest. In the Agricultural District and in
any residential district, public interest signs shall not exceed 32 square
feet. Public interest signs and street banners shall be permitted only for 14
days before and seven days after the event.
   (F)   Governmental, public and directional signs, such as traffic control
signs; railroad crossing signs; legal notices; signs indicating the location of
underground cables; no trespassing signs; no parking signs; signs indicating
the entrances and exits of parking lots; signs indicating the location of
public telephones; restrooms, and the like; and so forth.
   (G)   Institutional signs identifying a public, charitable, or religious
institution. Such signs shall be located on the premises of such institution,
shall not obstruct the vision of motorists, and shall not exceed 24 square
feet.
   (H)   Integral signs carved into stone or inlaid so as to become part of the
building, and containing such information as date of erection, name of
building, and memorial tributes.
   (I)   Home occupations signs identifying only the name and occupation of the
residents. Home occupation signs shall not be illuminated, and shall not exceed
four square feet.
   (J)   Subdivision entrance signs identifying a residential subdivision or
apartment complex. Such signs shall contain no commercial advertising, and
shall not exceed 20 square feet.
   (K)   House numbers and/or name of occupant signs located on the lot to
which the sign applies. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet for single-
family dwellings nor six square feet for multiple-family dwellings.
   (L)   Signs located in the interior of any building or within an enclosed
lobby or court of any building or group of buildings, provided such signs are
designed and located to be viewed exclusively by the patrons or residents of
such buildings.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -)
§ 152.145 SIGN REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Agricultural and residential districts. On or after the effective date
of this chapter, no sign other than those listed in §
152.144 shall be erected in the Agricultural District or in any residential
district.
   (B)   Business and industrial districts. No establishment located in any
business district or in the Industrial District shall display on any street
front a total area of sign in excess of the allowance derived by application of
the formula set forth in §
152.137. Additionally, signs in any business district or in the Industrial
District shall conform to the requirements indicated in the divisions (B)(1)
through (6) below.
      (1)   Flush-mounted signs. No flush-mounted (wall) sign shall:
         (a)   Project more than 18 inches from the wall or surface to which it
is attached; or
         (b)   Extend above the roof line of the building to which it is
attached.
      (2)   Window signs. Signs permanently (that is, longer than 30 days)
mounted in display windows shall be debited against the sign area allowance of
the particular establishment; window signs mounted for shorter periods shall
not be debited.
      (3)   Projecting signs. No establishment shall display more than one
projecting sign on any street front. No projecting sign shall:
         (a)   Project above the roof line of the building to which it is
attached; or
         (b)   Extend below a point eight feet above the ground or pavement; or
         (c)   Project over a driveway or beyond the curbline of any public
street; or
         (d)   Project more than four feet from the building to which it is
attached; or
         (e)   Exceed 16 square feet in area.
      (4)   Canopy or marquee signs. Signs mounted flush on any canopy or
marquee shall be considered flush-mounted (wall) signs, and shall meet the
requirements of division (B)(1) of this section. Signs suspended beneath a
canopy or marquee shall be considered projecting signs, and shall meet the
requirements of division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   Freestanding signs. No establishment shall display more than one
freestanding sign on any street front. Freestanding signs, whether mounted on
the ground or post mounted, shall comply with the following regulations:
         (a)   No part of any freestanding sign shall intrude into any public
right-of-way. No part of any freestanding sign that extends below a point ten
feet above the ground or pavement shall be located closer than ten feet from
the public right-of-way line.
         (b)   The area of any freestanding sign, calculated in accordance with
§
152.137, shall not exceed 100 square feet.
         (c)   When attached to its structural supports, no part of any
freestanding sign shall extend more than 20 feet above the ground or pavement.
         (d)   The length or width of any freestanding sign shall not exceed 12
feet.
      (6)   Billboards. Billboards (and other off-premises advertising signs)
are strictly prohibited in every district except the Industrial District. No
billboard shall:
         (a)   Be stacked on top of another billboard;
         (b)   Be located closer than 25 feet to any lot line or any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Be located closer than 500 feet from any other billboard on the
same side of the roadway;
         (d)   Extend more than 20 feet above the ground or pavement; or
         (e)   Exceed 300 square feet in area.
      (7)   Roof-mounted sign. Roof-mounted signs will be allowed on the roofs
of buildings provided they:
         (a)   Do not extend higher than the highest point of the roof they are
attached.
         (b)   The area of any roof-mounted sign, calculated in accordance with
§
152.137 , shall not exceed 100 square feet.
      (8)   Single-story building with multiple tenants on a single zoned lot.
         (a)   Each tenant having a grade-level, public entry from a commercial
street, or a side street contiguous with the subject property, or which faces a
driveway or parking lot located between the street and the building, is
entitled to one wall sign.
         (b)   Wall sign area, as computed by §
152.137, is restricted to two square feet of sign face per lineal foot of
tenant frontage on a commercial street.
         (c)   Maximum sign area per tenant is restricted to 100 square feet.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -; Am. Ord. 1197, passed 8-
26-19)
§ 152.146 CERTIFICATE OF SIGN COMPLIANCE.
   Any person, firm or corporation wishing to erect any sign other than those
expressly permitted by §
152.144, shall first secure a Certificate of Sign Compliance.
§ 152.147 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator shall order the removal of any sign erected
or maintained in violation of this part, by giving seven days notice in writing
to the owner of such sign, or to the owner of the building, structure or
premises on which the sign is located.
   (B)   Such notice shall require the owner to remove the sign or bring it
into compliance, at the owner’s expense.
   (C)   The Zoning Administrator will remove a sign immediately, or have the
sign removed, without notice, and at the owner’s expense, if the said sign is
attached to a public utility pole, street sign, or located on the public right-
of-way; or if the said sign is in violation of this Part and is advertising an
event which is set to occur before the provisions of this section could
normally be enforced; or if, in his opinion, the condition of the sign presents
an immediate threat to the safety of the public.
ADDITIONAL SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 152.155 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.
   This subchapter establishes lot and structure requirements and design/
operational standards for specific, potentially troublesome, structures and
uses. These regulations apply in every zoning district where the specific
structure or use is permitted or allowed by special use permit; but if more
stringent regulations are applicable in any particular district such
regulations shall prevail.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.156 AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Farm animals. No barn, stable, shed or other structure intended to
shelter farm animals shall be erected closer than 300 feet to any existing
dwelling or closer than 200 feet to any lot line of residential property,
whichever distance is greater. Similarly, fences shall be erected or other
means shall be taken to prevent farm animals from approaching closer than 300
feet to any existing dwelling or closer than 200 feet to any lot line or
residential property, whichever distance is greater.
   (B)   Farm equipment/commodities. No agricultural equipment or commodities,
including, but not limited to, baled crops, fertilizer, pesticides/herbicides,
shall be stored outdoors closer than 300 feet to any existing dwelling or
closer than 200 feet to any lot line of residential property, whichever
distance is greater. If the equipment/commodities are stored within a
completely enclosed structure, the structure shall be located at least 100 feet
from any lot line of residential property.
   (C)   Barbed wire/electrical fences. See §
152.157(A).
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.157 FENCES, WALLS.
   (A)   No barbed wire or electrically-charged fence shall be erected or
maintained anywhere in the village, except that one foot of barbed wire may be
added to the top of a security fence which is at least six feet high in the
Industrial District.
   (B)   No fence, wall or other obstruction shall be erected within any public
right-of-way, except by written permission of the Zoning Administrator.
   (C)   No fence, wall or other obstruction shall be erected in violation of
the Illinois Drainage Code. (ILCS Ch. 70, Act 605, §§ 2-1 through 2-12, as
amended from time to time.)
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 681, passed 6-5-95; Am. Ord. 687, passed 7-
3-95) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.158 HOME OCCUPATIONS.
   A HOME OCCUPATION means any business, profession or occupation conducted for
gain or support entirely within any dwelling or on any residential premises.
Within the village every home occupation shall be considered a special use. No
home occupation shall be established or conducted except in conformity with the
following regulations:
   (A)   Floor space. The total area devoted to a home occupation shall not
exceed 25% of the gross floor area of the dwelling, or 300 square feet,
whichever is less.
   (B)   Dwelling alterations. In any residential district, a dwelling shall
not be altered to accommodate a home occupation in such a way as to materially
change the residential character of the building.
   (C)   Outdoor storage. In any residential district, unenclosed storage of
equipment or materials used in connection with a home occupation is prohibited.
   (D)   Nuisances. A home occupation shall not generate any offensive noise,
vibration, smoke, dust, odors, heat, glare or electrical interference
noticeable at or beyond the lot lines.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.159 JUNK YARDS.
   (A)   No part of any junk yard, which includes any lot on which three or
more inoperable vehicles are stored, shall be located closer than 500 feet to
the boundary of any residential district.
   (B)   All vehicles, parts and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed structure or within an area screened by a wall, solid fence, or
closely-planted shrubbery at least ten feet high and of sufficient density to
block the view from adjacent property.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.160 NURSING HOMES.
   (A)   The lot on which any nursing home is situated shall have a minimum
width and depth of 200 feet, and a minimum area of two acres.
   (B)   The principal building of any nursing home shall be located at least
25 feet from all lot lines.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.161 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Note: The regulations of this section do not apply to recreational vehicles
parked in a permitted travel trailer park or on a permitted recreational
vehicles sales lot.
   (A)   Not more than two recreational vehicles shall be parked on any lot.
   (B)   No recreational vehicle shall be parked on any street.
   (C)   No recreational vehicle shall be used as a dwelling.
   (D)   No recreational vehicle shall be used as an office or for any other
commercial purpose.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.162 SERVICE STATIONS.
   (A)   All gasoline pumps and other service facilities shall be located at
least 25 feet from any street right-of-way line, side lot line, or rear lot
line.
   (B)   Every access way shall be located at least 200 feet from the principal
building of any fire station, school, public library, church, park or
playground, and at least 30 feet from any intersection of public streets.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.163 SWIMMING POOLS.
   (A)   No private swimming pool shall be located in any front yard or closer
than five feet to any side or rear lot line.
   (B)   Every swimming pool that is more than two feet deep shall be enclosed
by a wall or fence at least four feet in height. The fence must be completely
installed prior to the pool being filled for use. The passage through such wall
or fence shall be equipped with a gate.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 543, passed 8-1-88) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.164 UTILITY SUBSTATIONS.
   Every electrical substation, gas regulator station, telephone exchange
facility, private sewage treatment plant, private water storage facility, or
similar facility shall be deemed a special use, and shall conform to the
following regulations:
   (A)   Every lot on which any such facility is situated shall meet the
minimum area and dimensions requirements of the district in which it is
located. Every part of any such facility shall be located at least 25 feet from
all lot lines, or shall meet the district setback requirements, whichever is
greater.
   (B)   In any residential district, every such facility shall be designed,
constructed and operated so that it is compatible with the residential
character of the area.
   (C)   Screening at least ten feet in height and of sufficient density to
block the view from adjacent property shall be installed around every such
facility. Furthermore, if the Administrator determines that the facility poses
a safety hazard (for example, if there are exposed transformers), he shall
require that a secure fence at least ten feet in height be installed behind the
planting screen.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.165 SOLAR ENERGY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this section is to facilitate the
construction, installation, and operation of solar energy systems in the
village in a manner that promotes economic development and ensures the
protection of health, safety and welfare while also avoiding adverse impacts on
adjoining property or on the environment. It is the intent of this chapter to
encourage the development of solar energy systems that reduce reliance on
foreign and out-of-state energy resources, bolster local economic development
and job creation. This section is not intended to abridge safety, health or
environmental requirements contained in other applicable codes, standards or
ordinances.
   (B)   Definitions.
      (1)   ACCESSORY as applied to a building, structure, or use, one which is
on the same lot with, incidental to and subordinate to the main or principal
structure or use and which is used for purposes customarily incidental to the
main or principal structure, or the main or principal use.
      (2)   BUILDING INTEGRATED SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM means a solar energy system
that integrates photovoltaic modules into the building structure as the roof or
façade and which does not alter the relief of the roof.
      (3)   COMMERCIAL/LARGE SCALE SOLAR FARM means a utility scale commercial
facility greater than 5,000 kilowatts that converts sunlight to electricity,
whether by photovoltaics, concentrating solar thermal devices, or various
experimental technologies for on-site or off-site use with the primary purpose
of selling wholesale or retail generated electricity.
      (4)   COMMISSIONER means the Building Commissioner for the village.
      (5)   COMMUNITY SOLAR PROJECT means a solar-electric (photovoltaic) array
with a nameplate capacity not exceeding 5,000 kilowatts AC that provides retail
electric power (or financial proxy for retail power) to multiple households or
businesses residing in or located off-site from the location of the solar
elective array, provided that the project consists of no more than: (i) two
arrays on one parcel such that neither array exceeds 2,500 kilowatts AC; or
(ii) one array not exceeding 2,500 kilowatts AC on each of two contiguous
parcels.
      (6)   GROUND-MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM means a solar energy system that
is directly installed onto the ground and is not attached or affixed to an
existing structure.
      (7)   PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM means a solar energy system that produces
electricity by the use of semiconductor devices called photovoltaic cells that
generate electricity whenever light strikes them.
      (8)   QUALIFIED SOLAR INSTALLER means a trained and qualified electrical
professional who has the skills and knowledge related to the construction and
operation of solar electrical equipment and installations and has received
safety training on the hazards involved.
      (9)   ROOF-MOUNT SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM means a solar energy system in which
solar panels are mounted on top of a building roof as either a flush-mounted
system or as modules fixed to frames which can be tilted toward the south at an
optimal angle.
      (10)   SOLAR COLLECTOR means a device, structure or part of a device or
structure for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy
into thermal, mechanical, chemical or electrical energy.
      (11)   SOLAR ENERGY  means radiant energy received from the sun that can
be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
      (12)   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES) means the components and subsystems
required to convert solar energy into electric or thermal energy suitable for
use. The area of the system includes all the land inside the perimeter of the
system, which extends to any fencing. The term applies, but is not limited to,
solar photovoltaic systems, solar thermal systems and solar hot water systems.
      (13)   SOLAR STORAGE BATTERY/UNIT means a component of a solar energy
device that is used to store solar generated electricity or heat for later use.
      (14)   SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEMS means solar thermal systems that directly
heat water or other liquid using sunlight. The heated liquid is used for such
purposes as space heating and cooling, domestic hot water and heating pool
water.
   (C)   Ground-mount and roof-mount solar energy systems.
      (1)   Ground-mount solar energy systems designed to serve only the
occupants of the parcel on which they are located shall require a special use.
Such systems are accessory structures and are allowed only on zoning lots with
a principal structure. Roof-mount solar energy systems designed to serve only
the occupants of the parcel on which they are located shall not require a
special use.
      (2)   An application shall be submitted to the Commissioner demonstrating
compliance with all applicable provisions of the village Code and with the
following requirements:
         (a)   Height.
            1.   Roof-mount solar energy systems shall not exceed the height of
the principal structure on the zoning lot where the system is located.
            2.   Ground-mount solar energy systems shall not exceed 20 feet in
height when oriented at maximum tilt.
            3.   Ground-mount solar energy systems placed in the front yard
through a special use shall not exceed 30 inches above grade.
         (b)   Setbacks.
            1.   Ground-mount solar energy systems shall meet the accessory
structure setbacks for the zoning district in which the system is located.
            2.   Ground-mount solar energy systems shall not extend into the
side yard or rear yard setback at any design tilt.
            3.   In addition to building setbacks, the collector surface and
mounting devices for roof-mount systems shall not extend beyond the exterior
perimeter of the building on which the system is mounted or built. Exterior
piping for solar systems generating heated water may extend beyond the
perimeter of the building on a side yard exposure.
         (c)   Safety. Roof-mount solar energy systems, excluding building
integrated systems, shall allow for adequate roof access for firefighting
purposes to the south facing or flat roof upon which the panels are mounted.
   (D)   Building integrated systems. Building integrated solar energy systems
shall be permitted in all zoning districts in the village without a special use
but shall meet the requirements of all applicable provisions of the village
Code including, without limitation, the Millstadt Building Code and the
requirement to obtain a building permit.
   (E)   Community solar projects. Community solar projects are allowed by
special use in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Community solar projects may be located on rooftops.
      (2)   An interconnection agreement must be completed with the electric
utility in whose service the territory the solar energy system is located prior
to the project being energized.
      (3)   Dimensional standards. All community solar projects related
structures in newly platted and existing subdivisions shall comply with the
principal structure setback, height, and coverage limitations for the district
in which the solar energy system is located.
   (F)   Commercial/large scale solar farm. Commercial/large scale solar farms
may be allowed by special use in all zoning districts. The following
information shall also be submitted as part of an application for a commercial/
large scale solar farm:
      (1)   A site plan with existing conditions showing the following:
         (a)   Existing property lines and property lines extending 100 feet
from the exterior boundaries including the names of adjacent property owners
and the current use of those properties.
         (b)   All routes that will be used for the construction and
maintenance purposes shall be identified on the site plan. All routes for
either egress or ingress shall be shown.
         (c)   Location and size of any abandoned wells, sewage treatment
systems.
         (d)   Existing buildings and impervious surfaces.
         (e)   A contour map showing topography at two-foot intervals. A
contour map of surrounding properties may also be required.
         (f)   Existing vegetation (list type and percent of coverage: i.e.,
cropland/plowed fields, grassland, wooded areas, etc.).
         (g)   Any delineated wetland boundaries.
         (h)   A copy of the current FEMA FIRM maps that shows the subject
property including the 100-year flood elevation and any regulated flood
protection elevation, if available.
         (i)   Surface water drainage patterns.
         (j)   The location of any subsurface drainage tiles.
         (k)   Location and spacing of the solar collector.
         (l)   Location of underground and overhead electric lines connecting
the solar farm to a building, substation or other electric load.
         (m)    New electrical equipment other than at the existing building or
substations that is to be the connection point for the solar farm.
      (2)   Fencing and weed/grass control.
         (a)   An acceptable weed/grass control plan for property inside and
outside the fenced area for the entire property. The applicant and any
successor shall during the operation of the solar farm adhere to the weed/grass
control plan.
         (b)   Perimeter fencing having a maximum height of eight feet shall be
installed around the boundary of the solar farm. The fence shall contain
appropriate warning signage that is posted such that it is clearly visible on
the site.
         (c)   The applicant shall maintain the fence in good condition and
adhere to the weed/grass control plan.
      (3)   Manufacturers specifications. The manufacturer's specifications and
recommended installation methods for all major equipment, including solar
collectors, mounting systems and foundations for poles and racks.
      (4)   Connection and interconnection.
         (a)   A description of the method of connecting the solar array to a
building or substation.
         (b)   Utility interconnection details and a copy of written
notification to the utility company requesting the proposed interconnection.
      (5)   Setbacks. A minimum of 50 feet must be maintained from all property
lines.
      (6)   Fire protection. A fire protection plan for the construction and
the operation of the facility, and emergency access to the site.
      (7)   Endangered species and wetlands. Solar farm developers shall be
required to initiate a natural resource review consultation with the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources (IDNR) through the department's online EcoCat
Program. Areas reviewed through this process will be endangered species and
wetlands. The cost of the EcoCat consultation shall be borne by the developer.
      (8)   Decommissioning of the solar farm. The developer shall provide a
decommissioning plan for the anticipated service life of the facility or in the
event the facility is abandoned or has reached its life expectancy. If the
solar farm is out of service or not producing electrical energy for a period of
12 months, it will be deemed nonoperational and decommissioning and removal of
that facility shall commence according to the decommissioning plan as provided
and approved. A cost estimate for the decommissioning of the facility shall be
prepared by a professional engineer or contractor who has expertise in the
removal of the solar farm. The decommissioning cost estimate shall explicitly
detail the cost before considering any projected salvage value of the out of
service solar farm. A restoration plan shall also be provided for the site with
the application. The decommissioning plan shall include the following:
         (a)   Removal of the following within six months after the farm became
non-operational:
            1.   All solar collectors and components, above ground improvements
and outside storage.
            2.   Foundations, pads and underground electrical wires at reclaim
site to a depth of four feet below the surface of the ground.
            3.   Hazardous material from the property and dispose in accordance
with federal and state law.
         (b)    The decommissioning plan shall also include an agreement
between the applicant and the village that:
            1.   The financial resources for decommissioning shall be secured
by a surety bond, or cash deposited in an escrow account with an escrow agent
acceptable to the Commissioner.
            2.   The agreement shall establish conditions which the funds will
be disbursed.
            3.   The village shall have access to the security for the purpose
of completing decommissioning if decommissioning is not completed by the owner
of the project within six months of the end of project life or facility
abandonment.
            4.   The village shall have the right to enter the site, pursuant
to reasonable notice to effect or complete decommissioning.
            5.   The village shall have the right to seek injunctive relief to
effect or complete decommissioning, and to seek reimbursement from the owner
for decommissioning costs in excess of the amount deposited in escrow and to
file a lien against any real estate owned by applicant or applicant's
successor, or in which they have an interest, for the amount of the excess, and
to take all steps allowed by law to enforce said lien.
   (G)   Compliance with Building Code. All solar energy systems shall require
application for permit available at Village Hall subject to approval by the
Commissioner and shall comply with any other applicable provisions of the
village Code, St. Clair County Building and Zoning Codes, state law or federal
law.
   (H)   Liability insurance. The owner operator of the solar farm shall
maintain a current general liability policy covering bodily injury and property
damage and name the village as an additional insured with limits of at least
$1,000,000 per occurrence and $5,000,000 in the aggregate with a deductible of
no more than $5,000.
   (I) General provisions.
      (1)   Reflection angles. Reflection angles for solar collectors shall be
oriented such that they do not project glare onto adjacent properties.
      (2)   Aviation protection. For solar units located within 500 feet of an
airport or within approach zones of an airport, the applicant shall complete
and provide the results of the solar glaze hazard analysis tool (SGHAT) for the
airport traffic control tower cab and final approach paths, consistent with the
interim policy, FAA review of solar energy projects on federal obligated
airports, or most recent version adopted by the FAA.
      (3)   Visibility. Solar energy systems shall be located in a manner to
reasonably minimize view blockage for surrounding properties and shading of
property to the north while still providing adequate solar access for
collectors.
      (4)   Installation. All solar energy systems shall be installed by a
qualified solar installer.
      (5)   Utility connection. Any connection to the public utility grid shall
be inspected and approved by the affected public utility.
      (6)   Maintenance. All solar energy systems shall be maintained and kept
in good working order. If it is determined by the Commissioner that a solar
energy system is not being maintained, kept in good working order, or is no
longer being utilized to perform its intended purpose for six consecutive
months, the property owner shall be given 90-day written notice to remedy or to
remove the unit and all equipment.
      (7)   Approved solar components. Electric solar energy system components
shall have a UL listing or approved equivalent and solar hot water systems
shall have an SRCC rating.
      (8)   Restrictions on solar energy systems limited. Consistent with ILCS
Ch. 765, Act 165, §§ 1 et seq., no homeowner's agreement, covenant, common
interest community or other contracts between multiple property owners within a
subdivision shall prohibit or restrict homeowners from installing solar energy
systems.
   (J)   Administration and enforcement. The Commissioner shall enforce the
provisions of this chapter through inspections on such schedule as he deems
appropriate. The Commissioner has the authority to enter upon the premises
where a solar energy system is located at any time by coordinating a reasonable
time with the operator/owner of the facility. Any person, firm or cooperation
who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply with, or resists
enforcement of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the
general penalty provisions of the Village Code.
(Ord. 1280, passed 6-10-24)
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 152.175 PURPOSE.
   The requirements imposed by this chapter are designed to guide the use of
land by encouraging the development of structures and uses that are compatible
with the predominant character of each of the various districts. Lots,
structures and uses of land or structures that do not conform to the
requirements of the district in which they are located tend to impede
appropriate development. For example, nonconformities are frequently
responsible for heavy traffic on residential streets, the overtaxing of parking
facilities, the creation of nuisances, and/or the lowering of property values.
The regulations of this subchapter are intended to alleviate such existing/
potential problems by encouraging the gradual elimination of nonconformities.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.176 NONCONFORMING LOTS.
   (A)   Any vacant lot that does not conform to one or more of the lot size
(area dimensions) requirements of the district in which it is located may,
nonetheless, be developed for any use permitted in that district if such vacant
lot:
      (1)   Was recorded in the County Recorder of Deeds office prior to the
effective date of this chapter (or pertinent amendment thereto); and
      (2)   Is at least 50 feet wide.
   (B)   If two or more lots or combinations of lots and portions of lots with
continuous frontage were of record and in common ownership on the effective
date of this chapter, and if one or more of those lots does not meet the
minimum lot width, depth or area requirements of the district in which it is
located, the land involved shall be considered an undivided parcel. No portion
of any such parcel shall be developed except in compliance with this chapter,
nor shall any such parcel be divided so as to create a lot that does not meet
the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.177 NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES.
   Any otherwise lawful structure which exists on the effective date of this
chapter but which could not be erected under the terms of this chapter because
of requirements/restrictions concerning lot size, height, setbacks or other
characteristics of the structure or its location on the lot may lawfully
remain, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Maintenance. A nonconforming structure may be maintained by ordinary
repairs.
   (B)   Enlargement, alterations. A nonconforming structure shall not be
enlarged or altered in any way which increases its nonconformity.
   (C)   Relocation. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved unless, after
relocation, it will conform to all the regulations of the district in which it
will be situated.
   (D)   Reconstruction. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the
reconstruction, repairing, rebuilding and continued use of any nonconforming
building or structure damaged by fire, collapse, explosion, or Act of God,
subsequent to the date of this chapter, provided that all of the other
requirements of this chapter are met.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.178 NONCONFORMING USES OCCUPYING A STRUCTURE.
   If any lawful use occupying a structure exists on the effective date of this
chapter but would not be allowed under the terms of this chapter, such use may
lawfully continue, subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Maintenance. Any structure housing a nonconforming use may be
maintained through ordinary repairs.
   (B)   Enlargement, alteration, reconstruction, relocation. No structure
housing a nonconforming use shall be enlarged, structurally altered,
reconstructed or relocated unless 50% of the structure is changed to a
permitted use.
   (C)   Extension of use. No nonconforming use may be extended to any part(s)
of the structure not intended or designed for such use, nor shall the
nonconforming use be extended to occupy any land outside such structure.
   (D)   Change of use. A nonconforming use occupying a structure may be
changed to a similar use, to a more restrictive use, or to a conforming use.
Such use shall not thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use.
   (E)   Discontinuance of use. When a nonconforming use of a structure, or of
a structure and premises in combination, is discontinued for 12 consecutive
months or for 18 months during any three-year period, the nonconforming use
shall not thereafter be resumed. Any discontinuance caused by government action
and without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user shall not be
counted in calculating the length of discontinuance.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.179 NONCONFORMING USES OF LAND.
   Any lawful use of land existing on the effective date of this chapter that
would not be permitted under the terms of this chapter may lawfully continue,
subject to the following provisions:
   (A)   Intensification or extension of use. A nonconforming use of land shall
not be intensified, or extended to occupy a greater area of land than was
occupied by such use on the effective date of this chapter.
   (B)   Relocation. No nonconforming use of land shall be moved, in whole or
in part, unless such use, upon relocation, will conform to all pertinent
regulations of the district in which it is proposed to be located.
   (C)   Change of use. Whenever a nonconforming use of a building has been
changed to a more restrictive use or to a conforming use, such use shall not
thereafter be changed to a less restrictive use. If no structural alterations
are made, a nonconforming use of a building may be changed to another
nonconforming use of the same or more restricted classification.
   (D)   Discontinuance. When a nonconforming use of land is discontinued for a
period of 12 consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be resumed, and any
subsequent use of such land shall conform to the applicable district
regulations. Any discontinuance caused by government action and without any
contributing fault by the owner or operator shall not be counted in calculating
the length of discontinuance.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.180 NONCONFORMITIES UNDER PERMIT AUTHORITY.
   The regulations of this chapter shall not apply to any change in an existing
structure or to any change in the use of a structure or of land for which a
permit was issued prior to the effective date of this chapter or any pertinent
amendment thereto provided that the work authorized by such permit is completed
within a reasonable time.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
§ 152.190 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby established in accordance with state
law.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-3) (Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.191 MEMBERSHIP, APPOINTMENT, COMPENSATION.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall consist of seven members, all of whom
shall reside within the village. Each Board member shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees. One of the members
so appointed shall be named as Chairperson at the time of his appointment. Each
Board member shall receive compensation as established by the Village Board.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.192 TERM OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   (A)   Every member of the Board of Zoning Appeals which was established
pursuant to the former zoning code shall be entitled to serve on the Board of
Zoning Appeals established by this subchapter until the date his term of office
would have expired if the former zoning code had remained in effect. Any person
appointed to the Board of Zoning Appeals on or after the effective date of this
chapter shall hold office for five years from the date of his appointment, and
until his successor has been selected and qualified.
   (B)   With the advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, the Mayor may
remove any member of the Board of Zoning Appeals for cause, after a public
hearing. Vacancies on the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be filled for the
unexpired term of the member whose place has become vacant in the same manner
as provided for the appointment of new members.
   (C)   Any member of the Board of Zoning of Appeals wishing to be removed
from the Zoning Board of Appeals must submit a letter of resignation to the
Chairperson of the Board of Zoning Appeals, which will be given to the Village
President for presentation to the Village Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.193 MEETING; QUORUM.
   All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be held at the call of the
Chairperson and at such times as the Board may determine. All Board meetings
shall be open to the public. The Board may adopt their own rules of meeting
procedures consistent with this chapter and the applicable state statutes. The
Board may select such officers as it deems necessary. The Chairperson, or in
his absence, the Acting Chairperson may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum,
and the affirmative vote of at least four members shall be necessary to
authorize any Board action.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.194 RECORDS.
   The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings and examinations. These
minutes shall indicate the absence of any member, the vote or abstention of
each member on each question, and any official action taken. A copy of every
rule, variance, order or decision of the Board shall be filed immediately with
the Village Clerk and shall be a public record.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 152.205 ZONING ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.
   The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized and will be appointed by the
Village President and approved by the Village Board. The Zoning Administrator
directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This broad
responsibility encompasses, but is not limited to, the following specific
duties:
   (A)   To review and pass upon applications for initial and final
certificates of zoning compliance;
   (B)   To inspect lots, structures and uses to determine compliance with this
chapter, and where there are violations, to initiate appropriate corrective
action;
   (C)   To review and forward to the Board of Zoning Appeals all appeals and
applications for variances, special use permits, and amendments;
   (D)   To maintain up-to-date records of matters related to this chapter
including, but not limited to, district maps, certificates of zoning
compliance, special use permits, variances, interpretative decisions of the
Board of Zoning Appeals, amendments and all applications/documents related to
any of these items;
   (E)   To republish the zoning district map not later than March 31 if any
rezonings or annexations have been approved during the preceding calendar year;
   (F)   To provide information to the general public on matters related to
this chapter; and
   (G)   To perform such other duties as the Board of Trustees may from time to
time prescribe.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.206 INITIAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   Upon the effective date of this chapter, no lot shall be created, no land
shall be developed, no new use or structure shall be established or erected,
and no existing use or structure shall be enlarged, extended, altered,
relocated or reconstructed until an initial certificate of zoning compliance
has been issued. The Administrator shall not issue an initial certificate of
zoning compliance unless, following consultation with technically qualified
persons as necessary, he determines that the proposed activity conforms to the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
   (A)   Application. Every applicant for an initial certificate of zoning
compliance shall submit to the Administrator, in graphic and/or narrative form,
all the items of information listed below that are applicable to the particular
project. The Administrator shall decide which items are applicable. (Note:
Filing fee required). Items of information are as follows:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant:
      (2)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed lot,
structure or use, if different from division (A)(1) of this section;
      (3)   Brief, general description/explanation of the proposal;
      (4)   Location of the proposed lot, use or structure, and its
relationship to adjacent lots, uses or structures;
      (5)   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
      (6)   Existing topography of the site and proposed finished grade;
      (7)   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping and erosion control
features on the site, including the parking area;
      (8)   Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
      (9)   Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
      (10)    Location and number of proposed parking/loading spaces and access
ways;
      (11)    Identification and location of all existing or proposed
utilities, whether public or private; and/or
      (12)    Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may
require.
   (B)   Duration of certificate. Initial certificates of zoning compliance
shall be valid for one year, or until revoked for failure to abide by a
corrective action order. The Administrator may renew initial certificates of
zoning compliance for successive one-year periods upon written request,
provided the applicant is making a good faith effort to complete the authorized
work.
   (C)   Relationship to building permits. Upon the effective date of this
chapter, no building permit for the erection, enlargement, extension,
alteration, or reconstruction of any structure shall be issued until the
applicant for such permit has properly obtained an initial certificate of
zoning compliance pertaining to such work.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.207 FINAL CERTIFICATES OF ZONING COMPLIANCE.
   No lot or part thereof recorded or developed after the effective date of
this chapter, and no structure or use, or part thereof, that has been erected,
enlarged, altered, relocated or reconstructed after the effective date of this
chapter shall be used, occupied, or put into operation until a final
certificate of zoning compliance has been issued. The Administrator shall not
issue a final certificate of zoning compliance until it has been determined, by
inspection, that the work authorized by the initial certificate of zoning
compliance has been completed in accordance with approved plans. Failure to
obtain a final certificate of zoning compliance shall constitute a separate
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86) Penalty, see §
152.999
§ 152.208 CORRECTIVE ACTION ORDERS.
   Whenever the Zoning Administrator finds, by inspection or otherwise, that
any lot, structure, or use, or work thereon, is in violation of this chapter,
the Zoning Administrator shall so notify the responsible party, and shall order
appropriate corrective action.
   (A)   Contents of order. The order to take corrective action shall be in
writing and shall include:
      (1)   A description of the premises sufficient for identification;
      (2)   A statement indicating the nature of the violation;
      (3)   A statement of the remedial action necessary to effect compliance;
      (4)   The date by which the violation must be corrected;
      (5)   A statement that the alleged violator is entitled to a conference
with the Administrator if he so desires;
      (6)   The date by which an appeal of the corrective action order must be
filed, and a statement of the procedure for so filing; and
      (7)   A statement that failure to obey a corrective action order shall
result in revocation of the certificate of zoning compliance and may result in
the imposition of fines.
   (B)   Service of order. A corrective action order shall be deemed properly
served upon the owner, occupant or operator of the offending lot, structure or
use if it is:
      (1)   Served upon him personally;
      (2)   Sent by certified mail to his last known address; or
      (3)   Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the affected premises.
   (C)   Stop orders. Whenever any work is being done in violation of an
initial certificate of zoning compliance, the Administrator's corrective action
order may state that the violation must cease immediately, (see division (A) of
this section). In such case, the corrective action order is equivalent to a
stop order.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.209 EMERGENCY MEASURES.
   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, whenever the
Administrator determines that any violation of this chapter poses an imminent
peril to life or property, he may institute, without notice or hearing, any
necessary proceedings to alleviate the perilous condition.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.210 APPEALS.
   Any person aggrieved by any decision or order of the Zoning Administrator in
any matter related to the interpretation or enforcement of any provisions of
this chapter may be made and treated in accordance with state law, ILCS Ch. 65;
Act 5, § 11-13-12 and the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Filing, record transmittal. Every appeal shall be made within 45 days
of the matter complained of by filing with the Administrator and the Board of
Zoning Appeals a written notice specifying the grounds for appeal. Every appeal
shall also be filed with the Soil and Water Agricultural District as per state
law, ILCS Ch. 70, Act 405, §
22.02a. Not more than five working days after the notice of appeal has been
filed, the Administrator shall transmit to the Board of Appeals all records
pertinent to the case. (Note: Filing fee required.)
   (B)   Stay of further proceedings. An appeal stays all further action on the
matter being appealed unless the Administrator certifies to the Board of Zoning
Appeals, after the notice of appeal has been filed with him, that for reasons
stated in the certificate, a stay would cause imminent peril to life or
property. In such case, further action shall not be stayed unless the Board of
Zoning Appeals or the circuit court grants a restraining order for due cause,
and so notifies the Administrator.
   (C)   Public hearing; notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on every appeal within a reasonable time after the filing of the
appeal notice. At the hearing any interested party may appear and testify,
either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney. Notice indicating the
time, date, and place of the hearing, and briefly describing the issue to be
decided shall be given not more than 30 days nor less than 15 days before the
hearing:
      (1)   By first class mail to all parties whose property is within 250
feet of the lot affected by the appeal; and
      (2)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village.
   (D)   Decision by Board of Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
recommend to the Board of Trustees for their decision and opinion on the Appeal
within a reasonable time after the hearing. The Board of Zoning Appeals, in
their opinion to the Board of Trustees, may recommend to reverse or affirm,
wholly or partly, or to modify or amend the decision or order appealed from to
the extent and in the manner that they deem appropriate. In so performing their
duties, the Board of Zoning Appeals has all the powers of the Administrator.
   (E)   Decision by Board of Trustees. The Board of Trustees shall render a
decision on the appeal within 60 days after receiving the appropriate records
and recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Trustees may
uphold the recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals and pass an ordinance
stipulating the facts.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -)
§ 152.211 VARIANCES.
   A variance is a relaxation of the requirements of this chapter that are
applicable to a particular lot or structure. A so-called, use variance (which
would allow a use that is neither permitted nor special in the district in
question) is not a variance, it is an amendment, and may be granted only as
provided for at §
152.213.
   (A)   Application. Every application for a variance shall be filed with the
Administrator on a prescribed form. Every variance application shall also be
filed with the Soil and Water Agricultural District as per ILCS Ch. 70, Act
405, § 22.02a. The Administrator shall promptly transmit said application,
together with any device he might wish to offer, to the Board of Zoning
Appeals. The application shall contain sufficient information to allow the
Board to make an informed decision, and shall include, at a minimum, the
following: (Note: Filling fee required.)
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Location of the structure/use for which the variance is sought;
      (3)   Brief description of adjacent lots, structures, and/or uses;
      (4)   Brief description of the problem(s)/circumstances engendering the
variance request;
      (5)   Brief, but specific, statement/explanation of the desired variance;
      (6)   Specific section(s) of this chapter containing the regulations
which, if strictly applied, would cause a serious problem; and
      (7)   Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may require.
   (B)   Public hearing; notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on each variance request within a reasonable time after the
variance application is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party
may appear and testify either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the
nature of the proposed variance shall be given not more than 30 nor less than
15 days before the hearing:
      (1)   By first class mail to the applicant and to all parties whose
property is within 250 feet of the property affected by the proposed variance;
and
      (2)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village.
   (C)   Advisory report; findings of fact. Within a reasonable time after the
public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall submit their advisory report
to the Village Board. The report shall state the Board of Appeals'
recommendations regarding the proposed variance. The Board of Appeals shall not
recommend any variance unless, based upon the evidence presented to them, they
determine that:
      (1)   The proposed variance is consistent with the general purposes of
this chapter (see §
152.002);
      (2)   Strict application of the district requirements would result in
great practical difficulties or hardship to the applicant, and prevent a
reasonable return on the property;
      (3)   The proposed variance is the minimum deviation from such
requirements that will alleviate the difficulties/hardship, and allow a
reasonable return on the property;
      (4)   The plight of the applicant is due to peculiar circumstances not of
his own making;
      (5)   The peculiar circumstances engendering the variance request are not
applicable to other property within the district, and therefore, that a
variance would be a more appropriate remedy than an amendment (rezoning); and
      (6)   The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the area where the premises in question are located nor materially frustrate
implementation of this municipality's comprehensive plan.
   (D)   Action by Village Board. The Village Board shall act on every proposed
variance at their next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the
Board of Appeals advisory report. Without further public hearing, the Village
Board may approve or disapprove any proposed variance by simple majority vote
of all the members then holding office. Approved variances shall be supported
in the form of a village ordinance.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -)
§ 152.212 SPECIAL USES.
   (A)   Special use permits. This chapter divides the village into various
districts, and permits in each district as a matter of right only those uses
which are clearly compatible with one another. Certain other uses, because of
their special operational or physical characteristics, may or may not have a
detrimental impact on nearby permitted uses, depending upon their precise
location, manner of operation and other factors. Such special uses require
careful case-by-case review, and may be allowed only after review and approved
by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   Application. Every applicant for a special use permit shall submit to
the Zoning Administrator in narrative and/or graphic form, the items of
information enumerated below. The Administrator shall promptly transmit the
completed application, together with any comments or recommendation he might
have, to the Board of Zoning Appeals. (Note: Filing fee required.) Items of
information are as follows:
      (1)   Name and address of the applicant;
      (2)   Name and address of the owner or operator of the proposed structure
or use, if different from division (B)(1) above;
      (3)   Nature of the proposed use, including type of activity, manner of
operation, number of occupants or employees, and similar matters;
      (4)   Location of the proposed use or structure, and its relationship to
existing uses of structures on adjacent lots;
      (5)   Area and dimensions of the site for the proposed structure or use;
      (6)   Existing topography of the site and proposed finished grade;
      (7)   Existing and proposed screening, landscaping and erosion control
features on the site, including the parking area;
      (8)   Height and setbacks of the proposed structure;
      (9)   Number and size of proposed dwelling units, if any;
      (10)    Number and location of proposed parking/loading spaces and access
ways;
      (11)    Identification and location of all existing or proposed
utilities, whether public or private; and/or
      (12)    Any other pertinent information that the Administrator may
require.
   (C)   Public hearing; notice. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a
public hearing on every special use permit application within a reasonable time
after the application is submitted to them. At the hearing any interested party
may appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or
attorney. Notice indicating the time, date, and place of the hearing, and the
nature of the proposed special use shall be given not more than 30 nor less
than 15 days before the hearing:
      (1)   By first class mail to applicant and to all parties whose property
is within 250 feet of the lot line of the proposed special use; and
      (2)   By publication in a newspaper published within this village.
   (D)   Advisory report, factors considered. Within a reasonable time after
the public hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall submit their advisory
report to the village. In deciding what their advice should be, the Zoning
Board of Appeals shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   Whether the proposed design, location and manner of operation of
the proposed special use will adequately protect the public health, safety, and
welfare, and the physical environment;
      (2)   Whether the proposed special use is consistent with this
municipality's comprehensive plan, if any;
      (3)   The effect the proposed special use would have on the value of
neighboring property and on this municipality's overall tax base;
      (4)   The effect the proposed special use would have on public utilities
and on traffic circulation on nearby streets; and
      (5)   Whether there are any facilities near the proposed special use
(such as schools or hospitals) that require special protection.
   (E)   Action by Village Board. The Village Board shall act on every request
for a special use permit at their next regularly scheduled meeting following
submission of the Board of Zoning Appeals advisory. A village ordinance will be
passed for approved special use permits.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.213 AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The Board of Trustees may amend this chapter in accordance with state
law (ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14) and the provisions of this section.
Proposed alterations of district boundaries or proposed changes in the status
of uses (permitted, special, prohibited) shall be deemed proposed amendments.
Amendments may be proposed by the Board of Trustees, the Administrator, the
Board of Zoning Appeals, the Planning Commission, or any party in interest.
   (B)   Filing. Every proposal to amend this chapter shall be filed with the
Administrator on a prescribed form. Every amendment proposal shall also be
filed with the Soil and Water Agricultural District as per ILCS Ch. 70, Act
405, § 22.02a. The Administrator shall promptly transmit the proposal, together
with any comments or recommendations he might wish to make, to the Board of
Appeals for a public hearing. (Note: Filing fee required.)
   (C)   Public hearing; notice. The Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing on every amendment proposal within a reasonable time after said
proposal has been submitted to them. At the hearing, any interested party may
appear and testify, either in person or by duly authorized agent or attorney.
Notice indicating the time, date and place of the hearing and the nature of the
proposed amendment shall be given not more than 30 nor less than 15 days before
the hearing:
      (1)   By first class mail to all parties whose property is within 250
feet of the property affected by the proposed amendment; and
      (2)   By publication in a newspaper of general circulation within the
village.
   (D)   Advisory report; findings of fact. Within 30 days after the public
hearing, the Board of Appeals shall submit their advisory report to the Board
of Trustees. The report shall state the Board of Appeals' recommendations
regarding adoption of the proposed amendment, and their reasons therefore. If
the effect of the proposed amendment would be to alter district boundaries or
to change the status of any use, the Board of Appeals shall include in their
advisory report findings of fact concerning each of the following matters:
      (1)   Existing use and zoning of the property in question;
      (2)   Existing uses and zoning of other lots in the vicinity of the
property in question;
      (3)   Suitability of the property in question for uses already permitted
under existing regulations;
      (4)   Suitability of the property in question for the proposed use;
      (5)   The trend of development in the vicinity of the property in
question, including changes (if any) which may have occurred since the property
was initially zoned or last rezoned.
   (E)   Action by Board of Trustees.  
      (1)   The Board of Trustees shall act on every proposed amendment at
their next regularly scheduled meeting following submission of the Board of
Zoning Appeals advisory report. Without further public hearing, the Board of
Trustees may approve or disapprove any proposed amendment or may refer it back
to the Board of Appeals for further consideration, by simple majority vote of
all the members then holding office.
      (2)   Exception. The favorable vote of at least two-thirds of all the
members of the Board of Trustees is required to pass an amendment to this
chapter when the proposed amendment is opposed, in writing, by the owners of
20% of the frontage proposed to be altered, or by the owners of 20% of the
frontage immediately adjoining or across an alley therefrom, or by the owners
of 20% of the frontage directly opposite the frontage proposed to be altered.
(ILCS Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14)
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -)
§ 152.214 COMPLAINTS.
   Whenever any violation of this chapter occurs, or is alleged to have
occurred, any person may file a written complaint on forms provided by the
Administrator. The Administrator shall record such complaints, promptly
investigate, and, if necessary, institute appropriate corrective action.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.215 FILING FEES.
   The Board of Trustees shall establish (and may amend from time to time) a
schedule of filing fees for the various permits and procedures listed in this
chapter. The fees are intended to defray the administrative costs connected
with the processing/conducting of such permits or procedures; the fees do not
constitute a tax or other revenue-raising device. All such fees shall be paid
by the applicant to the Village Clerk. A current copy of the filing fee
schedule shall be available for public inspection in the office of the Village
Clerk.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
§ 152.216 REVIEW AND EXPIRATION.
   This chapter shall be reviewed every five years after its effective date
unless, following review by the Zoning Board it has been reenacted prior to
that date by the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
§ 152.300 PURPOSE.
   (A)   General purpose. The purpose of this subchapter is to provide specific
regulations for the placement, construction and modification of
telecommunications facilities. The provisions of this subchapter are not
intended and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of
prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, nor shall the
provisions of this subchapter be applied in such a manner to unreasonably
discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless
services.
      (1)   The goals of this subchapter are:
         (a)   To enhance the ability to provide telecommunications services to
the village.
         (b)   To encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas.
         (c)   Minimize the total number of towers in the village.
         (d)   Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites.
         (e)   Encourage users of towers to locate and configure them in a way
that minimizes adverse visual impact.
      (2)   Accordingly, the Board of Trustees finds that the promulgation of
this subchapter is warranted and necessary:
         (a)   To accommodate the growing need for communications facilities;
         (b)   To manage the location of communications facilities in the
village;
         (c)   To promote and encourage shared use co-location of existing and
new communications towers as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers, and to reduce the number of such structures
needed in the future;
         (d)   To protect residential areas and land uses from potential
adverse impacts of communications towers, including support structure failure
and falling ice;
         (e)   To minimize adverse visual impacts of communications facilities
through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative
camouflaging techniques;
   (B)   Technical consultation. Should the need arise where professional
technical consultation is necessary, the Village Zoning Administrator is
authorized, at his or her discretion, to employ on behalf of the village an
independent technical expert to review any technical materials submitted
including, but not limited to, those required under this subchapter and in
those case where a technical demonstration of unavoidable need or
unavailability of alternatives is required. The applicant shall pay all the
costs of the review, including any administrative costs incurred by the
village. To protect the applicant, any proprietary information disclosed to the
village, or to the expert hired, shall remain confidential and shall not be
disclosed to any third party.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.301 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this subchapter, certain terms or words used herein are
hereby defined as follows:
   ANTENNA. Any existing apparatus designed for telephonic, radio or television
communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves;
an antenna attached to a principal building for the purpose of providing
wireless telecommunications waves; an antenna attached to a principal building
for the purpose of providing wireless telecommunications services, utilizing
frequencies authorized by the Federal Communications Commission for “cellular,”
“enhanced special mobile radio,” and “personal communications systems”
telecommunications services, and its attendant base station.
   ANTENNA HEIGHT. The vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna
support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even if the
highest point is an antenna. Measurement of communications tower height shall
include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from
finish grade to the top of the antenna. If the support structure is on a sloped
grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in
calculating the antenna height.
   ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE. Any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod,
building, or other structure which supports a device used in the transmitting
or receiving of radio frequency energy.
   FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration.
   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
   GOVERNING AUTHORITY. The President and Village Board of Trustees of the
Village of Millstadt, Illinois.
   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE and PERSONAL WIRELESS FACILITIES. As used in this
subchapter, shall be defined in the same manner as in 47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(C),
as amended now or in the future.
   SATELLITE RECEIVING DISH. A generally dish-shaped signal-receiving device,
the purpose of which is to receive communications or other signals from
satellites in earth’s orbit and other extra-terrestrial sources.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY. A facility that transmits and/or receives
electromagnetic signals. It includes antennas, microwave dishes, horns, and
other types of equipment for the transmission and receipt of such signals,
telecommunication towers or similar structures supporting the equipment,
equipment buildings, parking area and other accessory development.
   TOWER. Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the
purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice
towers, guy towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative towers structures, and the like.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.302 USES ALLOWED.
   (A)   Compliance. All new telecommunications facilities shall comply with
this subchapter upon the date of passage. All telecommunications facilities
existing on the date of passage of this subchapter shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist and in accordance with continuance of
nonconformity regulations. New construction, other than routine maintenance, on
existing telecommunications facilities shall comply with the requirements of
this document, although the governing authority may waive or reduce the burden
on the applicant of one or more of the requirements, if in the sole discretion
of the governing authority, the goals of this subchapter are better served
thereby.
   (B)   Authorization. In all districts communication facilities shall be
permitted only if specifically authorized with a special use permit by the
President and Board of Trustees of the village, upon recommendations by the
Zoning Board of Appeals. In granting a special use permit, the governing
authority may impose zoning conditions to the extent the governing authority
concludes such conditions are necessary to buffer or otherwise minimize any
adverse effect of the proposed telecommunications facility on adjoining
properties.
   (C)   Agreement. No approval granted hereunder shall be effective until the
applicant and the village have executed a written agreement setting forth the
particular terms and provisions under which the approval to occupy and use
public ways of the village will be granted. Such agreement shall provide for
complete indemnification for the village and also provide for such liability
insurance as the village may require.
   (D)   Nonexclusive grant. No approval granted under this subchapter shall
confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use
the public ways of the village for delivery of telecommunications services or
any other purposes.
   (E)   Rights granted.  No approval granted under this subchapter shall
convey any right, title or interest in the public ways, but shall be deemed
approval only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purpose and
terms stated in the approval. Further, no approval shall construed as any
warranty of title.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.303 REGISTRATION AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Registration and fee.
      (1)   All telecommunications carriers and providers that offer or provide
any telecommunications service for a fee directly to the public within the
village or outside the corporate limits from telecommunications facilities
within the village, shall register with the village pursuant to this subchapter
on forms provided by the village, which shall include:
         (a)   The identity and legal status of the registrant, including any
affiliates.
         (b)   The name, address and telephone number of the officer, agent or
employee responsible for the accuracy of the registration statement.
         (c)   All of the information listed below for a permit.
      (2)   Each application for registration as a telecommunications carrier
or provider shall be accompanied by a fee of $500.
   (B)   Permit. A proper building permit must be obtained for any
telecommunications facility installation. Applications for special use permit,
planned unit development approval and building permit shall include any
combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written
narratives necessary to convey the following information:
      (1)   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height
of any proposed communications facility, on site land uses and zoning, adjacent
land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, set backs
from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed facilities and any
other structures.
      (2)   Map and/or aerial photograph showing the proposed facility location
and surrounding areas within 1,500 feet.
      (3)   Legal description of the property proposed for telecommunications
facility.
      (4)   Exact distances, locations and identifications of surrounding
residential properties and other telecommunications facilities.
      (5)   A landscape plan in compliance with the village code.
      (6)   Method of fencing, color of facilities, and where applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
      (7)   Plans must be completed and sealed by a professional engineer
registered with the state and must include a statement that the facilities will
comply with the Electronic Industries Associations standard and all village
building and construction codes.
      (8)   A statement by the applicant on the ability of the construction of
the facility to accommodate the co-location of additional antenna
installations.
      (9)   Any telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed
by the FCC.
      (10)   The applicant must demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its
overall network within the village and plans must include any expected future
facilities desired to be constructed within the village.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.304 CO-LOCATION AND ABANDONMENT.
   (A)   Co-location.
      (1)   Co-location of communications antennas is desired to minimize
adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation and clustering of
communications facilities. Co-location of communications facilities by more
than one carrier on existing or new antenna support structures shall take
precedence over the construction of new single use communication facilities. An
applicant for a new antenna support structure shall demonstrate that a diligent
effort has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities in
accordance with the site selection and protocol requirements of this subchapter
and that, due to valid considerations including physical restraints and
economic or technological feasibility, no more appropriate location is
available. The telecommunications company is required to demonstrate that it
contacted, in writing, the owners of tall structures within a 1,500 foot radius
of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna on those
structures, and was denied in writing, for reasons other than economic ones.
The village may deny the application to construct a new facility if the
applicant has not made a diligent effort, described in writing, to mount the
antenna on an existing structure.
      (2)   In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed
in the village in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be
designed to accommodate antennas for more than one user, unless the applicant
demonstrates in writing why such design is unfeasible for technical or physical
reasons. Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be unfeasible, the site
plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the
placement of additional equipment/buildings for other users.
   (B)   Abandonment. In the event the use of any communications facility has
been discontinued for a period of 180 consecutive days, the facility shall be
deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made
by the Village Zoning Administrator, who shall have the right to request
documentation and/or affidavits from the communications facility owner/operator
regarding the issue of facility usage. Upon such abandonment the owner/operator
of the facility shall have 90 days to reactivate the use of the facility,
transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the
facility, or dismantle and remove the facility. If there are two or more users
of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all
users cease using the facility. When a facility has been abandoned and removed,
the Village Board of Trustees will take necessary action to vacate any previous
special use or planned unit development approval for the particular abandoned
facility.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.305 SITE SELECTION AND PROTOCOLS.
   (A)   Site selection.
      (1)   As a fundamental element of this subchapter, the telecommunications
company proposing to construct an antenna support structure or mount an antenna
on an existing structure is required to demonstrate, using technological
evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order to satisfy its
function in the company’s grid system. Further, the company must demonstrate by
technological evidence that the height requested is the minimum height
necessary to fulfill the communications facilities function in the grid system.
      (2)   Given the unquestioned visual impact of communications towers on
their surrounding environment, no antenna support structure may be constructed
on a speculative basis. Applications for necessary permits will only be
processed when the applicant has in place agreements with an FCC licensed
telecommunications provider for lease/utilization of the support structure
space, written proof of which must be offered by the applicant.
      (3)   (a)   Telecommunications facilities must be located and designed to
minimize any adverse effect they may have on residential property values. Sites
shall be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation,
buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening.
Location and design of all sites shall consider the impact of the site on the
surrounding neighborhood. In residential districts and residential land use
areas, the minimum lot size for commercial communications tower shall be three
acres, except for government owned properties.
         (b)   Specific locations will be evaluated using the following
criteria which are not listed in order of priority:
            1.   Topography as it relates to line of sight transmissions for
optimum efficiency in service.
            2.   Availability of road access.
            3.   Availability of electrical power.
            4.   Availability of land based telephone lines or microwave link
capability.
            5.   Leasable lands and landlords who want facilities to be located
on their property.
            6.   Screening of potential and existing vegetation, structures and
topographic features.
            7.   Compatibility with adjacent land uses.
            8.   The least number of sites to cover the desired area.
            9.   The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical
requirements.
            10.   Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact.
            11.   Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna
mounting.
   (B)   Protocols. The following establishes the planning order of priorities
for locating new communications facilities:
      (1)   Place towers and antennas on commercial or government property.
      (2)   Place towers and antennas on other non-residential property.
      (3)   Place antennas on other appropriate existing structures such as
buildings, communication towers, water towers and smoke stacks.
      (4)   Place new communication towers in residential districts only if
locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not available on existing
structures or in non-residential districts. The telecommunications company is
required to demonstrate that it contacted, in writing, the owners of other more
appropriate properties and was denied, in writing, for reasons other than
economic ones.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.306 DESIGN CRITERIA.
   The following is a list of design criteria:
   (A)   New communications facilities shall be located in accordance with the
site selection and protocol requirements of this subchapter and shall be
designed to accommodate antennas for more than one user. All facilities must be
architecturally compatible with surrounding buildings and land uses or
otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the
existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. All facilities
must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and
any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate such
facilities. If such standards and regulations are changed then the owners of
the communications facilities shall bring those facilities into compliance with
the revised standards and regulations within three months of the effective date
of such standards and regulations unless a more stringent schedule is mandated
by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring facilities into compliance
with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the
removal of the facility.
   (B)   All telecommunications facilities must be located on properties that
comply with the lot area requirements of the zoning code. Additionally, any
telecommunications facility located in a residential zoning district must be
located on a lot with a minimum size of three acres.
   (C)   All communications facilities must be separated from communications
facilities on other properties by at least 1,500 feet.
   (D)   The maximum height for any antenna support structure shall be 150 feet
upon property zoned heavy commercial, 120 feet on property zoned light
commercial, and 100 feet on all other properties, unless additional height is
approved by variation by the President and Board of Trustees after a proper
public hearing and recommendation of the Zoning Board of Appeals in the event
of a planned unit development amendment.
   (E)   All antenna support structures must be set back a distance equal to
their height from any property line. At a minimum, any such antenna tower shall
provide a lot line setback at least equal to one-half of its height from the
antenna to all adjoining residential property lines.
   (F)   Communications towers shall have a non-contrasting blue, grey, or
black finish, or a similar color that minimizes their visibility, unless a
different color is required by the FCC or FAA.
   (G)   All telecommunications facilities shall be lighted only if required by
the FCC or the FAA. Where tower lighting is required, it shall be shielded or
directed to the greatest extent possible in such a manner as to minimize the
amount of light that falls onto nearby properties, particularly residences. A
manually-operated or motion detection light above the equipment shed door is
permitted but shall be kept off except when personnel are actually present at
night.
   (H)   Communications towers shall be constructed in accordance with
standards of the Electronic Industries Association and all applicable
construction and building codes, as may be amended from time to time.
Surrounding areas shall not be negatively affected by support structure
failure, falling ice or other debris or interference. All support structures
shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices as approved by the manufacturers.
   (I)   Building mounted facilities must be architecturally compatible with
the building on which they are mounted and designed and located so as to
minimize any adverse aesthetic impact. Any support structure or mechanical
equipment must be screened or enclosed in such a manner as to mask such
equipment. Such screening shall be of noncombustible material and of the same
color, character and design as the building upon which the screening is
erected. An antenna must be mounted to the wall of a building or extend above
the roof of a building without the screening, provided the antenna is painted
or otherwise made to match the color of the building or structure or background
against which they are most commonly seen. Communications facilities shall not
occupy more than an aggregate total of 10% of the roof area of any building.
   (J)   Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing
character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation must be
preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site
must be minimized. All ground mounted facilities and equipment shall be
enclosed with a solid six foot high fence. Landscaping shall be required to
screen as much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding the
support structure and any other ground level features, and in general soften
the appearance of the facility. As a condition of permit the village may set
conditions concerning existing vegetation, topography, walls, fences or other
landscaping to achieve an acceptable degree of screening.
   (K)   Driveways and parking areas constructed in compliance with village
code must be provided as necessary for each telecommunications facility. If any
site is not automated, the number of required parking spaces shall equal the
number of people on the largest shift. Any security fencing must be of a color
and design to blend into the character of the existing environment.
   (L)   No telecommunications facility shall cause interference with the
reception of television and radio broadcasts to the property on which they are
located or to surrounding properties.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.307 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following are considered exemptions:
   (A)   Proposed communications antennas may, and are encouraged to, co-locate
onto existing approved structures. Provided such co-locations are accomplished
in a manner consistent with the terms of this subchapter, then such co-
locations may be approved without any new or additional special use or planned
unit development approval. Proper plans must be submitted and permits obtained
for such co-location facilities as required by this subchapter.
   (B)   Any communications facilities on properties owned by the village are
exempt from the terms of this subchapter subject to any conditions set by the
President and Board of Trustees of the village.
   (C)   Nothing in the code shall apply to "receive only" communications
facilities for use by an individual residential dwelling unit or business,
provided such facilities comply with the height requirements of the zoning
district in which they are located.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.308 SEVERABILITY AND CONFLICT RESOLUTION.
   (A)   Severability. The provisions of this subchapter are hereby declared to
be severable and should any provision, clause, sentence, paragraph, sub-
paragraph, section, or part of this subchapter be determined to be in conflict
with any law, statute or regulation by a court of competent jurisdiction, the
provision shall be excluded and deemed inoperative, unenforceable, and as
though not provided for herein, and all other provisions shall remain
unaffected, unimpaired, valid and in full force and effect. It is hereby
declared to be the legislative intent of the village that this subchapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional or invalid provision, clause,
sentence, paragraph, sub-paragraph, section or part thereof not been included.
   (B)   Conflict resolution. All code provisions, ordinances, resolutions and
orders, or parts thereof, in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such
conflict hereby superseded.
(Ord. 807, passed 10-2-02)
§ 152.999 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who is convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $500, plus costs. Each day that a
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the village from
taking any other lawful action that may be necessary to secure compliance with
this chapter.
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
APPENDIX A: SUMMARY TABLE OF LOT AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS
Restrictions “A”  “R-1” “R-2” “R-3” “R-4” “R-5” “B-1” “B-2” “I
             District District  District  District  District  District  District  District  District
Restrictions                                       “A”  “R-1” “R-2” “R-3” “R-4” “R-5” Distr“B-1” “B-2” “I
                                                   District District  District  District  District                 District  District  District
                                                                                          9,600 sq.
Minimum lot area                                   3 acres  5,000 sq. 8,5000    9,600 sq. ft. or    6,000 sq. ft.  None      18750,000 18750,000
                                                            ft.       sq. ft.   ft.       2,000 sq.                          sq. ft.   sq. ft.
                                                                                          ft./unit
                                                                                          80 ft. or
Minimum lot width (at established building line)   250 ft.  50 ft.    70 ft.    80 ft.    20 ft./   50 ft.         50 ft.    125 ft.   125 ft.
                                                                                          unit
Minimum lot depth                                  250 ft.  100 ft.   100 ft.   120 ft.   120 ft.   120 ft.        None      150 ft.   150 ft.
Minimum setbacks:
From front lot line                                50 ft.   25 ft.    25 ft.    25 ft.    25 ft.    25 ft.         None      50 ft.    25 ft.
Side yards
     Minimum total setback from both side lot 25 ft    10 ft.    20 ft.    20 ft.    20 ft.    10 ft.         None      50 ft.    50 ft.
lines
     Minimum setback from either side lot line10 ft    5 ft.     10 ft.    10 ft.    10 ft.    10 ft.         None      25 ft.    25 ft.
From rear lot line                                 50 ft.   25 ft.    25 ft.    25 ft.    25 ft.    20 ft.         None      25 ft.    25 ft.
Maximum structure height                           35 ft.   35 ft.    35 ft.    35 ft.    35 ft.    35 ft. See §  45 ft.    35 ft.    60 ft.
                                                                                                    152.074  (F)
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86; Am. Ord. 744, passed - -)
APPENDIX B: FIGURES
Figures:
   
1.   Corners
   
2.   Lots
   
3.   Sign area
   
4.   Sign area
FIGURE 1. CORNERS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1857.jpg]
 
FIGURE 2. LOTS.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1860.jpg]
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
FIGURE 3. SIGN AREA.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1863.jpg]
 
FIGURE 4. SIGN AREA.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1866.jpg]
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
APPENDIX C: LOT TERMS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/14293e455b2b5f77b8c5eca930ff180ecf9388eb/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1869.jpg]
 
(Ord. 491, passed 6-16-86)
CHAPTER 153: COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
Section
   
153.01   Adoption by reference
§ 153.01 ADOPTION BY REFERENCE.
   The “Village of Millstadt Comprehensive Community Plan Update dated August
2012,” attached to Ordinance 1094, passed August 6, 2012 as Exhibit “A,” and by
reference made a part thereof, is hereby adopted as the Comprehensive Plan for
the village.
(Ord. 730, passed 10-6-97; Am. Ord. 821, passed 5-6-02; Am. Ord. 1029, passed
6-1-09; Am. Ord. 1094, passed 8-6-12)
CHAPTER 154: COMMERCIAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
General Provisions
   
154.01   Title; purpose
   
154.02   Scope
   
154.03   Intent
   
154.04   Severability
   
154.05   Applicability
   
154.06   Effect on existing ordinances; remedies
   
154.07   Code enforcement guidelines
   
154.08   Certificate of building maintenance and occupancy required
   
154.09   Certificate of building maintenance and occupancy application
   
154.10   Action on an application
   
154.11   Issuance of permit
   
154.12   Conditional permit
   
154.13   Rejection of application
   
154.14   Invalidity of permit
   
154.15   Revocation of permit
   
154.16   Existing commercial/industrial occupancies
   
154.17   Unscheduled inspections
Definitions
   
154.25   General
   
154.26   Applied meanings of words and terms
Administration and Enforcement
   
154.31   Duties and powers of Building Inspector/Code Administrator
   
154.32   Liability
   
154.33   Right of entry
   
154.34   Notice to owner or to persons responsible
   
154.35   Violations
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 154.01 TITLE; PURPOSE.
   (A) These regulations shall be known as the “Commercial Property Maintenance
Code”, hereinafter referred to as the “Property Maintenance Code” or “this
code.”
   (B)   This code is to establish minimum acceptable standards in the village
which must be maintained in buildings, structures, premises and facilities to
protect health, safety and general welfare.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.02 SCOPE.
   The provisions of this code shall apply to all nonresidential structures and
all premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for premises,
structures, equipment and facilities for light, ventilation, space, heating,
sanitation, protection from the elements, life safety, safety from fire and
other hazards, and for safe and sanitary maintenance; the responsibility of
owners, operators and occupants; the occupancy of existing structures and
premises, and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.03 INTENT.
   This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to
ensure public health, safety and welfare in so far as they are affected by the
continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. Existing
structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions shall be
altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety as required
herein.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.04 SEVERABILITY.
   If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for
any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this code.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.05 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters
affecting or relating to structures and premises. Where, in a specific case,
different sections of this code specify different requirements, the most
restrictive shall govern.
   (B)   Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good
working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service,
facility, equipment or utility, which is required under this section, to be
removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied structure,
except for such temporary interruption as necessary while repairs or
alterations are in progress. The requirements of this code are not intended to
provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety
systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified
herein, the owner shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings,
structures and premises.
   (C)   Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall
be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacturer’s installation instructions.
   (D)   Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory
for existing buildings or structures designated as historic buildings when such
buildings or structures are judged by the Building/Zoning Commissioner to be
safe and deviation from the requirements of this code is in the public
interest.
   (E)   Requirements not covered by code. Requirements necessary for the
strength, stability or proper operation of an existing fixture, structure or
equipment, or for the public safety, health and general welfare, not
specifically covered by this code, shall be determined by the Building
Inspector/Code Administrator.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.06 EFFECT ON EXISTING ORDINANCES; REMEDIES.
   (A)   This code establishes minimum requirements for the initial and
continued occupancy and use of all structures and premises, and does not
replace or modify requirements otherwise established by ordinance which may be
additional or more stringent for the construction, repair, alteration or use of
structures, equipment or facilities.
   (B)   The provisions in this code shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which prescribe standards
stricter than are provided herein.
   (C)   The provisions in this code shall not be deemed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the village or its officers or agencies relating to the
removal or demolition of any buildings which are deemed to be dangerous, unsafe
and unsanitary.
   (D)   This code shall not affect violations of any oilier ordinances, codes
or regulations existing prior to the effective date hereof, and any such
violation shall be governed and shall continue to be punishable to the full
extent of the law under the provisions of those ordinances, codes or
regulations in effect at the time the violation was committed.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.07 CODE ENFORCEMENT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Building and construction codes.
      (1)   Any repairs or alterations to a structure or changes of use
therein, which may be caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of tins
code, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of the
Building Code adopted in Chapter 150 of the village’s code.
      (2)   Any repair, alteration or replacement of structural elements of a
building, which may be required by the provisions of these guidelines, shall be
done in accordance with the applicable sections of the Building Code,
Electrical Code, Plumbing Code or other applicable code or ordinance of this
jurisdiction.
   (B)   Zoning Code. The provisions of these guidelines shall not permit the
abridgement or violation of the Zoning Code of this municipality.
   (C)   Conflicts. Specific provisions of these guidelines indicate their
precedence over the requirements of other related codes and ordinances. Where
specific precedence is not indicated, the requirements of the most restrictive
code or ordinance prevail.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.08 CERTIFICATE OF BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to occupy, or
permit to be occupied, any commercial/industrial unit, without obtaining a
certificate of commercial building maintenance (“permit”) described in this
section, or a conditional permit described in §
154.12.
   (B)   For purposes of this code, an on-premises inspection shall be
required, and a permit required for each of the following events or
occurrences:
      (1)   Change in commercial/industrial unit occupancy. Whenever there is a
change in occupancy of any structure containing a commercial/industrial unit,
an application for an occupancy permit shall be made by the owner thereof, or
by his or her duly authorized agent or representative, and filed with the
Building Inspector/Code Administrator. If an occupancy permit was previously
issued for such structure within a 12-month period prior to the change in
occupancy, a new occupancy permit for the change in occupancy shall be
required; however, a re-inspection shall not be required.
      (2)   Complaint received.
   (C)   Exempt property. Notwithstanding anything contained in the preceding
divisions (A) and (B) of this section, no on-premises inspection shall be
required and a certificate of building maintenance and occupancy shall not be
required for newly constructed structures until after the lapse of five years
following the date of construction completion.
   (D)   A $50 annual fee shall be paid to the village no later than April 30
of each year for the certificate of building maintenance and occupancy. All
commercial properties existing as of November 22, 2021 shall not have to pay
this annual fee until April 30, 2023.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.09 CERTIFICATE OF BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND OCCUPANCY APPLICATION.
   (A)   Application for a certificate of building maintenance and occupancy
required by this code shall be made by the owner of the structure containing
the commercial/industrial unit or by his or her duly authorized representative.
If the application is made by a person other than the owner in fee, it shall be
accompanied by a signed statement of the owner to the effect that the applicant
is authorized by the owner in fee to make such application. The full names and
addresses of the owner or the name and address of the responsible party if the
owner is a corporation, trust or other type of legal entity that is not a
natural person and the name and address of the applicant shall be stated in the
application.
   (B)   The application for such certificate shall be submitted in such form
as the Building Inspector/Code Administrator prescribes and shall be filed with
the Building Inspector/Code Administrator whenever one of the events described
in §
154.08 requires an inspection and issuance of an occupancy permit. (See
attachment to Ord. 1246 for Commercial Property Business Registration
Application.)
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly make any false
statement on an application for an occupancy permit.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.10 ACTION ON AN APPLICATION.
   (A)   The Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall examine or cause to be
examined all applications for permits and shall schedule the inspection, if
deemed required by the Building Inspector/Code Administrator, to be completed
within seven working days after filing. If the premises are not in compliance
with this code and all laws and ordinances applicable thereto, the Building
Inspector/Code Administrator shall provide the applicant with a list of defects
that are not in compliance. Said defects shall be listed with as much
specificity as possible. The owner or occupant of every commercial/industrial
structure and its premises will give the Building Inspector/Code Administrator
free access thereto, within and at a reasonable time, for the purpose of such
inspection.
   (B)   In the event practical difficulties prevent the inspection from being
made within five working days after filing, occupancy shall be permitted on a
conditional basis as described in this code until the examination and
inspection can be made as in division (A) above.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.11 ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   When all fees are paid and a commercial/industrial unit is entitled thereto,
the Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall make a recommendation to the
Mayor or his or her designee who shall then issue a certificate of building
maintenance and occupancy. The certificate shall certify compliance with the
provisions of this code, shall state the street address or other means of
identification, date of issue, and such other information as the Building
Inspector/Code Administrator shall deem appropriate for the implementation of
this code.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.12 CONDITIONAL PERMIT.
   Occupancy shall be permitted on a conditional basis when, in the judgment of
the Building Inspector/ Code Administrator with approval from the Mayor,
practical difficulties interfere with the completing of all repairs required to
bring the premises into full compliance with this code prior to permitting
occupancy. However, no conditional permit shall be issued when there is a
condition on the premises which can threaten the health or safety of an
occupant.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.13 REJECTION OF APPLICATION.
   If the application does not comply with the requirements of all pertinent
laws, the Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall make a recommendation to
the Mayor or his or her designee who shall then reject such application in
writing, stating the reasons therefor.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.14 INVALIDITY OF PERMIT.
   Any permit issued shall become invalid if the occupancy is not commenced
within six months after issuance of a permit or if the occupancy is terminated
except that the Building Inspector/Code Administrator is authorized to grant an
extension of time for an additional period not exceeding six months after a
follow-up inspection. The extension shall be requested in writing and
justifiable cause demonstrated.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.15 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Building Inspector/Code Administrator may revoke a permit in case of any
false statement or misrepresentation of facts in the application on which a
permit was based or in the event a structure or part thereof is condemned
pursuant to this code.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.16 EXISTING COMMERCIAL/INDUSTRIAL OCCUPANCIES.
   The provisions of §
154.08 shall apply to any commercial/industrial occupancy in existence at the
time this chapter takes effect. Existing commercial/industrial occupancies must
apply for a permit under this code but shall be exempt from the permit fee for
a period of one year.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.17 UNSCHEDULED INSPECTIONS.
   Nothing in this code shall be construed to prevent the Building Inspector/
Code Administrator from performing inspections at unscheduled, random intervals
or spontaneous frequency in furtherance of the implementation of this code,
particularly in the instance of complaints brought to his or her attention, or
in the course of a block or multi-block survey, or in the event of obvious
cause.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
DEFINITIONS
§ 154.21 GENERAL.
   (A)   Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the terms in §
154.22 shall, for the purpose of this code, have the meanings indicated in this
section.
   (B)   Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the
singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   (C)   Terms defined in other codes. Where terms are noted in this code and
are defined in the Building Code, they shall have the same meanings ascribed to
them as in that code.
   (D)   Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined under the provisions of
this code or under the provisions of the Building Code, they shall have
ascribed to them their ordinarily accepted meanings or such as the context
herein may imply.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.22 APPLIED MEANINGS OF WORDS AND TERMS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply,
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED. As applied to a material, device or method of construction shall
mean approved by the Building Inspector/Code Administrator under the provisions
of this code or approved by other authority designated by law to give approval
in the matter in question.
   ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. A building intended for furnishing services for
the elderly or disabled, but not providing the same degree of care as a nursing
home.
   BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly below and partly above
grade and having at least one-half its height below grade.
   BUILDING CODE. The Building Code officially adopted by the legislative body
of this jurisdiction, or such other code as may be officially designed by the
legislative body of the jurisdiction for the regulation of construction,
alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and
maintenance of buildings and structures.
   BUILDING INSPECTOR/CODE ADMINISTRATOR. The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly appointed
representative.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The official designated by the jurisdiction to enforce
building, or similar laws, or a duly authorized representative.
   CENTRAL HEATING. The heating system permanently installed and adjusted so as
to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms, bathrooms and water
closet compartments from a source outside of these rooms.
   CODE OFFICIAL. As used in this code, the Building Inspector/Code
Administrator, or any duly appointed representative.
   CONDEMN. To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy.
   CONDEMNATION. The act of judicially condemning.
   DUMPSTER. A large roll-off or hoisting-type trash container.
   EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS. The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests
by eliminating their harborage places, by removing or making inaccessible
materials that may serve as their food, by poison spraying, fumigating,
trapping or by any other approved pest elimination.
   GARBAGE. The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   HISTORIC BUILDING. A building recognized as being of particular
architectural or historic interest. A building of local importance included on
a local list, or a listed building.
   HOTEL. An establishment containing lodging accommodations designed for use
by transients, travelers or temporary guests, with no provisions in such
accommodations for cooking in any individual room or suite. Facilities provided
may include maid service, laundering of linen used on the premises,
communications and secretarial or desk service.
   INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to a structure or premises,
of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
   INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLES. Any motor vehicle which, for a period of at least
seven days, is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. INOPERABLE
MOTOR VEHICLE shall not include a motor vehicle which is temporarily incapable
of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service
or repair operations inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and
approved for such purposes.
   LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET. To permit possession or occupancy of a dwelling,
dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by one person who is or
purports to be the owner or agent of same to another person pursuant to a
written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or pursuant to a recorded or
unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of land.
   LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE. A building with more than three guest spaces where
lodging is provided for compensation pursuant to previous arrangement, but not
on a daily, overnight or per-meal basis to transient guests.
   LODGING OR ROOMING HOUSE UNIT. A habitable room used or intended to be used
by up to three individuals for sleeping purposes, excluding bathrooms, toilet
rooms, laundries, pantries, foyers, communicating corridors, closets, storage
space and stairwells.
   MAINTENANCE. Work that is done regularly to keep a building and its
facilities in good condition and working order.
   MOTEL. A group of attached or detached buildings containing individual
sleeping or living units, designed for or used temporarily by automobile
tourists or transients with garage attached or parking space conveniently
located to each unit, including auto courts, motels, motor lodges or other
similar type uses.
   OCCUPANCY PERMIT. As used in this code, a certificate of building
maintenance and occupancy.
   OPENING AREA. That part of a window or door which is available for
unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which are let or offered for occupancy.
   OWNER. Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable
interest in the property.
   PERSON. Includes a corporation or co- partnership as well as an individual.
   PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon. Whenever the words “multi-family dwelling,” “residence
building,” “dwelling unit,” “lodging or rooming house,” “lodging or rooming
house unit” or “premises” are used in this code, they shall be construed as
though they were followed by the words “or any part thereof.”
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Includes the following:
      (1)   The physical condition or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law;
      (2)   Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children, including but not
limited to abandoned wells, shafts, basements, excavations and unsafe fences or
structures;
      (3)   Any premises which have unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;
      (4)   Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use;
      (5)   Any premises which are manifestly capable of being a fire hazard or
are manifestly unsafe or insecure as to endanger life, limb or property;
      (6)   Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities
required by this code have been removed, or from which utilities have been
disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective or the required
precautions against trespassers have not been provided;
      (7)   Any premises which are unsanitary or which are littered with
rubbish or garbage, or which have an uncontrolled growth of weeds; or
      (8)   Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; over-crowded; open, vacant or
abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to provide shelter, in danger
of collapse or failure, and is dangerous to anyone on or near the premises.
   RENOVATION. A building and its facilities made to conform to present-day
minimum standards of sanitation, fire prevention and safety.
   RUBBISH. Combustible and non-combustible waste materials, except garbage,
and the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and
other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior,
rubber, leather, free branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
   SANITARY. Rules and conditions of health, especially of absence of dirt and
agents of infection or tending to promote health and healthful conditions.
   STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE. An offense in which the prosecution in a legal
proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of its case. It
is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which was prohibited,
or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally required to do.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected which requires location on the
ground or is attached to something having location on the ground, including a
fence or free-standing wall. A sign, billboard or other advertising medium,
detached or projecting, shall be construed to be a STRUCTURE.
   SUPPLIED. Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator.
   VENTILATION. The process of supplying and removing air by natural or
mechanical means to or from any space, and shall include:
      (1)   Ventilation by power-driven devices; or
      (2)   Ventilation by opening to outer air through windows, skylights,
doors, louvers or stacks without wind-driven devices.
   WORKING DAYS. Those days during which the Village Hall is open for business.
   WORKMANLIKE. Whenever the words WORKMANLIKE STATE OF MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR
are used in this code, they shall mean that such maintenance and repair shall
be made in a skillful manner.
   YARD. An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building extending
along the entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line.
(Ord. 1492, passed 9-15-2008; Am. Ord. 1524, passed 9-8-2009; Am. Ord. 1685,
passed 6-22-2015; Am. Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 154.31 DUTIES AND POWERS OF BUILDING INSPECTOR/CODE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   Enforcement. The Building Inspector/Code Administrator, or other
designee, shall enforce all provisions of this code relative to the maintenance
of structures and premises, except as may otherwise be specifically provided
for by other regulations.
   (B)   Appointment. The Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Village Board. The
Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
and Village Board.
   (C)   Notices and orders. The Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall
issue all necessary written notices and orders to abate illegal or unsafe
conditions to ensure compliance with the code requirements for the safety,
health and general welfare of the public.
   (D)   Coordination of enforcement. Inspection of premises, the issuance of
written notices and orders and enforcement thereof shall be the responsibility
of the Building Inspector/Code Administrator so charged by the village.
Whenever, in the opinion of a Building Inspector/Code Administrator initiating
an inspection under this code, it is deemed necessary or desirable to have
inspections by any other department, the Building Inspector/Code Administrator
shall make reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such
inspections so as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors and to confer
with the other departments for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders
before any are issued. A department shall not, however, delay the issuance of
any emergency order which it determines must be ordered.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.32 LIABILITY.
   The officer or employee charged with the enforcement of this code, while
acting for the jurisdiction, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally,
and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage accruing to
persons or property as a result of an act required or permitted in the
discharge of official duties. Any suit instituted against any officer or
employee because of an act performed by that officer or employee in the lawful
discharge of duties and under the provisions of this code shall be defended by
the legal representative of the jurisdiction until the final termination of the
proceedings. The Building Inspector/Code Administrator or any subordinate shall
not be liable for costs in an action, suit or proceeding that is instituted in
pursuance of the provisions of this code; and any officer of the department of
property maintenance inspection, acting in good faith and without malice, shall
be free from liability for acts performed under any of its provisions or by
reason of any act or omission in the performance of official duties in
connection therewith.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.33 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Authorization. The Building Inspector/Code Administrator is authorized
to enter the structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect subject to
constitutional restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. Where no
consent to enter or inspect any property has been given by the owner, occupant,
or other person in charge of a structure subject to the provisions of this
code, no entry or inspection shall be made without procurement of a warrant
from the Circuit Court of St. Clair County. The Court may consider any of the
following factors along with such other matters as it deems pertinent in its
decision as to whether a warrant shall issue:
      (1)   Eye witness account of violation.
      (2)   Citizen’s complaint.
      (3)   Tenant complaint.
   (B)   Credentials. The Building Inspector/Code Administrator or the Building
Inspector/Code Administrator’s authorized representative shall disclose proper
credentials of their respective office for the purpose of inspecting any and
all buildings and premises in the performance of duties under this code.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.34 NOTICE TO OWNER OR TO PERSONS RESPONSIBLE.
   (A)   Notice. Whenever the Building Inspector/Code Administrator determines
that there has been a violation of this code or has reasonable grounds to
believe that a violation has occurred, notice shall be given to the owner or
the person or persons responsible in the manner described below.
   (B)   Form of notice. Such notice prescribed in division (A) of this section
shall:
      (1)   Be in writing;
      (2)   Include a description of the real estate for identification;
      (3)   Include a statement of the reason or reasons why the notice is
being issued; and
      (4)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the
repairs and improvements required to bring the structure into compliance with
the provisions of this code.
   (C)   Service of notice. Such service shall be deemed to be properly served
upon such owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally; or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of someone in
the family of suitable age and discretion who shall be informed of the contents
thereof; or known address with return receipt requested; or if the certified or
registered letter is returned with receipt showing that it has not been
delivered, by posting a copy thereof in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice.
   (D)   Repeated occurrences. Notification will not be required as a
prerequisite to further legal action under this code, if the Building
Inspector/Code Administrator has reason to believe that a violation of this
code, for the same offense, has occurred within one year of the subject
occurrence.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21)
§ 154.35 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation
to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
   (B)   Notice of violation. The code official shall serve or have served a
notice of violation or order in accordance with this code.
   (C)   Prosecution of violation. Any person failing to comply with a notice
of violation or order served in accordance with this code shall be deemed
guilty of an ordinance violation and the violation shall be deemed a strict
liability offense. If the notice of violation is not complied with, the
Building Inspector/Code Administrator shall institute the appropriate
proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or
to require the removal or termination of the unlawful occupancy of the
structure in violation of the provisions of this code or of the order or
direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by the authority having
jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against the real estate upon
which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
   (D)   Violation penalty. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of a
violation of any section of this code shall be subject to the general penalty
described in this code of ordinances. If more than one provision, standard or
requirement of this code is violated, then each such provision, standard or
requirement violated shall be considered to be a separate offense. Each day
that a violation occurs or continues, after due notice has been served, shall
be considered to be a separate offense for which the violator shall be liable
to the maximum penalty herein specified for each violation.
   (E)   Abatement of violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the legal officer of the jurisdiction from
instituting appropriate action to restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the building, structure or
premises.
(Ord. 1246, passed 11-22-21) Penalty, see §
10.99
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   ACCEPTANCES
      
II.   ANNEXATIONS
      
III.   CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
      
IV.   VACATIONS
      
V.   STREET NAME CHANGES
TABLE I: ACCEPTANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
518      4-20-87     Accepting the plat of first addition to Lake Audrey
                     Subdivision.
519      5-4-87      Accepting the plat of Ethel Mae Estates, Wheat Ridge
                     Addition.
550      10-12-88    Accepting the plat of Ethel Mae Estates, Wheat Ridge
                     Second Addition.
683      - -         Accepting the plat of Curtis Addition to Millstadt.
                    
 
TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
468  7-16-  Annexing certain territory being Lot 4 of Lake Audrey Subdivision, situated in the
     84     County of St. Clair.
     12-17- Annexing certain territory beginning the survey thereof at the intersection of the
479  84     north line of the quarter section with the west right-of- way line of State Aid Route
            No. 9.
            Annexing certain territory commencing the survey thereof at the center of Section 10
487  9-3-85 and running northerly along the east line of the northwest quarter of Section 10 a
            distance of 104.50 feet to the point of beginning.
            Annexing a tract of land beginning at an old iron pipe in the east line of the
492  7-7-86 northwest quarter, where it intersects the northerly right-of-way of Illinois Route
            No. 158 and N 0°04'56" W a distance of 494.80 feet from an old stone which marks the
            southeast corner of the northwest corner.
520  5-4-87 Annexing certain territory commencing at the northeast corner of Lot No. 11 of
            “Second Addition to Parkview Place.”
533  3-21-  Annexing certain territory commencing at the northeast corner of Lot 11 of “Second
     88     Addition to Park Place.”
553  12-19- Annexing certain territories being:
     88
          Parcel 1: Lots 1, 2 and 3 of Lake Audrey Subdivision.
          Parcel 2: Part of Lot 14, part of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 1
            south, Range 9 west.
          Parcel 3: Part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 1
            south, Range 9 west.
     2-15-  Annexing certain territory beginning at a point marked by a pipe on the southerly
630  93     right-of-way line of State Bond Issue Route No. 158, which said point is 84 feet
            distant from a pipe on the east boundary line of the northwest quarter of Section 10.
670  3-20-  Annexing part of Lot 11 of John H. Lacey's Subdivision of the northeast quarter of
     95     Section 10, Township 1 South, Range 9 West.
671  - -    Annexing part of Lot 14, part of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West.
678  4-3-95 Annexing part of the southwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 10,
            Township 1 South, Range 9 West.
705  - -    Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement for the development known as
            Alpine Meadows.
707  7-1-96 Annexing part of the southeast quarter of Section 10, Township 1 South, Range 9 West.
     12-16- Annexing a part of Lot 15 as shown on the Henry J. Frierdich Assessment Plat located
710  96     in the southwest quarter of Section 9, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third
            Principal Meridian.
749  6-7-99 Annexing a tract of land being part of Lot 23, being part of the southwest quarter of
            Section 9 in Township 1 South, Range 9 west of the Third Principal Meridian.
750  6-21-  Annexing Lot 4 of the northeast quarter of Section 3 in Township 1 South, Range 9
     99     West of the Third Principal Meridian.
751  7-6-99 Annexing part of the southwest quarter of Section 22 in Township 1 South, Range 9
            West of the Third Principal Meridian.
760  1-17-  Annexing part of the Lot No. 23 in the south half of the southwest quarter of Section
     00     No. 9 in Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
     1-17-  Annexing a tract of land being a part of Lot 23 in the south one-half of the
761  00     southwest quarter of the Section 9 of Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third
            Principal Meridian.
767  3-17-  Authorizing the execution of annexation agreements relating to territories located on
     00     the Saxton Road Waterline Extension.
763  3-20-  Annexing two parcels:
     00
          Parcel 1: All that part of Lot 18 of the west half of the northeast quarter of
            Section 9, Township 1 south, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
          Parcel 2: The northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
769  4-17-  Annexing two parcels:
     00
          Parcel 1: All that part of Lot 18 of the west half of the northeast quarter of
            Section 9, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
          Parcel 2: The northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 9, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
774  6-5-00 Annexing certain territory to the village more specifically described in Exhibit A,
            attached to Ordinance No. 774, passed June 5, 2000.
792  2-19-  Annexing certain territory more specifically described in Exhibit A, attached to
     01     Ordinance No. 792, passed February 19, 2001.
799  6-18-  Annexing three parcels:
     01
          Parcel 1: The southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
          Parcel 2: The southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 15, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
          Parcel 3: The southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northwest quarter of
            Section 15, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
803  8-20-  Annexing part of the southwest quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 9,
     01     Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
808  11-11- Annexing part of the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 1 South, Range 9 West
     01     of the Third Principal Meridian.
809  11-11- Annexing territory more specifically described in Exhibit A through J, attached to
     01     Ordinance No. 809, passed November 11, 2001.
843  4-21-  Annexing part of the south half of Section 10, Township 1 South, Range 9, West of the
     03     Third Principal Meridian.
846  5-5-03 Annexing all of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of Section 16, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
847  5-5-03 Annexing part of the northeast 1/4 of the southeast 1/4 of Section 16, Township 1
            South, Range 8 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
            Annexing Lot 2 of “Lucy Schaefer Estates,” being a subdivision of part of the
848  5-5-03 southeast quarter of Section 16, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third
            Principal Meridian.
851  7-7-03 Annexing part of the south half of Section 10, Township 1, South, Range 9 West of the
            Third Principal Meridian.
857  8-18-  Annexing part of the south half of Section 10, Township 1, South, Range 9 West of the
     03     Third Principal Meridian.
862  11-19- Annexing part of Lot 11 in the northwest quarter of Section 10, Township 1, South,
     03     Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
869  1-5-04 Annexing the east half of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
            21, Township 1, South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
875  3-15-  Annexing part of Lots 3, 4, and 5 of the north half of Section 15, Township 1, South,
     04     Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
876  3-15-  Annexing part of Lot 23 in the south half of the southwest corner of Section 9,
     04     Township 1, South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
895  9-7-04 Annexing part of Lot 3 of Section 3 and part of the northwest quarter of Section 3,
            Township 1, South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
896  9-20-  Annexing part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22,
     04     Township 1, South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
898  8-2-04 Authorizing execution of annexation agreement with H & H Sales, Inc.
     11-15- Annexing part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 22,
901  04     Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian - Permanent Parcel No.
            12-22-0-300-018.
            Annexing part of Section 22, Township 1 South, Range 9 West, Third Principal Meridian
912  3-21-  and also any right-of-way adjacent to tract not currently within the corporate
     05     limits; excepting therefrom any portion of tract or right-of-way currently within the
            corporate limits.
            Annexing tracts of land, being Lots 1and 3 in the northeast quarter of Section 2,
     5-16-  Township 1, Range 9 West; excepting a tract beginning at the southeast corner of Lot
920  05     3 and also any right- of-way adjacent to tracts not currently within the corporate
            limits; excepting therefrom any portion of tracts or right-of-way currently within
            the corporate limits.
            Annexing part of the northwest quarter of the southwest quarter of Section 9,
921  6-6-05 Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian and also any right-of-
            way adjacent to tract not currently within the corporate limits; excepting therefrom
            any portion of tract or right-of-way currently within the corporate limits.
923  6-6-05 Annexing Lots 1, 2, 3, and 4 of Cedar Creek Subdivision.
            Annexing parts of Lots 5 and 6 in the north half of Section 15, Township 1 South,
924  7-18-  Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian and also the right-of-way adjoining the
     05     tract not currently within the corporate limits; excepting any part currently within
            the corporate limits - Permanent Parcel No. 12-15-200-002.
            Annexing part of Lots 9 in the northeast quarter of Section 10, Township 1 South,
     7-18-  Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian and also any right-of-way adjacent to
925  05     the tract not currently within the corporate limits; excepting any portion of the
            tract or right-of-way currently within the corporate limits - Permanent Parcel Nos.
            12-10-0-200-006 and 12-10-0-200-020.
946  6-19-  Annexing part of Lot 12 of the northeast quarter of Section 9, Township 1 South,
     06     Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
961  12-18- Annexing part of the west half of the northeast quarter of Section 22, Township 1
     06     South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian, 40.39 acres, more or less.
994  3-17-  Annexing part of Lot 2 in the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 14,
     08     Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
1016 10-20- Annexing property owned by Harold S. Harsin and Marlene C. Harsin.
     08
1018 11-17- Annexing Lots 3 and 4 of Old Rock House Farm on Saeger Road.
     08
     11-17- Annexing the southwest quarter of the southeast quarter of Section 17, Township 1
1019 08     South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian, excepting 7.22 feet off the
            north side thereof.
            Annexing certain property owned by the trustees of the Richard F. Betlach living
            trust dated May 24, 2004 and the Alice M. Betlach living trust dated May 24, 2004;
            property owned by the trustee of the Norman Dohrman living trust dated March 20, 2006
            ; property owned by Fred and Lisa A. Fritzzinger; property ownedy by the trustee of
     6-15-  the Aileen B. Gravot family trust; property owned by James C. Halter; property owned
1028 09     by Larry D. and Barbara D. Jensen and Julie A. and Dudley G. Barlow; property owned
            by Bryan and Catherine Mitchell; property owned by Tim and Cynthia Ratajczyk;
            property owned by Russel E. and Mona J. Scheibel, property owned by Danny and Kelly
            Schult; property owned by James and Kathleen Sommers; property owned by Norman and
            Sandra Sutter; property owned by Anthony and Norma J. Wiscomb; property owned by
            Richard and Sheri Herbeck; and property owned by Patricia Mineer.
1043 1-19-  Annexing property owned by Darlene E. Schwab, Craig A. Schwab and Steven A. Schwab.
     10
1048 3-15-  Annexing property owned by Michael E. Murray and Mary D. Murray.
     10
1062 9-20-  Annexing property owned by Aaron Eversmeyer.
     10
            Annexing part of Section 2 in Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal
1063 9-7-10 Meridian and part of Section 2 in Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third
            Principal Meridian.
1064 9-7-10 Annexing Lot 8 of the Buffwood Subdivision, located in Section 2, 3, and 11 of
            Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
1065 9-7-10 Annexing Lot 10 of the Buffwood Subdivision, located in Sections 2, 3, and 11 of
            Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
1066 9-7-10 Annexing Lot 11 of the Buffwood Subdivision, located in Sections 2, 3, and 11 of
            Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
1118 3-3-14 Execution of an annexation agreement with Jeffrey and Kendra Hayden.
1119 3-3-14 Annexing certain territory to the village owned by Jeffrey and Kendra Hayden.
1123 6-16-  Execution of an annexation agreement with Salvatore Briguglio.
     14
1124 6-16-  Annexing certain territory to the village owned by Salvatore Briguglio.
     14
1129 2-17-  Execution of an annexation agreement with The Kevin and Linda Kronk Family Trust,
     15     Dated August 16, 2005.
1145 4-18-  Annexing certain territory to the village owned by Ricky L. and Marikay G. Gaertner
     16
1147 6-20-  Execution of annexation agreement for Red Barn Farms.
     16
1148 8-1-16 Annexing certain territory known as Red Barn Farms to the village.
1149 9-6-16 Execution of annexation agreement with Robert Wallace concerning part of Lot 2 in the
            south half of the northeast quarter of Section 14, Township 1 South, Range 9 West.
1150 9-6-16 Annexing certain territory to the village owned by Michael R. and Joanne L. Farris.
1163 7-24-  Annexing certain territory to the village owned by June E. Hankammer-Grebing.
     17
1178 7-23-  Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with John Dohle and Emily Dohle
     18     for property located at 1235 East Washington.
1181 10-22- Annexing certain territory to the village owned by James L. Schaefer Revocable Trust.
     18
1185 1-28-  Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Robert Young and Cheryl
     19     Young for property located at 3929 Urbana Road.
1191 5-28-  Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Andrew and Christen Bendick
     19     for property located at 4908 Union Trail Crossing.
1196 8-26-  Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Frank and Shirleen Simek
     19     for property located at 6648 Oakdale School Road.
     9-23-  Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Myrtle A. Weis for part of
1200 19     the southeast quarter of the northwest quarter of Section 8, Township 1 South, Range
            9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
1204 11-12- Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Mark and Barbara Weber to annex two
     19     parcels:
             Parcel 1: Part of Lot 1 in the south half of the northeast quarter of Section 14,
            Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
             Parcel 2: Part of Lots 1 and 2 in the south half of the northeast quarter of
            Section 14, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
     11-25- Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Scott and Alyssa Feazel for
1205 19     part of Lot 10 of the east half of the northwest quarter of Section 11, Township 1
            South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
1209 3-23-  Authorizing an agreement with Eugene A. Rodemich to annex two parcels:
     20
                   Parcel 1: Part of the southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of Section
            15, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal Meridian.
                     Parcel 2: The southwest quarter of the northeast quarter of the northwest
          quarter of Section 15, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the Third Principal
            Meridian.
1215 9-14-  Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Kevin and Christine Brouk for the real
     20     property commonly known as 6700 Oakdale School Road, PIN 12-8.0-100-031.
1215 9-14-  Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Kevin and Christine Brouk for the real
     20     property commonly known as 6700 Oakdale School Road, PIN 12-8.0-100-031.
     11-23- Annexing approximately 7.64 acres of real property being part of Lot 23 of the
1225 20     southwest quarter of Section 9, Township 1 South, Range 9 West of the 3rd Principal
            Meridian.
1240 9-27-  Annexing certain territory to the village owned by TDW Family LLC.
     21
     2-14-  Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Dennis and Roxanne Amos for the
1249 22     annexing of real property known as 2735 Saeger Road, Parcel Nos. 618-978-4591 and
            618-406-2924.
Res. 3-28-  Transferring annexation funds for Green space improvement from Stonemark Development
22-  2022   LLC into the village’s Park Fund.
02
1272 5-22-  Annexing certain territory owned by Todd and Linda Hack commonly known as 5502
     23     Saxtown Road.
1273 5-22-  Authorizing the execution of an annexation agreement with Todd and Linda Hack.
     23
           
 
TABLE III: CONTRACTS AND AGREEMENTS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  Date   Description
No.   Passed
424         An agreement with the Millstadt Rural Fire Protection District to form the
             Millstadt Ambulance District.
             Approving participation in the Plan of the Illinois Municipal League Risk
427         Management Association and directing the Village President and Village Clerk
             to execute the Intergovernmental Cooperation Contract, for a minimum of three
             years.
             Authorizing and approving membership in the Illinois Municipal League Risk
             Management Association and directing the Village President and Village Clerk
435         to execute an intergovernmental Cooperation Contract with the Illinois
             Municipal League Risk Management Association for membership for a period of
             one year.
496   10-18- Contracting with Illinois Power Company for the furnishing of street lighting
      76     in the village for a term of ten years.
725   8-18-  Authorizing sale contract with Lester O. Germann.
      97
822   6-17-  Authorizing sale contract with James S. Schwartz and Doris M. Schwartz.
      02
852   7-21-  Authorizing a lease between the Village of Millstadt and the Millstadt
      03     Library.
856   8-18-  Authorizing the execution of the intergovernmental cooperation contract for
      03     the establishment and operation of a program of risk management.
859   9-15-  Authorizing loan agreement with the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
      03
877   3-15-  Approving St. Clair County Building and Zoning Department Agreement for
      04     building inspection program.
878   4-5-04 Authorizing wireless communications site lease with Motorola, Inc.
879   4-5-04 Authorizing agreement with St. Clair County regarding equipment and services.
890   6-21-  Authorizing easement agreement with Millstadt Consolidated School District
      04     #160.
Res.  2-6-06 Authorizing execution of the State of Illinois Department of Natural
-            Resources vendor license agent contract.
941   3-20-  Authorizing the execution of a lease with Millstadt Historical Society.
      06
--    6-4-07 St. Clair County, Illinois Coordinated Community Services Contract between
             St. Clair County and Village of Millstadt Police Department
981   10-1-  Approving St. Clair County Building and Zoning Department Agreement for
      07     building inspection program.
982   10-1-  Authorizing execution of contract with Patriot Waste, Inc.
      07
Res.  12-26- Approving and authorizing the execution of Development Agreement No. 07-02
08-09 07     with the In-Land Management Group, LLC (IMG).
1010  9-2-08 Authorizing lease with Millstadt Library.
Res.  11-17- Authorizing execution of a St. Clair County Parks Grant Committee District
08-19 08     Grant Commission Contract.
Res.  3-16-  Confirming commitment to collaborate with Millstadt Community Consolidated
--    09     School to apply for grant funding from the St. Clair County Parks Commission
             to expand the Millstadt Park Walking Trail.
      7-20-  Granting to Charter Communications Entertainment I, LLC permission to
1036  09     construct, operate and maintain a cable system upon, along, across, over and
             under the streets and public rights-of-way of the village.
Res.  8-16-  Authorizing the execution of Development Agreement No. 10-01 with Detonics
10-5  10     Defense Technologies, LLC and Bruce Siddle, individually.
1074  1-18-  Authorizing the execution of an agreement with Millstadt Commercial Club,
      11     Inc.
Res.  3-21-  Authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 11-01 with II
11-01 11     Progressive Properties, LLC and Lee Vogel.
Res.  5-16-  Authorizing the execution of an amendment to development agreement 07-01 with
11-02 11     Metro Printing and Publishing, Inc. d/b/a Record Printing, and Paul Adrignola
             and Susan Adrignola.
Res.  11-7-  Approving the extension of a memorandum of agreement between the village and
11-12 11     Lisa K. Bowman.
             Authorizing the execution of agreement by and among the village, the
1087  1-3-12 Millstadt Fire Protection District, and the Millstadt Union Fire Department,
             Inc.
1092  6-4-12 Approving St. Clair County Building & Zoning Department Agreement for
             Building Inspection Program.
1096  8-20-  Authorizing the execution of agreement with Russell E. and Carol M. Gamblin.
      12
Res.  11-5-  Approving the extension of a memorandum of agreement between the village and
12-06 12     Lisa K. Bowman.
Res.  2-4-13 Authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 13-01 with Muskopf’s
13-01        Garage Inc.
Res.
2013- 3-4-13 Approval of Professional Energy Consulting Services agreement.
03
Res.  4-15-  Authorizing execution of a service agreement with the lowest responsible
13-06 13     bidder for the supply of electricity for residential and small commercial
             retail customers who do not opt out of such a program.
Res.  8-5-13 Authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 13-02 with Mertz
13-07        Properties Inc. d/b/a Mertz Motor Co. Inc.
Res.  11-4-  Approving the extension of a memorandum of agreement between the village and
13-10 13     Lisa K. Bowman.
Res.  4-7-14 Authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 14.01 with Millstadt
14-02        Glass, Inc.
Res.         Authorizing the execution of a law enforcement mutual aid agreement and the
14-03 4-7-14 existence and formation of the Illinois Law Enforcement Alarm System by
             intergovernmental cooperation.
Res.  6-2-14 Entering into project labor agreements for the village.
14-05
Res.  7-7-14 Authorizing execution of a sales agreement with Joseph Wagner for K-9 Officer
14-08        Khaos.
Res.  11-3-  Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman.
14-11 14
1127  11-17- Authorizing the execution of the IMLRMA Minimum/Maximum Contribution
      14     Agreement.
Res.         Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 15-01
15-01 2-2-15 with Todd M. Evers, Trustee of the Todd M. Evers Revocable Living Trust for
             renovations to the Millstadt Pharmacy.
Res.  2-17-  Authorizing the execution of a service agreement for the supply of
15-02 15     electricity for residential and small commercial retail customers who do not
             opt out of such a program.
Res.  3-16-  Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 15-02
15-06 15     with SGSL MD, LLC.
Res.         Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 15-03
15-09 9-8-15 with Bradley K. and Debra S. Curtis, co-trustees of the Curtis Family Trust
             for improvements to Curtis Auto Body.
Res.  10-6-  Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 15-04
15-11 15     with Wall and Ceiling Systems Supply Inc., for renovations to their facility,
             George Weis Company.
Res.  10-19- Authorizing execution of an agreement regarding equipment and services with
15-13 15     St. Clair County.
Res.  11-2-  Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman,
15-14 15     independent consultant.
1136  12-7-  Authorizing the execution of a lease with the Millstadt swim team.
      15
1138  1-4-16 Authorizing the execution of a land and water tower lease agreement with the
             Friends fo the Old Millstadt Water Tower.
1142  4-4-16 Authorizing the execution of a lease with Millstadt Historical Society
Res.  4-4-16 Approving and authorizing the execution of a development agreement with DSMW
16-2         Corporation D/B/A Schubert’s Smokehouse for renovations to their facility
Res.  6-6-16 Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Millstadt Consolidated School
16-3         District #160 for a grant for capital improvements.
Res.  11-7-  Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman,
16-11 16     independent consultant.
1158  3-27-  Agreement for building inspection program.
      17
Res.  10-23- Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman,
17-08 17     independent consultant.
Res.  11-13- Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman,
18-09 18     independent consultant.
Res.  2-11-  Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 19-01
19-01 19     with Mac Medical for the expansion of their facility at 820 South Mulberry
             Street.
      2-25-  Extending the authorization to Ameren Illinois Company, d/b/a Ameren
1186  19     Illinois, to construct, operate and maintain a gas utility system in the
             village.
1187  2-25-  Amending the terms of an electric franchise agreement with Ameren Illinois
      19     Company, d/b/a Ameren Illinois.
             Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 19-02
Res.  2-25-  with Three Men in a Tub LLC, d/b/a Millpond Brewery and Incubator, for the
19-03 19     purchase and rehabilitation of property located at 308 East Washington
             Street.
Res.  4-22-  Authorizing the execution of an electric supply agreement for all village
19-05 19     accounts as reoommended by Good Energy L.P.
Res.  4-22-  Authorizing the execution of a natural gas supply agreement for all village
19-06 19     accounts as recommended by Good Energy L.P.
Res.  11-12- Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman,
19-12 19     independent consultant.
Res.  11-12- Approving and authorizing the execution of development agreement No. 19-03
19-13 19     with Spikes Public House LLC, d/b/a Spikes Public House, for new construction
             located at 4 East Washington Street.
Res.  4-27-  Approving an intergovernmental agreement with Millstadt Community
20-03 20     Consolidated School District #160 for a grant of $8,700 from the Tax
             Increment Financing (TIF) Fund for capital improvements.
Res.  10-24- Approving a memorandum of agreement between the village and Lisa K. Bowman,
22-11 22     independent consultant.
-     11-6-  Intergovernmental cooperation agreement between the Village of Millstadt, and
      24     Millstadt Township to provide services to senior citizens.
      7-21-  Easement agreement between Richard S. Herling and the Village of Millstadt
-     25     regarding an existing sidewalk located on property located at 3315 Diamond
             View Court to grant public pedestrian access.
      7-28-  Development agreement #25-02 with Curtis Auto Body, Inc. located at 420 South
-     25     Illinois Street, located in the TIF District on Parcel Number 12-09.0-307-
             001.
1302  10-27- Authorizing the execution of a community solar subscription agreement with
      25     Millstadt IL 2, LLC.
Res.  11-10- Approving a memorandum of agreement between the Village of Millstadt and Lisa
25-12 25     K. Bowman, independent consultant.
            
 
TABLE IV: VACATIONS
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. Date   Description
No.  Passed
601  8-6-91 Vacating a section of Baltz Street lying east of and adjoining Lots 6 and 7 of
            Baltz's Second Addition.
605  11-4-  Vacating a section of Dallas Street lying north of Elm Street and south of the
     91     westerly extension of the north line of Lot 91.
662  9-6-94 Approving a partial vacation of Lots 5, 6 and 7 of Ethel Mae Estates, Wheat
            Ridge Addition.
     6-17-  Vacating the east 175 feet of that part of Madison Street lying between the
706  96     east right-of- way line of Breese Street and west of and adjoining the west
            right-of-way line of Mulberry Street.
752  7-19-  Vacating a section of Elm Street lying between Blocks 5 and 10 of Randleman’s
     99     4th Addition.
841  4-7-03 Vacating all of a six foot wide alley lying southerly of and adjoining Lots 1,
            2 and 3 of “Goodings 1st Addition to Centreville.”
1031 7-6-09 Vacating an alley easement located in Randelman’s 4th Edition.
1106 2-19-  Vacating an alley easement in Randleman’s 2nd Addition.
     13
1254 4-20-  Vacating an east-west alley located in Blocks 7 and 11 of Glass and Stookey’s
     22     Addition and reserving utility easements.
           
 
TABLE V: STREET NAME CHANGES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Description
690      8-7-95      Changing the name of a portion of Urbana Road to East
                     Madison Street.
1301     10-13-25    Amending the name of West Parkview Drive to American
                     Legion Drive.
                    
 
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to Illinois Compiled Statutes
References to 1973 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO ILLINOIS COMPILED STATUTES
ILCS Section Code Section
ILCS Section                                  Code Section
Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 1-1 et seq.              31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-15                       31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 5-65                       38.03
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 7-5(a)                     31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, §§ 10-10 - 10-40            31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 15-10                      38.03
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 50-5                       31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5                       31.07
Ch. 5, Act 430, § 70-5(c)                    31.07
Ch. 20, Act 1605, §§ 1 et seq.              135.02
Ch. 20, Act 1605, § 7.12                     135.02
Ch. 20, Act 2910, §§ 0.01 et seq.           137.02
                                              35.01,
Ch. 20, Act 3305, §§ 1 et seq.              35.04,
                                              35.10,
                                              35.13
Ch. 30, Act 225, § 1                         31.41
Ch. 30, Act 235, § 6                         31.41
Ch. 30, Act 235, § 6.5                       31.41
Ch. 30, Act 405, §§ 1 et seq.               51.01
Ch. 35, Act 115, § 9                         36.16
Ch. 35, Act 120, § 3                         36.02
Ch. 50, Act 45, §§ 1 et seq.                117.06,
                                              117.07
Ch. 50, Act 105, § 2                         31.01
Ch. 50, Act 735, § 2                         31.21
Ch. 55, Act 5, § 3-9005                      137.02
                                              31.05,
Ch. 65, Act 5                                 31.36,
                                              31.57,
                                              34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-5(a),(b)             31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-6                    31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-25                   31.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-30                   31.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-35                   31.58
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-40                   31.03,
                                              31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-45                   31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-50                   31.20,
                                              31.35
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-55                   31.20
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-10-65                   31.20
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-5                    31.20
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-10                   31.20
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-20                   31.21,
                                              31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-15-25                   31.21
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-20-25(c)                31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-25-75(b)                31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-25-90                   31.35
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5                    31.40,
                                              31.55
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-5(d)                 31.06
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-30-10                   31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-5                    31.21
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-10                   31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-20                   31.21
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-30                   31.21
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-35                   31.21
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-40                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-40 - 3.1-35.85     51.90
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-45                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-50                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-55                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-60                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, §§ 3.1-35-65 - 3.1-35-80     31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-80                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-85                   31.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-35-90                   31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-45-5                    31.21
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-45-10                   31.56
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-5                    31.04
                                              31.04,
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-50-10                   31.22,
                                              31.37
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 3.1-55-5                    31.57
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-2-2                       31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 5-2-11                      31.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.3                     34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.4                     34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.5                     34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.6                     34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.7                     34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.9                     34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-2-9.10                    34.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-10                        34.15
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-10-4                      34.15
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-1                      36.01
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-5                      36.15
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-6                      36.30
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 8-11-24                     36.40,
                                              36.41
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 10-1-1 et seq.              31.36
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1-5                      132.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-12-4 - 11-12-12          151.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-1, et seq.            152.002
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-3                     152.190
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-12                    152.210
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-14                    152.213
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-13-19                    152.021
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-1                     71.001,
                                              75.10
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3                     90.02
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-40-3.1                   90.02,
                                              90.03
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-139-8                    52.88
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1426                     73.30
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 11-1428                     73.30
Ch. 65, Act 5, § 12-805                      71.045
                                              152.210,
Ch. 70, Act 405, § 22.02a                    152.211,
                                              152.213
Ch. 70, Act 605, §§ 2-1 - 2-12              152.157
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-301(c)                  117.02,
                                              117.03
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401                     117.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-401(b)(6)               117.02
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801                     117.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(b)                  117.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(c)(1)(vi)           117.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 21-801(d)                  117.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501                     116.01
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(r)(1)               116.03
Ch. 220, Act 5, § 22-501(s)                  116.04
Ch. 225, Act 225, §§ 1 et seq.              51.23
Ch. 225, Act 225, §§ 1 - 23                 152.042
Ch. 225, Act 320, § 3(1)                     52.41
Ch. 225, Act 445, § 185                      137.02
Ch. 225, Act 446, §§ 1 et seq.              137.02
Ch. 230, Act 10, §§ 1 et seq.               135.02,
                                              135.03
Ch. 230, Act 15, §§ 1 et seq.               135.02
Ch. 230, Act 20, §§ 1 et seq.               135.02
Ch. 230, Act 25, §§ 1 et seq.               135.02
Ch. 230, Act 30, §§ 1 et seq.               135.02
                                              110.18,
Ch. 230, Act 40, §§ 1 et seq.               135.02 ,
                                              135.03
Ch. 230, Act 45                               135.02,
                                              135.03
Ch. 235                                       110.23
Ch. 235, Act 5                                110.02,
                                              110.16
                                              110.15,
Ch. 235, Act 5, §§ 1-1 et seq.              110.25,
                                              110.65 -
                                              110.68
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 2-1                        110.15
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 4-5                        110.65
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-1                        110.22
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-2                        110.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-11                       110.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-12                       110.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-13                       110.50
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-15                       110.16
Ch. 235, Act 5, § 6-19                       110.36
Ch. 410, Act 130                              132.05
Ch. 410, Act 625, § 3.6                      152.047
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.215                      71.103
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.220                      71.103
                                              71.103,
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 3.360                      136.01,
                                              136.02
Ch. 415, Act 5, § 4(e)                       52.41
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 3                        71.103,
                                              136.01
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 4 and 8                  136.02
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 5 and 8                  136.03
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 6 and 8                  136.04
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 8                        136.07
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 9                        136.05
Ch. 415, Act 105, § 10                       136.06
Ch. 425, Act 35                               99.01
Ch. 505, Act 100, § 2                        95.02
                                              70.35,
Ch. 605, Act 120, §§ 1 et seq.              136.02 -
                                              136.04
Ch. 625                                       152.007
Ch. 625, Act 5                                70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-100 et seq.              136.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-102                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-105                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-106                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-107                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-108                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-111.8                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-112                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-113                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-116                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-120                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-125                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-126                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-130                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-131                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-132                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-135                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-136                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-137                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-138                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-139.1                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-145.001                  70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-146                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-147                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.2                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-148.3a-5                 70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-153                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-154                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-155                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-156                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-157                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-158                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-159.1                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-162.5                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-163                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-166.1                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-167.5                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-168.8                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-169                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.6                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-171.8                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-172                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-174                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-176                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-177                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-178                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-179                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-181                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-182                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-187.1                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-188                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-193                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-194                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-195                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-196                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-197                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-199                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-200                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-201                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-203                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-205.1                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-207                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-208                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-209                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-210.01                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-211.01                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-212                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.1                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-214.8                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-217                      70.01,
                                              131.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 1-223                      70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-101(d)                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-401.5                    70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-414(l)                   70.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-609                      72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 3-616                      72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4 Article II               38.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-107(c)                   90.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-201                      90.01,
                                              90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-202                      90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-203                      90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-204                      90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-205                      90.04,
                                              90.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-206                      90.04,
                                              90.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-207                      90.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-208                      90.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-209                      90.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-210                      90.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-211                      90.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-212                      90.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(a)                   90.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-213(b)                   76.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 4-214                      90.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-101                      38.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 6-303                      38.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 7-601                      76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-203                     70.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-205                     70.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-206                     70.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-209.1                   71.045
                                              70.01,
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-301                     72.12,
                                              72.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-302                     70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-305                     70.30
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-306                     70.31
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-307                     70.32
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-308                     70.33
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-309                     70.34
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-310                     70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-311                     70.35
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-312                     70.37
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-313                     70.38
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-401                     76.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-402                     76.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-403                     76.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-404                     76.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406 (Repealed)          76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(a) (Repealed)       76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-406(b) (Repealed)       76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-409                     76.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-410 (Repealed)          76.09
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-415                     76.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-500 - 11-502            73.30
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501                     38.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-501.1                   76.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-503(a)                  76.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506                     Ch. 76
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-506(a)                  90.03 
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-601                     71.001
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-604                     71.001
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605                     71.002
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-605.1                   71.002
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-606(a)                  71.004
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-611                     71.003
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-701                     71.040
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-702                     71.041
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-703                     71.042
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-704                     71.043
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-705                     71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-706                     71.044
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-707                     71.047
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-708                     71.046
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-709                     71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-710                     71.096
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-711                     71.106
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-801                     71.020
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-802                     71.021
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-803                     71.022
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-804                     71.023
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-805                     71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-806                     71.025
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-901                     71.060
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-902                     71.061
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-903                     71.062
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-904                     71.063
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-905                     71.064
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-906                     71.065
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907                     71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907(a), (b), (c)        71.066
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-907.5                   71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-908                     71.048
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1001                    74.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1002                    74.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003                    74.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1003.1                  74.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004                    74.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1004.1                  74.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1005                    74.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1006                    74.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1007                    74.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1008                    74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1009                    74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1010                    74.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1011                    74.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1201(a), (b), (c), (d-1)71.080
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1202                    71.081
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1204                    70.31,
                                              70.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1205                    71.082
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301                    72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.1                  72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.2                  72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3(a), (b)          72.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1301.3(c), (d)          72.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1302                    72.40
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1303                    72.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1304                    72.01,
                                              72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1305                    72.41
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1401                    72.02
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1402                    71.095
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403                    73.20
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.1                  73.08
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1403.2                  73.23
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1404                    73.21
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1405                    73.22
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1406                    71.097
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1407                    71.098
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1410                    71.099
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1411                    71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412                    71.100
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1412.1                  71.101
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1413                    71.103
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1414(a) - (e)           71.045
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1416                    71.104
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1418                    71.105
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1420                    71.067
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1425                    71.083
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1502                    73.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1503                    73.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1504                    73.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505                    73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1505.1                  73.04
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1506                    73.05
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507                    73.06
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 11-1507.1                  73.07
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 12-100 et seq.           75.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-101                     75.01
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-208                     71.023,
                                              71.024
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215                     70.11,
                                              71.066
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-215(b)                  72.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-601                     74.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-709                     73.30
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-803                     71.045
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 12-805                     71.045
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 15-100 et seq.           75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-101                     75.10
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-105                     75.11
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-106                     75.12
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-109                     75.13
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 15-114                     75.14
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 16-101 et seq.           70.99
Ch. 625, Act 5, §§ 18a-100 et seq.          90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18a-200                    90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18a-200(6)                 90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18a-300(6)                 90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 18a-302                    90.03
Ch. 625, Act 5, § 700-1 et seq.              71.081
Ch. 625, Act 12, § 801                       71.081
Ch. 625, Act 12, § 803                       71.081
Ch. 625, Act 12, § 805                       71.081
Ch. 720, Act 5                                38.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-2                        130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-3                        130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-4                        130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 2-12                       130.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-4                        130.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-5                        130.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-6                        130.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 4-7                        130.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 8-4                        130.06
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-20                      134.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-21                      134.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 11-30                      134.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 12-12                      134.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 21-3                       131.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)                    137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(6), (7), and (9)   137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1(a)(7)                 137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-1.9                     137.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-2                       137.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-3.1                     137.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-5                       137.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 24-6(a)                    137.05
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 25-16(D)                   135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1                       135.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-1 (a)(4)                135.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2                       135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-2 (a)(1) - (a)(4)       135.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-3                       135.03
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 28-5(a),(b)                135.04
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-1                       133.01
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 31-8                       133.02
Ch. 720, Act 5, § 32-9                       133.03
Ch. 720, Act 550                              38.02
Ch. 720, Act 550, §3                         132.05
Ch. 720, Act 570                              38.02
Ch. 720, Ac5 675                              132.03
Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-3                     131.02
Ch. 725, Act 5, § 112A-14(b)                 131.02
Ch. 725, Act 210, §§ 1 et seq.              137.02
Ch. 740, Act 174, § 15                       38.03
Ch. 745, Act 10, § 1-101                     152.005
Ch. 745, Act 10, § 1-101 et seq.             151.09
Ch. 760, Act 100, §§ 1 et seq.              92.06
Ch. 760, Act 550, §§ 1 et seq.              96.30
Ch. 765, Act 165, §§ 1 et seq.              152.165
Ch. 765, Act 205, §§ 1 et seq.              151.03
Ch. 765, Act 205, §§ 6, 7 and 8             151.71
Ch. 775, Act 5, § 6-101                      38.03
                                              
 
REFERENCES TO 1973 CODE
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
1973 Code Section 1994 Code Section
1.06(a)           10.99
1.07              10.19
2.01              30.01
2.02              30.02
2.03              30.15
2.04              30.16
2.05              30.04
2.06              30.17
2.07(a)           30.30
2.07(b)           30.31
2.07(c)           30.32
2.07(d)           30.33
2.07(e)           30.34
2.07(f)           30.35
2.07(g)           30.36
2.08              30.03
3.05              31.50
3.07              31.51
3.08              31.52
3.09              31.53
3.12              31.54
3.13              34.01
3.14              34.02
3.19(a)           96.06
3.19(c)           96.02
3.19(d)           96.03
3.22              34.03
4.01              34.15
4.02              34.15
4.03              34.16
4.04              34.17
4.05              34.18
4.06              34.19
4.07              34.20
4.08              34.21
5.01              97.01
5.02              97.02
5.03              97.03
5.04              97.20
5.05              97.21
5.06              97.22
5.07              97.23
5.08(a)           97.35
5.08(c)           97.36
5.08(d)           97.37
5.08(e)           97.38
5.08(f)           97.39
5.08(g)           97.40
5.08(h)           97.41
5.08(i)           97.42
5.09              97.55
5.10              97.04
5.11              97.05
5.12              97.56
5.14              97.07
5.15              97.08
5.16              97.09
5.17              97.57
5.18              97.10
6.01(a)           33.10
6.01(c)           33.11
6.01(d)           33.28
6.01(f)           33.12
6.02(a)           33.25
6.02(b)           33.26
6.02(c)           33.27
9.01              35.01
9.02              35.02
9.03              35.03
9.04              35.04
9.05              35.05
9.06              35.06
9.07              35.07
9.08              35.08
9.09              35.09
9.10              35.10
9.11              35.11
9.12              35.12
9.13              35.13
12.01             95.01
12.02             95.02
12.03             95.03
12.04             95.04
12.05(a)          93.15
12.05(b)          93.16
12.05(c)          93.17
12.05(d)          93.18
12.05(e)          93.19
12.05(f)          93.20
12.06(a)          98.01
12.06(b)          98.02
12.06(c)          98.03
12.06(d)          98.04
12.06(e)          98.05
12.06(f)          98.06
12.06(g)          98.07
12.09             51.08
15.01             92.01
15.02             92.02
15.03             92.03
15.04             92.04
15.05             92.15
15.06             92.16
15.07             92.17
15.08             92.18
15.09             92.19
15.10             92.20
15.11             92.05
15.12             92.06
32.01             111.01
32.02             111.15
32.03             111.16
32.04             111.17
32.05             111.18
32.06             111.19
32.07             111.02
32.08             111.03
32.09             111.05
33.01(a)          36.01
33.01(b)          36.02
33.01(c)          36.03
33.01(d)          36.04
33.02(a)          36.15
33.02(b)          36.16
33.02(c)          36.17
33.02(d)          36.18
33.04(a)          36.30
33.04(b)          36.31
33.04(c)          36.32
34.01(a)          110.01
34.01(b)          110.02
34.02             110.15
34.03             110.16
34.04             110.17
34.06(b)          110.18
34.07             110.20
34.08             110.21
34.09             110.22
34.10             110.23
34.11             110.35
34.12             110.24
34.14             110.50
34.15             110.51
34.16             110.52
34.17             110.53
34.18             110.54
34.19             110.36
34.20             110.37
34.21             110.38
34.22             110.03
34.23             110.39
34.25             110.05
34.26             110.04
34.27             110.65
34.28             110.66
34.29             110.25
34.30             110.67
34.31             110.68
34.32             110.26
41.03             33.01
41.05             Ch. 77, Sch. I
41.06, Sch. A     Ch. 77, Sch. II
41.07(a))         Ch. 77, Sch. III
41.07(b), Sch. C  Ch. 77, Sch. IV
41.08, Sch. F     Ch. 77, Sch. III
41.09, Sch. E     Ch. 78, Sch. III
41.09(a), Sch. D  Ch. 78, Sch. I
41.09(b), Sch. E  Ch. 78, Sch. II
41.11, Sch. G     Ch. 78, Sch. IV
43.01             132.01
43.02             137.06
43.04             99.01
43.05             99.02
43.06             97.06
43.08             131.04
43.17             131.05
43.09             93.01
43.10             93.02
                  
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
Ord. No.     Date Passed Code Section
                         151.01 -
                         151.09,
                         151.20 -
                         151.23,
                         151.35 -
—          - -         151.37,
                         151.50 -
                         151.53,
                         151.65 -
                         151.72,
                         Ch. 151, App. A, § 2 - 5,
                         Ch. 151, App. B, Figures 1 - 5
337          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
338          - -         110.35
341          - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
343          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
345          - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
349          - -         36.30 -
                         36.32
359          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
364          - -         Ch. 78, Sch. IV
365          - -         35.01 -
                         35.13
370          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
374          - -         110.26
389          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
401          - -         Ch. 78, Sch. I
409          - -85       Ch. 77, Sch. III
                         96.02,
418          - -         96.03,
                         96.06
424          - -         T.S.O. III
426          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
427          - -         T.S.O. III
435          - -         T.S.O. III
436          - -         92.17,
                         92.18
438          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
439          - -         34.03
452          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
454          - -         92.15,
                         92.18
455          - -         30.03
457          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
460          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
468          7-16-84     T.S.O. II
475          8-20-84     111.04
476          9-17-84     Ch. 77, Sch. III
479          12-17-84    T.S.O. II
487          9-3-85      T.S.O. II
488          1-20-86     32.01 -
                         32.14
489          1-6-85      Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                         Ch. 78, Sch. I
                         Ch. 152, Apps.
                         A -
                         C,
                         152.001 -
                         152.007,
                         152.020 -
                         152.023,
                         152.035 -
                         152.046,
                         152.070 -
                         152.074,
                         152.085 -
                         152.086,
                         152.100 -
491          6-16-86     152.104,
                         152.115 -
                         152.122,
                         152.135,
                         152.136 -
                         152.145,
                         152.155 -
                         152.164,
                         152.175 -
                         152.180,
                         152.190 -
                         152.194,
                         152.205 -
                         152.216,
                         152.999,
                         152.999
492          7-7-86      T.S.O. II
496          10-18-76    T.S.O. III
508          2-3-87      110.18
510          2-16-87     110.27
511          2-3-87      30.03
                         51.01 -
                         51.07,
                         51.09,
                         51.20 -
                         51.27,
                         51.40 -
517          4-6-87      51.52,
                         51.65 -
                         51.73,
                         51.85,
                         51.86,
                         51.88 -
                         51.92,
                         51.99
518          4-20-87     T.S.O. I
519          5-4-87      T.S.O. I
520          5-4-87      T.S.O. II
526          9-8-87      51.85
533          3-21-88     T.S.O. II
536          5-16-88     51.85
543          8-1-88      152.163
546          9-6-88      92.15
548          10-3-88     Ch. 77, Sch. III
550          10-12-88    T.S.O. I
553          12-19-88    T.S.O. II
554          2-6-89      30.03
558          3-20-89     Ch. 77, Sch. IV
                         50.01 -
560          4-27-89     50.03,
                         50.15 -
                         50.19
567          9-5-89      Ch. 78, Sch. I
                         52.01,
                         52.02,
                         52.15 -
                         52.29,
                         52.40 -
                         52.42,
573          10-25-89    52.55 -
                         52.58,
                         52.70 -
                         52.76,
                         52.85 -
                         52.88,
                         52.99
                         51.01,
574          10-25-89    51.85,
                         51.92
578          12-19-89    Ch. 77, Sch. III
                         34.16,
581          - -         34.17,
                         34.19
585          7-16-90     92.17,
                         92.20
587          7-16-90     Ch. 77, Sch. III
601          8-6-91      T.S.O. IV
605          11-4-91     T.S.O. IV
610          4-20-92     Ch. 77, Sch. III
614          - -         50.03
615          7-20-92     Ch. 77, Sch. I
620          - -         52.70
621          11-16-92    51.85
622          11-2-92     10.99
629          2-1-93      30.03
630          2-15-93     T.S.O. II
631          3-3-93      Ch. 77, Sch. V
634          4-5-93      Ch. 78, Sch. II
                         152.007,
                         152.070,
637          5-17-93     152.071,
                         152.074,
                         152.086
646          9-20-93     Ch. 78, Sch. II
647          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. VI
648          - -         52.70
649          - -         51.85
650          - -         Ch. 77, Sch. III
662          9-6-94      T.S.O. IV
670          3-20-95     T.S.O. II
671          - -         T.S.O. II
                         92.15,
672          4-17-95     92.17,
                         92.18
678          4-3-95      T.S.O. II
681          6-5-95      152.157
683          - -         T.S.O. I
684          - -         151.36
687          7-3-95      152.157
690          8-7-95      T.S.O. V
692          10-16-95    51.85,
                         52.70
694          11-20-05    Ch. 78, Sch. I
696          - -96       52.40
698          3-1-96      Ch. 37
700          5-6-96      50.03
701          5-6-96      Ch. 78, Sch. I,
                         II
705          - -         T.S.O. II
706          6-17-96     T.S.O. IV
707          7-1-96      T.S.O. II
708          8-19-96     151.53;
                         Ch. 151, App. A, § 5
710          12-16-96    T.S.O. II
715          3-17-97     Ch. 77, Sch. III
723          7-21-97     32.15
725          8-18-97     T.S.O. III
727          9-15-97     52.40
728          9-15-97     51.42
730          10-6-97     Ch. 153
734          1-5-98      Ch. 77, Sch. I
736          2-2-97      31.01
737          2-16-98     90.02
740          9-21-98     Ch. 77, Sch. III;
                         Ch. 78, Sch. I
743          3-15-99     Ch. 77, Sch. III
                         152.043,
                         152.117,
                         152.118,
                         152.119,
                         152.142,
744          - -         152.144,
                         152.145,
                         152.210,
                         152.211,
                         152.213,
                         Ch. 152, Appendix A
745          4-19-99     152.023
747          6-21-99     31.07
749          6-7-99      T.S.O. II
750          6-21-99     T.S.O. II
751          7-6-99      T.S.O. II
752          7-19-99     T.S.O. IV
754          10-18-99    152.055 -
                         152.058
755          11-1-99     53.01
756          11-1-99     Ch. 77, Sch. III
                         52.71,
759          12-6-99     52.73,
                         52.77
760          1-17-00     T.S.O. II
761          1-17-00     T.S.O. II
762          3-6-00      Ch. 78, Sch. I
763          3-20-00     T.S.O. II
767          3-17-00     T.S.O. II
768          4-17-00     Ch. 54
769          4-17-00     T.S.O. II
772          6-5-00      51.85,
                         52.70
773          6-5-00      31.08
774          6-5-00      T.S.O. II
790          2-5-01      110.35
791          2-5-01      92.15
792          2-19-01     T.S.O. II
794          4-2-01      Ch. 77, Sch. IV
795          4-2-01      Ch. 77, Sch. III
797          5-7-01      51.85
798          6-4-01      115.01 -
                         115.04
799          6-18-01     T.S.O. II
800          7-2-01      Ch. 78, Sch. I
801          7-16-01     111.16
802          8-6-01      Ch. 78, Sch. II
803          8-20-01     T.S.O. II
807          10-2-01     152.300 -
                         152.308
808          11-11-01    T.S.O. II
809          11-11-01    T.S.O. II
                         114.01 -
811          12-17-01    114.26,
                         114.99
                         113.01 -
813          1-7-02      113.13,
                         113.99
814          2-4-02      Ch. 77, Sch. III,
                         IV
815          2-4-02      Ch. 77, Sch. III
816          3-18-02     70.99
817          3-18-02     72.99
818          3-18-02     94.99
821          5-6-02      153.01
822          6-17-02     T.S.O. III
824          9-3-02      Ch. 77, Sch. III
828          9-16-02     31.08
835          2-17-03     52.40,
                         52.76
836          2-17-03     51.42,
                         51.86
841          4-7-03      T.S.O. IV
843          4-21-03     T.S.O. II
845          4-21-03     Ch. 78, Sch. I
846          5-5-03      T.S.O. II
847          5-5-03      T.S.O. II
848          5-5-03      T.S.O. II
851          7-7-03      T.S.O. II
852          7-21-03     T.S.O. III
856          8-18-03     T.S.O. III
857          8-18-03     T.S.O. II
859          9-15-03     T.S.O. III
860          11-19-03    Ch. 77, Sch. III
862          11-19-03    T.S.O. II
869          1-5-04      T.S.O. II
875          3-15-04     T.S.O. II
876          3-15-04     T.S.O. II
877          3-15-04     T.S.O. III
878          4-5-04      T.S.O. III
879          4-5-04      T.S.O. III
880          4-5-04      50.03
886          5-3-04      31.07
887          5-17-04     132.02
889          6-7-04      152.071 -
                         152.073
890          6-21-04     T.S.O. III
895          9-7-04      T.S.O. II
896          9-20-04     T.S.O. II
898          8-2-04      T.S.O. II
901          11-15-04    T.S.O. II
912          3-21-05     T.S.O. II
913          3-21-05     132.03
920          5-16-05     T.S.O. II
921          6-6-05      T.S.O. II
923          6-6-05      T.S.O. II
924          7-18-05     T.S.O. II
925          7-18-05     T.S.O. II
927          8-1-05      Ch. 77, Sch. III
928          8-15-05     32.01,
                         32.02
935          11-7-05     31.08
Res. -       2-6-06      T.S.O. III
939          2-21-06     132.04
941          3-20-06     T.S.O. III
                         51.42,
943          4-17-06     51.85,
                         52.40,
                         52.70
944          5-1-06      50.03
946          6-19-06     T.S.O. II
948          8-7-06      31.08
                         150.057,
949          10-2-06     152.070 -
                         152.072, 150.074
Res. -       12-4-06     35.25
961          12-18-06    T.S.O. II
964          1-15-07     92.17
965          1-15-07     31.59
966          1-15-07     31.52
                         30.03,
970          4-2-07      31.22,
                         31.37,
                         31.42
--           6-4-07      T.S.O. III
977          8-6-07      51.85
978          8-20-07     51.85
980          - -         150.01,
                         150.02
981          10-1-07     T.S.O. III
982          10-1-07     T.S.O. III
983          10-1-07     50.03
984          10-15-07    31.08
985          11-5-07     52.72
986          11-5-07     Ch. 77, Sch. III
Res. 08-09   12-26-07    T.S.O. III
989          1-8-08      38.01
990          1-8-08      92.17
992          3-17-08     116.01 -
                         116.04
993          3-17-08     117.01 -
                         117.07
994          3-17-08     T.S.O. II
997          4-21-08     Ch. 77, Sch. I
998          4-21-08     Ch. 77, Sch. III
1003         7-7-08      71.107
1006         7-7-08      132.01
1007         7-7-08      110.53
1008         8-4-08      31.08
1009         8-4-08      92.19
1010         9-2-08      T.S.O. III
                         34.15 -
1011         10-6-08     34.17,
                         34.19
1016         10-20-08    T.S.O. II
1017         11-3-08     52.72
1018         11-17-08    T.S.O. II
1019         11-17-08    T.S.O. II
1020         11-17-08    52.75
1021         11-17-08    51.87
Res. 08-19   11-17-08    T.S.O. III
1023         12-15-08    Ch. 77, Sch. III
1025         4-20-09     151.80 -
                         151.87
1026         5-4-09      50.02
1028         6-15-09     T.S.O. II
1029         6-1-09      153.01
1032         6-15-09     30.15
Res. -       3-16-09     T.S.O. III
1031         7-6-09      T.S.O. IV
1036         7-20-09     T.S.O III
1037         10-5-09     T.S.O. IV
1038         10-19-09    10.20
1040         11-4-09     Ch. 77, Sch. III
1043         1-19-10     T.S.O. II
1044         2-16-10     51.42
1045         3-1-10      Ch. 78, Sch. III
1046         3-1-10      152.117
1048         3-15-10     T.S.O. II
1050         3-15-10     151.90,
                         151.91
1052         3-15-10     152.085,
                         152.086
1055         4-5-10      96.07
1056         4-19-10     51.85
1058         5-17-10     92.15,
                         92.17
1059         5-17-10     Ch. 78, Sch. I
1060         6-7-10      Ch. 78, Sch. I
Res. 10-5    8-16-10     T.S.O. III
1062         9-20-10     T.S.O. II
1063         9-7-10      T.S.O. II
1064         9-7-10      T.S.O. II
1065         9-7-10      T.S.O. II
1066         9-7-10      T.S.O. II
Res. 10-07   9-20-10     35.35
1067         10-18-10    110.40
1068         11-1-10     Ch. 77, Schs. III,
                         IV
1073         12-20-10    132.02
1074         1-18-11     T.S.O. III
1075         2-22-11     32.16
1078         3-21-11     73.30
Res. 11-01   3-21-11     T.S.O. III
1079         5-16-11     150.10,
                         150.11
Res. 11-02   5-16-11     T.S.O. III
1082         8-15-11     52.03
1083         10-3-11     51.85
Res. 11-12   11-7-11     T.S.O. III
1087         1-3-12      T.S.O. III
1091         4-16-12     32.17
1092         6-4-12      T.S.O. III
1093         7-16-12     Ch. 77, Sch. I
1094         8-6-12      153.01
1095         8-6-12      110.18
1096         8-20-12     T.S.O. III
1097         10-1-12     Ch. 77, Sch. III
Res. 12-06   11-5-12     T.S.O. III
1103         11-19-12    135.02
1105         1-22-13     Ch. 77, Sch. III
Res. 13-01   2-4-13      T.S.O. III
1106         2-19-13     T.S.O. IV
Res. 2013-03 3-4-13      T.S.O. III
Res. 13-06   4-15-13     T.S.O. III
1112         8-5-13      38.02
Res. 13-07   8-5-13      T.S.O. III
1113         10-21-13    Ch. 78, Sch. II
Res. 13-10   11-4-13     T.S.O. III
1116         1-21-14     31.08
1118         3-4-14      T.S.O. II
1119         3-4-14      T.S.O. II
Res. 14-02   4-7-14      T.S.O. III
Res. 14-03   4-7-14      T.S.O. III
1121         4-21-14     150.20
1122         4-21-14     93.30
Res. 14-05   6-2-14      T.S.O. III
1123         6-16-14     T.S.O. II
1124         6-16-14     T.S.O. II
Res. 14-08   7-7-14      T.S.O. III
Res. 14-11   11-3-14     T.S.O. III
1127         11-17-14    T.S.O. III
Res. 15-01   2-2-15      T.S.O. III
1129         2-17-15     T.S.O. II
Res. 15-02   2-17-15     T.S.O. III
Res. 15-06   3-16-15     T.S.O. III
Res. 15-09   9-8-15      T.S.O. III
Res. 15-11   10-6-15     T.S.O. III
Res. 15-13   10-19-15    T.S.O. III
Res. 15-14   11-2-15     T.S.O. III
1136         12-7-15     T.S.O. III
                         Ch. 77, Schs.
1137         1-4-16      III,
                         IV
1138         1-4-16      T.S.O. III
1142         4-4-16      T.S.O. III
Res. 16-2    4-4-16      T.S.O. III
1145         4-18-16     T.S.O. II
Res. 16-3    6-6-16      T.S.O. III
1147         6-20-16     T.S.O. II
1148         8-1-16      T.S.O. II
1149         9-6-16      T.S.O. II
1150         9-6-16      T.S.O. II
Res. 16-11   11-7-16     T.S.O. III
1154         1-18-17     51.85,
                         52.70
1158         3-27-17     T.S.O. III
1160         4-10-17     112.01 -
                         112.08
1163         7-24-17     T.S.O. II
Res. 17-08   10-23-17    T.S.O. III
1169         1-8-18      38.03
1178         7-23-18     T.S.O. II
1180         9-24-18     152.047
1181         10-22-18    T.S.O. II
1182         10-22-18    52.03
Res. 18-09   11-13-18    T.S.O. III
1185         1-28-19     T.S.O. II
Res. 19-01   2-11-19     T.S.O. III
1186         2-25-19     T.S.O. III
1187         2-25-19     T.S.O. III
Res. 19-03   2-25-19     T.S.O. III
Res. 19-05   4-22-19     T.S.O. III
Res. 19-06   4-22-19     T.S.O. III
1191         5-28-19     T.S.O. II
1196         8-26-19     T.S.O. II
1197         8-26-19     152.137,
                         152.145
1198         9-9-19      51.85,
                         52.70
1200         9-23-19     T.S.O. II
1201         10-4-19     Ch. 78, Sch. I
1204         11-12-19    T.S.O. II
Res. 19-12   11-12-19    T.S.O. III
Res. 19-13   11-12-19    T.S.O. III
1205         11-25-19    T.S.O. II
1209         3-23-20     T.S.O. II
Res. 20-03   4-27-20     T.S.O. III
1215         9-14-20     T.S.O. II
                         132.03,
1218         10-12-20    132.05,
                         132.06
1225         11-23-20    T.S.O. II
1226         12-14-20    150.03
1233         2-8-21      10.21
1236         5-24-21     91.01,
                         91.02
1237         5-24-21     152.043
1239         6-14-21     91.01,
                         91.02
1240         9-27-21     T.S.O. II
1243         10-11-21    137.06
                         154.01 -
                         154.17,
1246         11-22-21    154,25,
                         154.26,
                         154.31 -
                         154.35
1249         2-14-22     T.S.O. II
Res. 22-02   3-28-22     T.S.O. II
1254         4-20-22     T.S.O. IV
Res. 22-11   10-24-22    T.S.O. III
1268         3-13-23     110.18
1272         5-22-23     T.S.O. II
1273         5-22-23     T.S.O. II
1276         8-28-23     110.20
1280         6-10-24     152.165
1283         5-28-24     52.03
1284         6-24-24     37.02
1285         8-26-24     31.43
1289         10-28-24    52.03
1290         3-10-25     93.30
1291         3-24-25     97.35
1292         3-24-25     152.020
1293         3-24-25     10.99
1294         3-24-25     110.26
1295         3-24-25     92.17,
                         92.19
1297         6-23-25     151.53
-            7-21-25     T.S.O. III
-            7-28-25     T.S.O. III
1298         7-14-25     36.40 -
                         36.42
1301         10-13-25    T.S.O. V
1302         10-27-25    T.S.O. III
Res. 25-12   11-10-25    T.S.O. III
1303         11-10-25    92.15,
                         92.17
                        
 
