VILLAGE CODE of
MINOOKA, ILLINOIS
1997
Code current through:
Ord. 2025-34, passed October 21, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
         This code of the Village of Minooka, as supplemented, contains
ordinances up to and including ordinance 2025-34, passed October 21, 2025.
Ordinances of the Village adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions
of this code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith.
Consult the Village office in order to ascertain whether any particular
provision of the code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
                     American Legal Publishing
                     Cincinnati, Ohio
ORDINANCES PENDING REVIEW FOR CODIFICATION
Listed ordinances have been passed, but they are pending review by the
publisher, and they may not amend the code of ordinances. Additionally,
ordinances listed in this section may not show the original ordinances in their
entirety. Please contact the office of the clerk if there are any questions
concerning any listed ordinances.
 
ORDINANCE NO.   2026-2
 
AN ORDINANCE AMENDING PROVISIONS OF THE MINOOKA ZONING ORDINANCE REGARDING
CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS

   WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village of Minooka, Will, Grundy,
and Kendall Counties, Illinois, have the authority to adopt ordinances and to
promulgate rules and regulations that pertain to its government and affairs and
protect the public health, safety, and welfare of its citizens; and
   WHEREAS, pursuant to Article 11, Division 13 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 11-13-1, et seq.) the Corporate Authorities of the Village have
authority to enact zoning ordinances that regulate land use within the Village;
and
   WHEREAS, the Corporate Authorities of the Village previously exercised this
authority, enacting Title 5 (Zoning) of the Minooka Village Code (the “Minooka
Zoning Ordinance”); and
   WHEREAS, the Village previously proposed an amendment to the Minooka Zoning
Ordinance to add accessory offices or administrative buildings used to support
the activities of religious institutions as a conditional permitted use in
residential districts (the “Proposed Amendment”); and
   WHEREAS, the Proposed Amendment was submitted to the Planning and Zoning
Commission (the “Plan Commission”) for its review and consideration and for the
purposes of holding a public hearing thereon; and
   WHEREAS, the Plan Commission held a public hearing to consider the Proposed
Amendment on December 9, 2025, with notice having been properly given for the
same, and at that time made all findings of fact, incorporated by reference as
Exhibit A, which are required by and pursuant to the Village Code; and
   WHEREAS, the Plan Commission has recommended that the President and Board of
Trustees amend the Minooka Zoning Ordinance as set forth in this Ordinance; and
   WHEREAS, the President and Board of Trustees of the Village hereby approve
and adopt the Plan Commission’s findings of fact and further find and declare
that amending the Minooka Zoning Ordinance as set forth in this Ordinance is in
the best interests of the Village and its citizens.
   NOW THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CORPORATE AUTHORITIES OF THE VILLAGE OF
MINOOKA, WILL, GRUNDY, AND KENDALL COUNTIES, ILLINOIS, PURSUANT TO ITS
STATUTORY AUTHORITY, AS FOLLOWS:
   SECTION 1.   The Corporate Authorities hereby find that all of the recitals
contained in the preamble to this Ordinance are true, correct, and complete and
are hereby incorporated by reference hereto and made a part hereof.
 
 
 
SECTION 2.   That Title 5 (Zoning), Chapter 6 (Residential Districts), Section
5-6-3 (R1 Single-Family Detached Residence District) of the Minooka Village
Code is hereby amended to include the underlined text, as follows:
5-6-3: R1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
* * *
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
* * *
   Churches, temples, synagogues or other places of religious worship on a lot
not less than two (2) acres in area, as well as accessory offices or
administrative buildings used solely in support of the activities of the
religious institution whether on the same lot or a separate lot located within
150 ft.
* * *
   SECTION 3.   In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or
portions, or clause or clauses of this Ordinance shall be declared to be
invalid or unenforceable by a Court of competent jurisdiction, such
adjudication shall in no way affect or impair the validity or enforceability of
any of the remaining provisions, portions, or clauses of this Ordinance that
may be given effect without such invalid or unenforceable provision or
provisions, portion or portions, or clause or clauses.
   SECTION 4.   That all ordinances, resolutions, motions, or parts thereof,
conflicting with any of the provisions of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed
to the extent of the conflict.
   SECTION 5.   That the Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish this
Ordinance in pamphlet form.
   SECTION 6.   That this Ordinance shall be in full force and effect from and
after its passage, approval and publication in pamphlet form as provided by
law.
PRESENTED and passed by the Board of Trustees on a roll call vote on 27 th day
of January 2026.
 
 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit A
Plan Commission’s Findings of Fact
and Recommendation of Approval
Village of Minooka
Planning and Zoning Commission
Finding of Fact and Recommendation of Approval for a Proposed Text Amendment to
the Minooka Zoning Ordinance Regarding Religious Offices as a Conditional
Permitted Use in Residential Districts
On Tuesday, December 9, 2025, at 6:00 p.m., the Village of Minooka Planning and
Zoning Commission (the “Plan Commission”) conducted a public hearing, with
public notice having been duly given for the same. At said hearing, the Plan
Commission considered whether to recommend approval or denial of a proposed
text amendment that would amend the Minooka Zoning Ordinance to allow accessory
offices or administrative buildings used solely in support of the activities of
religious institutions as a conditional permitted use allowed in all
residential districts.
Having heard and considered all of the evidence presented at the hearing and
being fully advised in the premises, the Plan Commission hereby recommends that
the Corporate Authorities of the Village approve the text amendment to the
Minooka Zoning Ordinance, with an amendment to limit the distance a church or
religious office can be from the religious building it is associated with to
150 feet.
 
PASSED this 9 th day of December 2025, by roll call vote.
    Aye       Nay      Absent      Abstain
Daniel Friant                        X             
Steve Bryce    X                                 
Casey McCollom    X                                 
Mark Skwarczynski              X                       
Robert White                                  X   
Robert Wilson    X                                 
Daniel Wittenkeller    X                                 
 
 
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 1997-14
AN ORDINANCE ADOPTING THE VILLAGE CODE OF MINOOKA, ILLINOIS
   Be it ordained by the Village President and Board of Trustees of the Village
of Minooka, Illinois, an Illinois Municipal Corporation:
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this Ordinance, the Village
Code of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, prepared by Sterling Codifiers, Inc.,
containing the compilation of all ordinances of a general nature together with
the changes made to said ordinances, under the direction of the governing body
of the Village, shall be accepted in all courts without question as the
Official Code and Law of the Village as enacted by the President and Board of
Trustees.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
provided by Sterling Codifiers, Inc., whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a
general and permanent nature amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions
of the Official Village Code is identified by the proper catchline and is
inserted in the proper place in each of the official copies, three (3) copies
of which shall be maintained in the office of the Village Clerk, certified as
to correctness and available for inspection at any and all times that said
office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this Official
Village Code shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision
and the fact that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated by the
governing body shall not serve to cause any interruption in the continuous
effectiveness of ordinances included in said Official Village Code. All
ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances, bond ordinances,
franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances, shall continue in
full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended by a provision of
the Village Code. Such ordinances are not intended to be included in the
Official Village Code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code,
or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Village to
be misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith, are,
to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed.
   Section 6: This Ordinance and the Code adopted by the same shall be in full
force and effect from and after its passage and approval in accordance with
law, as printed and published in book form by order of the Village President
and Board of Trustees.
ACT OF INCORPORATION
An Act to Incorporate the Town of Minooka
Section 1.
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Illinois represented in the General
Assembly, That the inhabitants of the town of Minooka in the county of Grundy
and state of Illinois be, and the same are hereby incorporated and constituted
a body corporate and politic by the name and style of "The President and
Trustees of the town of Minooka" and by that name and style shall have
perpetual succession, and may have and use a common Seal, which they may alter
or change at pleasure, and in whom the government of the Corporation shall be
vested and by whom its affairs shall be managed.
Section 2.
All that district of county embraced within the following boundaries, to-wit:
The whole of section one (1), in township thirty-four (34), north range eight
(8), east of the third principal meridian, in Grundy county, Illinois, is
hereby declared to be within the boundaries of the said town of Minooka.
Section 3.
The inhabitants of said town by the name and style aforesaid, shall have power
to sue and be sued, to plead and be impleaded, defend and be defended, answer
and be answered unto, in all courts of law and equity in this state, in all
actions whatever; to purchase, receive and hold property, real and personal
within or without the corporate limits of said town for burial grounds and
other public purposes for the use and benefit of the inhabitants of said town,
to sell, lease or otherwise dispose of the property real and personal of said
town for the use and benefit of the same, and to improve and protect such
property and to do all the acts and things in relation thereto that natural
persons might do.
Section 4.
The corporate powers and duties of said town shall be vested in five (5)
trustees, who shall constitute a board for the transactions of the business of
town and who shall be elected annually on the first Monday of April of each
year, and who shall hold their offices for the term of one year, and until
their successors are elected and qualified, unless sooner removed by death,
resignation or otherwise as provided by this act, or the ordinances of said
town. The persons elected as trustees shall be citizens of the United States
and of this state; they shall possess a freehold estate within said town, and
shall have actually resided within said town three months next preceding their
election.
Section 5.
Ten (10) days previous notice shall be given of all elections to be held under
the provisions of this act, or any ordinances of said town by posting up
notices in writing in at least three (3) public places in said town or by
publication in some newspaper published therein. The first election after the
passage of this act shall be called by the Town Clerk of the town of Aux Sable
and shall be held on the first Monday of April in the year of our Lord, one
thousand eight hundred and sixty-nine, or as soon thereafter as practicable.
All subsequent elections shall be called by the President of the board of
Trustees of the town of Minooka. Said notices shall specify the time and place
of holding such elections, the hour of the day at which the polls shall be
opened, and the hour at which they shall close. The voters who may be present
at the time and place specified for holding any such election shall, at the
hour specified for opening the polls, appoint by acclamation three (3) of their
number to act as judges of such election, and the said judges shall appoint two
(2) clerks of such election. Said judges and clerks, before entering upon the
duties of their offices, shall qualify in the same manner as is required of
judges and clerks of elections for State and County purposes. All such
elections shall be by ballot and all who by the laws of this state are entitled
to vote for state and county officers, and who shall have been actual residents
of said town six (6) months next preceding such election shall be entitled to
vote thereat, and all cases of contested elections under this act shall be
tried and determined by the Police Magistrate of said town, in such manner as
may be provided by ordinance.
Section 6.
The Trustees-elect, before entering upon the duties of their offices, shall
take and subscribe an oath to support the constitution of the United States and
of this State, and that they will, to the best of their abilities, faithfully
discharge the duties of their office. They shall hold at least one regular
meeting every three (3) months and shall, at the first meeting after their
election, appoint one of their number President. A majority of such trustees
shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from
day to day and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and
under such penalties as may be by ordinance provided. Such board may make such
rules and regulations as to them may seem proper; they shall have power to fill
vacancies in the board of trustees occasioned by death, resignation or removal,
or otherwise, by appointment. They may punish their members for disorderly
conduct and by vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the board, may expel a member. They
shall also have power to remove from office by four-fifths (4/5) vote of all
the members, any subordinate officer of said town who holds his office by
appointment of the board of trustees of said town.
Section 7.
They shall have power and it shall be their duty to appoint a clerk, town
constable, treasurer, assessor, collector, and one or more street commissioners
and such other officers, (if any), as may be necessary for carrying into effect
the provisions of this act, and the ordinances of said town and to require
them, before entering upon the duties of their respective offices, to give such
bonds and security as may be necessary to ensure the faithful performance of
their duties. They shall also require all persons appointed to office by them,
before entering upon the discharge of their duties of their respective offices,
to take and subscribe an oath that they will support the constitution of the
United States and of this State, and that they will faithfully and to the best
of their ability, discharge the duties of their offices.
Section 8.
They shall have power and authority to levy, assess and collect taxes upon all
property, real and personal, within said town, which is subject to taxation for
State and county purposes not exceeding fifty cents ($0.50) annually, on the
hundred dollars ($100.00) of the assessed valuation thereof and they may assess
and enforce the collection of such taxes by any ordinance or ordinances not
repugnant to the constitution of this state or of the United States. They shall
also have power to appropriate money and to provide for the payment of the
debts and expenses of the incorporation.
Section 9.
They shall have power to make regulations for securing the health and comfort
of the inhabitants of said town; to define and declare what shall be considered
a nuisance and to provide for the prevention, removal or abatement of the same
and to provide for the punishment of the authors thereof by fines, penalties or
imprisonment in the county jail of Grundy county, or by both such fines and
imprisonment, and to authorize, direct and enforce the summary abatement of any
such nuisance or nuisances.
Section 10.
They shall have power and it shall be their duty to cause all streets, alleys
and public roads within said town to be kept in good repair and for that
purpose they may require every male resident of said town over the age of
twenty one (21) years and not exceeding fifty (50) years to labor thereon not
exceeding three (3) days in each and every year or to pay at the time of being
notified to work, the sum of one dollar fifty cents ($1.50) for each day's
labor thereby required of him, and if the labor and money performed and
received be not sufficient for that purpose, they shall appropriate so much
from the general fund of the Corporation as may be necessary therefor, and the
inhabitants of said town shall be exempt from working in any road outside of
the same.
Section 11.
They shall have power to open, alter, vacate, widen, extend, establish, grade,
pave or otherwise improve any street, avenue, lane, alley, public grounds, and
public roads within the limits of said town and to establish, erect, construct,
build and keep in repair bridges, culverts, sewers, sidewalks, pavements and
crossways and to regulate the construction and use of the same and punish the
abuse thereof, and to levy and collect from time to time a tax on the lot or
lots in front of which such sidewalk or sidewalks, pavement or pavements shall
be ordered and proposed to be made or repaired, provided, that every such tax
shall be levied on such lots proportionate to the length of their respective
fronts, and provided further that such tax shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of
the actual cost of such making and repairing and that the other half of the
cost of such making and repairing shall be paid out of the general fund of the
Corporation provided that the tax provided for in this section shall not be
taken or held to be any part of the tax provided for in section eight of this
act.
Section 12.
They shall have power to provide the town with water, to sink and keep in
repair public wells, and to erect and keep in repair such public buildings, as
the necessities of the town may require and provide for the inspection and
weighing of hay, stone, coal and the measurement of wood, fuel and building
stone to be used in said town.
Section 13.
They shall have power to license and tax and regulate auctioneers, merchants,
family grocery stores, eating houses, hawkers and peddlers and to regulate the
fixing of chimneys, and the flues thereof; also to regulate the storage of
gunpowder, and other combustible materials in said town, to restrain and
prohibit every description of gambling and fraudulent devices, and to suppress
and prohibit gambling houses, bawdy houses, houses of ill fame, and all other
disorderly houses within said town, and one mile from the limits of said town.
Section 14.
They shall have power to tax, license and regulate or suppress and prohibit all
exhibitions of common showmen, shows of every kind, caravans, circuses and
exhibitions and amusements of every kind, unless gotten up in said town by the
citizens of said town. They shall also have power to provide for the arrest,
trial and punishment of persons who may be guilty of any assault, assault and
battery, affrays, routs, riots, disturbing the peace of the inhabitants or of
any public meeting, whether religious or otherwise, of said town or disorderly
assemblages of any kind within the limits of said town, to prohibit and impose
penalties on the authors thereof, any indecent exposure of person or dumb beast
to the public view, or the public use of indecent or obscene language, or the
exposure to public view of any indecent or obscene picture or publication
within the limits of said town.
Section 15.
They shall have power to prevent the running at large of dogs, and to provide
for the destruction of the same when found at large contrary to the provisions
of any ordinance in such cases made and provided; to prevent the firing of
squibs, guns, rockets or other fire works or combustibles within said town.
Section 16.
They shall have power to prevent the encumbering of any street, lane, avenue,
road, alley or public ground of said town; to prevent the obstruction of the
streets by the unnecessary detention of railroad trains upon the crossings, or
by leaving of cars upon the crossings of any public street; to regulate the
rate of running speed of railroad trains through said town; to protect shade
trees; to compel persons to fasten horses, mules and other animals attached to
vehicles or saddled or bridled for use, while standing in any street, lane,
road, alley or uninclosed lot within said town; to prevent horses, cattle,
sheep, hogs or other animals running at large, within said town and to provide
for the distraining and impounding of any such animal or animals and the sale
thereof to satisfy costs and charges and penalty or penalties incurred under
any ordinance of said town; to prevent racing within said town with horses or
other animals; to prevent any immoderate riding or driving of horses, or other
animals within said town, and also to prohibit and punish the abuse of and
cruelty to any and all animals within said town.
Section 17.
The President and Trustees of the town of Minooka shall have and exercise
complete and exclusive control as hereinafter provided, over the licensing,
selling, bartering, exchanging, giving away, or in any manner trafficking in
any wine, rum, gin, brandy, whiskey, ale, beer, or any intoxicating liquor
within the limits of said town, or within one mile thereof, and may by
ordinance declare any such selling, bartering, exchanging, giving away or
trafficking in any manner in any such wine, gin, rum, brandy, whiskey, ale,
beer, or any other intoxicating liquors within the corporate limits of said
town or within one mile thereof, and the place or places where the same is
carried on or either of them, a nuisance, and shall have and exercise the same
power and authority to provide for prohibition or prevention, removal or
abatement of any such nuisance or nuisances and for the punishment of the
authors thereof as they have and may exercise by virtue of Section nine of this
act in the case of other nuisances, provided that all fees paid for the
granting of licenses shall be paid into the common fund of the incorporation
and provided further that bona fide druggists shall not be prohibited from
selling in good faith any intoxicating liquor for purely medicinal, mechanical
or sacramental purposes under such rules and regulations as may be by ordinance
prescribed.
Section 18.
They shall have power to direct the location and regulate the construction of
tanneries, blacksmith shops, foundries, livery stables and packing houses; to
direct the location and regulate the construction and management of or to
restrain, abate and prohibit within said town and to the distance of one mile
from the limits thereof, breweries, distilleries, slaughtering establishments,
establishments for rendering lard, tallow, offal and other establishments and
places where nauseous, offensive or unwholesome business may be carried on.
Section 19.
They shall have power to restrain and prohibit vagrants, mendicants, beggars,
prostitutes and to provide for the arrest and punishment of the same or of any
person or persons found intoxicated in any street, alley or other public places
in said town.
Section 20.
They shall have power to make such regulations for the prevention and
extinguishment of fires, as they may deem expedient; they shall have power to
procure fire engines, to organize fire, hook, hose, ax and ladder companies,
and make rules and regulations for the government of the same.
Section 21.
They shall have power to enlarge the boundaries of said town by ordinances
provided, such proposed enlargements shall first be submitted to the decision
of the qualified voters of said town, and also of the legal voters residing in
the limits of the proposed enlargements, and the enlargement shall be
authorized by a majority of votes cast at such election.
Section 22.
They shall have power to make all ordinances, which may be necessary or proper
for carrying into effect the powers and authority conferred on them by the
provisions of this act, or which may be necessary for the better regulation of
the internal police of the said town not inconsistent with the Constitution of
this State, or of the United States, and to cause the same to be executed. They
shall also have power to impose fines and penalties, provided, that in no case
shall any fine for any one offense exceed the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00), nor shall they impose a penalty of imprisonment in the county jail
for any one offense of more than six (6) months.
Section 23.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the board when present and in
case of his absence from any meeting, the members of the Board present shall
appoint one of their members chairman, who shall preside at that meeting. The
President or any two (2) members of the board may call special meetings of the
board. The President shall be active and vigilant in enforcing the laws and
ordinances of said town. He shall inspect the conduct of all subordinate
officers and cause negligence or willful violation of duty to be punished; he
shall have power to call on all male inhabitants of said town over the age of
twenty one (21) years, to aid in enforcing the laws and ordinances of said
town, and any and every person who shall neglect or refuse to obey such call
shall forfeit and pay to said town the sum of not less than five (5) nor more
than twenty five dollars ($25.00); he shall have power whenever he may deem it
necessary to require of any officer of said town a written exhibit of his books
and papers, and shall have power, and it shall be his duty to do all other acts
and things that may be required of him by the laws and ordinances of said town.
Section 24.
At the first election of trustees of the town of Minooka held under the
provisions of this act, and every four (4) years thereafter, there shall be
elected by the legal voters of said town a police magistrate of said town, who
shall be ex-officio a justice of the peace for the County of Grundy; he shall
qualify in the same manner and be subject to the same penalties that are
provided by the general laws of this State for other justices of the peace; he
shall hold his office for the term of four (4) years and until his successor
shall be elected and qualified; he shall possess and may exercise all the
powers, jurisdiction and authority that other justices of the peace of the
County of Grundy might have and exercise in similar cases.
Section 25.
Said police magistrate shall be a conservator of the peace of said town of
Minooka and shall have exclusive original jurisdiction, except as herein
otherwise provided in all cases arising out of or under the laws and ordinances
of said town, or this act, and shall in such cases possess and may exercise all
the rights, powers and authority now conferred on police magistrates by virtue
of an act entitled, "An act for the better government of towns and cities and
to amend the characters thereof" approved February 27th, A.D., 1854. Whenever
there shall occur a vacancy in the office of Police Magistrate of said town,
the board of trustees of said town or the President of said board shall, within
twenty (20) days from the occurring of any such vacancy, call an election to
fill the same and the person so elected shall hold his office until his
successor shall be elected and qualified.
Section 26.
He shall in all cases be entitled to the same fees and emoluments that are by
the laws of this State allowed to other Justices of the Peace for similar
services. In case of the absence of said police magistrate or of his inability,
any other justice of the peace of the County of Grundy having an office in said
town shall have the same jurisdiction, power and authority under the laws and
ordinances of said town, as the said police magistrate possesses in like cases.
The rule of practice and proceedings in all cases arising out of the laws or
ordinances of said town, shall conform to the practice and proceedings before
other Justices of the Peace, except cases where such rules of practice and
proceedings shall be changed or modified by the laws or ordinances or charter
of said town, in which case the rule of practice or proceeding shall conform to
the rule prescribed by such laws, ordinances or charter.
Section 27.
In all cases arising under any ordinance of said town or under this act,
changes of venue and appeals shall, when applied for, be allowed to the circuit
court of the County of Grundy in the same manner as is provided in other cases,
before justices of the peace, provided that in all cases arising out of any
ordinance of said town or under this act, if either party wishes to appeal, he
or they shall give notice in writing thereof to the justice of the peace before
whom the case was tried on the day of trial thereof, and shall file the
necessary appeal bond with such justice of the peace within twenty (20) days
from the day of trial.
Section 28.
The town constable of said town shall qualify in such manner as the board of
trustees may by ordinance prescribe and shall have power and authority to
execute all warrants and other processes issued by the police magistrate of
said town, or any other justice of the peace of said County of Grundy; he shall
have and may exercise in all cases the same power and authority that are given
to other constables of said county by the laws of the State of Illinois, and
shall be entitled to like fees for his services and shall in all cases of
nonfeasance and misfeasance of duty be subject to the same penalties and
liabilities that are provided by the law of the State of Illinois for other
constables in like cases.
Section 29.
In all cases arising under the laws or ordinances of said town any constable of
the County of Grundy shall have the same right, power and authority to serve or
execute any process issued therein, original or otherwise, that the said town
constable would possess. Whenever the constable of said town shall see any
person or persons engaged in any assault, assault and battery, riot, rout,
affray, disturbing the peace of the inhabitants of said town, disturbing any
public meeting, religious or otherwise, or unlawful assemblage of any kind
within said town, it shall be his duty to make immediate arrest of such person
or persons on view without warrant, and in all such cases any constable of the
County of Grundy shall have the same power to arrest, without warrant, as the
said town constable in such cases would possess, and in all such cases of
arrest without warrant, the constable making such arrest shall forthwith take
such person or persons before the police magistrate of said town, or in case of
his absence or inability to act, before any justice of the peace having an
office in said town, and shall inform such police magistrate or justice of the
peace of the nature of the offense for which such person or persons were
arrested and the said police magistrate or justice of the peace, shall
thereupon institute a suit against such person or persons and proceed therein
in all the respects the same as if any such person or persons had been arrested
and brought before him under warrant duly issued; the same town constable shall
faithfully perform all other acts and duties required of him by the laws and
ordinances of said town.
Section 30.
Until the board of trustees of said town of Minooka shall provide by ordinance
for enforcing the collection of taxes due said town, the same shall be
collected in the same manner provided in the ninth Section of an act entitled,
"An act to incorporate towns and cities" approved February 10th, 1849, for the
collection of other corporation taxes.
Section 31.
All prosecutions under the laws and ordinances of said town of Minooka for
assaults, assaults and battery, affrays, riots, routs, disturbing the peace of
the inhabitants of said town, disturbing any public meeting, religious or
otherwise, unlawful assemblages of any kind and cases in which the penalty
attached by law or ordinances of said town is imprisonment in the County Jail
of said County of Grundy shall be (except in cases of arrest without warrant as
hereinbefore provided) commenced by complaint and warrant in the same manner
prescribed by the laws of the State of Illinois for the regulation of criminal
proceedings in justice courts, and in all such cases, the rules of practice,
and proceeding shall be the same as are prescribed in such cases for justice
courts by the laws of this State, except when the laws and ordinances of said
town prescribe new rules or different rules of practice or proceeding, in which
case the rule or practice or proceeding shall conform to the rule prescribed by
the laws or ordinances of said town. Provided that the right of trial by jury
shall in no case be denied to any person charged with a breach of any of the
provisions of this act or of any ordinance of said town.
Section 32.
In all other cases for violating the laws or ordinances of said town, the
penalties or penalty therefor shall be recovered by action of debt, in the name
of "the President and Trustees of the town of Minooka," and in all such actions
of debt the first process shall be by summons to be issued, served and returned
as other summons and actions of debt issued by justices of the peace of said
County of Grundy, unless some competent person shall before the commencement of
any such action of debt, file with the justice of the peace before whom such
writ is about to be commenced, an affidavit accusing the person or persons
about to be sued with some one or more violations of the same nature of the
laws or ordinances of said town specifying such offense or offenses, and
stating that he or she verily believes that unless the person or persons so
accused shall be forthwith arrested and brought to trial, there is danger that
the penalty or penalties in such case shall be lost, and specifying the facts,
on which this belief is founded in which case, if the said police magistrate or
justice of the peace shall be of the opinion that there is reason to believe
that the opinion set forth in such affidavit is correct, he may issue a warrant
against the person or persons so accused, causing him or her or them to be
forthwith arrested and brought before him, and he shall proceed at once to the
trial of such suit, which shall be by action of debt for the recovery of the
penalties or penalty attached to the offense or offenses specified in the
affidavit aforesaid and if the said defendant or defendants shall be found
guilty or severally of any one or more of the offenses specified in such
affidavit, the police magistrate or justice of the peace before whom such suit
is tried, shall enter into judgment thereon for the amount of the fines
assessed and the cost of suit as in other cases.
Section 33.
In all actions of debt for offenses committed against the laws or ordinances of
said town, it shall be lawful for the plaintiff in the same suit to allege and
prove and recover for any number of offenses of the same nature, provided, that
the amount recovered shall in no case exceed the sum of one hundred dollars
($100.00). All fines or penalties received or collected for any violation of
the laws or ordinances of said town shall by the person or persons receiving or
collecting the same, be paid into the treasury of said town.
Section 34.
The President and Trustees of said town shall not in any suit in which they are
concerned for the violation of any law or ordinance of said town, either before
the commencement or during the pendency thereof, be compelled to give any
security therein for costs, the president or trustees or any other officer of
said town shall be a competent witness for either party, in any suit for a
violation of the laws or ordinances of said town.
Section 35.
Upon the rendition of any judgment for a breach of any law or ordinance of said
town, the police magistrate or other justice of the peace rendering such
judgment shall forthwith issue an execution for the amount of such judgment and
cost of suit which may be levied upon and collected out of any property of the
defendant or defendants, not exempt from executions by the laws of the State of
Illinois. But if the constable having such execution shall return thereon that
he cannot find sufficient property of the defendant or defendants, not exempt
from execution, to satisfy such execution, then the said justice shall issue a
capias against the body or bodies of the defendant or defendants, and the
constable shall arrest such person or persons and convey him, her or them to
the jail of the County of Grundy thereto remain forty eight (48) hours, and if
the said fines and costs exceed the sum of five dollars ($5.00), then to remain
in said jail twenty four (24) hours for every five dollars ($5.00) over and
above the said five dollars ($5.00), provided, however that if the president
and trustees of said town or other attorney shall require a transcript of the
judgment and costs to be certified to the clerk of said County of Grundy, to
have the same levied upon real property and shall signify the same to such
justice. He shall not issue a capias as aforesaid, but shall, without delay,
certify a transcript thereof, according to law to said clerk which shall be
filed and recorded as in other cases and such judgment shall have from the date
of filing of such transcript, the same force and effect as judgments rendered
in said circuit court in civil cases. Provided, that if the defendant or
defendants shall, in any case arising under the provisions of this act or under
any law or ordinance of said town as hereinbefore provided, signify his, her or
their intention of appealing and shall file the necessary appeal bond within
the time required, the justice shall, if he approve such appeal bond, order the
return of any property that may have been taken under execution to satisfy such
payment.
Section 36.
Whenever it shall become necessary to take private property for opening or
altering any public street or alley, the corporation shall make a just
compensation to the owner or owners of such property and pay or tender the same
before opening or altering such street or alley or before taking any private
property for public use and in case the amount of such compensation cannot be
agreed upon, the police magistrate shall cause the same to be ascertained by a
jury of six (6) disinterested freeholders of said town. All jurors empaneled to
ascertain such damages shall be sworn to that effect. They shall proceed to
examine the property in question and after carefully considering both the
advantages and disadvantages that will probably accrue to the owners thereof by
such taking and the proposed use of such property, they shall within ten (10)
days make out and return their verdict in writing, signed by each of said
jurors, to the police magistrate of said town, assessing to such owner or
owners such damages as they think just. Said police magistrate shall file and
docket such verdict, and shall forthwith cause the president and trustees or
their clerk or attorney and the owner or owners of property, included in such
verdict, to be notified of the contents of the same. The said police magistrate
may at any time within ten (10) days of the filing of such verdict, for good
cause shown set aside such verdict and grant a new inquest of damages. If
either party shall be dissatisfied with the verdict of the second inquest, they
shall be allowed an appeal to the circuit court of the County of Grundy. When
any such verdict, not exceeding the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00), shall
be filed with the police magistrate and entered on his docket, unless set aside
or appealed from, it shall be a judgment against the president and trustees of
said town of Minooka, in favor of such owner, including therein the amount of
damages thereby assessed to him, and in case the sum assessed to any owner,
exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00), the said police magistrate shall on
application of the person entitled thereto, certify to the clerk of the circuit
court of Grundy County a full and complete transcript of the proceedings and
verdict in such case, which shall be filed and recorded by the clerk of the
said court in the same manner as other transcripts from the justice's dockets
and shall from the time of such filing, have all the force and effect in favor
of the person or persons entitled to such damages as a judgment obtained in
said circuit court.
Section 37.
The president and trustees shall require their clerk, and it shall be his duty,
to make and keep a full and faithful record of all their proceedings, by-laws
and ordinances and of the time, place and manner of the publication of such by-
laws and ordinances in a book to be provided for that purpose and such book
purporting to be the record book of the corporation of the said town of
Minooka, shall be received in all courts without further proof as evidence of
the matters therein contained and all ordinances, by-laws, acts, resolutions
and other things pertaining to and concerning the corporation of the town of
Minooka shall be sufficiently proven in any court of law or equity in the State
of Illinois by the production in such court of the book or books in which the
same are recorded in the manner and form hereinafter provided, to-wit:
All ordinances, by-laws or rules passed or established by the board of trustees
of said town before taking effect, shall be published at least ten (10) days in
some newspaper published in said town, or by posting up copies of the same in
at least three (3) public places in said town, and shall be signed by the
president and clerk of the board and authenticated by the common seal of the
corporation, and shall be written out in full on the record book or books of
said corporation, and signed thereon by the president and clerk of the board of
trustees with their own proper signatures and said clerk, at the time of making
such record, shall attach thereon the common seal of the corporation and shall
also note the date of the adoption of said ordinances, by-laws or rules, the
time of the taking effect thereof, and also the time, manner and place or
places of their publication.
Section 38.
In all cases of assault, assault and battery, affrays, riots, routs, disturbing
the peace, disturbing public meetings and unlawful assemblage of any kind
committed within said town of Minooka, after the passage of this act, and
before the board of trustees of said town shall have provided by ordinances for
the punishment of any such offense, the criminal laws of the State of Illinois,
applicable to such offense, shall be deemed and held to be in full force and
effect as to any such offense or offenses.
Section 39.
This act is hereby declared to be a public act, and may be read in evidence in
any and all courts of law and equity in the State of Illinois without proof and
shall take effect and be in force from and after its passage.
 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA      )
                  ) ss.      Office of Secretary
State of Illinois            )
   I, Edward Rummel, Secretary of the State of Illinois, do hereby certify that
the foregoing is a true copy of "An Act to Incorporate the Town of Minooka."
Approved March 27th, 1869.
Now on file in this office.
   In witness whereof, I hereto set my hand and affix the Great Seal of the
State of Illinois at the city of Springfield, this 14th day of December, A.D.
1869.
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL VILLAGE CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1 Title
1-1-2 Acceptance
1-1-3 Amendments
1-1-4 Code Alteration
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon adoption by the Board of Trustees, this Village Code is hereby declared to
be and shall hereafter constitute the official Village Code of the Village of
Minooka. This Village Code of Ordinances shall be known and cited as the
MINOOKA VILLAGE CODE, and it is hereby published by authority of the Board of
Trustees and shall be kept up to date as provided in Section
1-1-3 of this Chapter under the direction of the Village Attorney, acting for
said Village Board of Trustees. Any reference to the number of any section
contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same
number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty
clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is
made to this Village Code by title in any legal document. (1977 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This Village Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in all administrative
tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the Village of general and
permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in Section
1-2-1 of this Code. (1977 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this Village Code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute a sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this Village Code. All
such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this Village Code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the Village Code. (1977 Code)
1-1-4: CODE ALTERATION:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this Village Code in such a manner that
the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages
may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by
the Village Board. The Village Clerk shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the
Village Clerk. Any person having in his custody an official copy of this
Village Code shall make every effort to maintain this Code in an up to date and
efficient manner. He shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement
pages when such are delivered to him or made available to him through the
office of the Village Clerk. Said Code books, while in actual possession of
officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the
Village and shall be returned to the office of the Village Clerk when directed
so to do by order of the Village Board. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1 Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2 Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3 Court Proceedings
1-2-4 Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
All general ordinances of the Village passed prior to the adoption of this
Village Code are hereby repealed, except such as are referred to herein as
being still in force or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections),
from which are excluded the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed:
tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to
boundaries, and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting
special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances
authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the Village; and all special ordinances. (1977 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroads or railroad crossings with streets and other
public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public
utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this Village Code or
by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as this Village Code may contain
provisions for such matters, in which case this Village Code shall be
considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such
provisions only. (1977 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense
or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the
ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment be mitigated by any provision of a new
ordinance, such provision may be, by the consent of the party affected, applied
to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or
implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions
upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now
pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the Village herein
repealed and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code
shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same
provision; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating,
modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the
liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the
Village under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the
adoption of this Village Code. (1977 Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this Village Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The Village Board of
Trustees hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1 Construction Of Words
1-3-2 Definitions
1-3-3 Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
Whenever any word in any section of this Village Code importing the plural
number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons,
any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although
distributive words may not have been used.
When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this Village Code by
words importing the singular number only, or the masculine gender, several
matters, parties or persons and females as well as males and bodies corporate
shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction
shall not be applied to any section of this Village Code which contains any
express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or
content may be repugnant thereto.
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the Village has been
changed in the content of this Village Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section"
and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and
clarification purposes only. Such change to the Village's ordinances is not
meant to amend the passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
(1977 Code)
1-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code they shall have the
meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another.
BOARD: The Board of Trustees of the Village.
CODE: The Village Code of Minooka, and amendments thereto.
COUNTY: The County of Grundy, and/or the County of Will, State of Illinois.
EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village employee by
title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words, "of the
Village of Minooka".
FEE: A sum of money charged by the Village for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation. (1977 Code)
FISCAL AND MUNICIPAL YEAR: The fiscal and municipal year of the Village shall
commence on May 1 of each year, and end on April 30 in each calendar year.
(1904 Code § 13.1)
KNOWINGLY: Imports only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of this Code. It does not require any knowledge
of the unlawfulness of such act or omission.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
MISDEMEANOR: Any offense for which a sentence to a term of imprisonment in
other than a penitentiary for less than one year may be imposed.
NEGLIGENT: Imports a want of such attention to the nature of probable
consequences of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily bestows in
acting in his own concern.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive or obnoxious to the health and welfare of the
inhabitants of the Village; or any act or thing repugnant to, or creating a
hazard to, or having a detrimental effect on the property of another person or
to the community.
OCCUPANT: Applied to a building or land shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this Code.
OFFICERS: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a Village officer by title
only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the Village
of Minooka".
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: Applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner,
tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such
building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in small quantities
direct to the consumer.
STATE: The State of Illinois.
STREET: Includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public squares, public
places and sidewalks.
TENANT: Applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the
whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.
VILLAGE: The Village of Minooka, County of Grundy and/or County of Will, State
of Illinois.
VILLAGE PRESIDENT: The President of the Village.
WHOLESALER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to
relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things in quantity to
persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.
WILFULLY: When applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted,
implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission
referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure
another, or to acquire an advantage.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: Includes printing and any other mode of representing words
and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to
any official or public writing or bond required by law, it shall be in the
proper handwriting of such person, or in case he is unable to write, by his
proper mark. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this Village Code are intended as
mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed
or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify
or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so
deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-
enacted. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1 General Penalty
1-4-2 License Revocation
1-4-3 Application Of Provisions
1-4-4 Liability Of Officers
1-4-5 Administrative Compliance Tickets
1-4-6 Fine Payment Schedule
1-4-7: Third-Party Collections; Fees And Penalties
1-4-8: Persons And Entities Indebted To The Village
1-4-1: GENERAL PENALTY:
   A.   Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the village any act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in
such code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no other specific penalty is provided
or not listed in section
1-4-5 of this chapter, the violation of such provision of this code or any
ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty
dollars ($750.00), or such other amount as provided by law/ordinance, for any
one offense. The revocation of a license or permit shall not be considered a
recovery or penalty so as to bar any other penalty being enforced. Every day
that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   In addition, a penalty imposed for may include, or consist of, a
requirement that the subject accused perform some reasonable public service
work such as, but not limited to, the picking up of litter in public parks or
along public highways or the maintenance of public facilities.
   C.   No imprisonment as authorized by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-
9 for failure to pay any fine, penalty or cost shall exceed six (6) months for
one offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
1-4-2: LICENSE REVOCATION:
When a person is convicted of a violation of any section of this code any
license previously issued him by the village may be revoked by the court or by
the board of trustees, after allowing such licensee to be heard in his own
defense. (1977 Code; amd. 1997 Code)
1-4-3: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
The penalty provided in this chapter shall be applicable to every section of
this code the same as though it were a part of each and every separate section.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day such duty or
obligation remains unperformed or such act continues, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this code.
In all cases where the same offense may be made punishable or shall be created
by different clauses or sections of the ordinances of the village, the
prosecuting officer may elect under which to proceed; but no more than one
recovery shall be had against the same person for the same offense. (Ord. 2011-
29, 12-20-2011)
1-4-4: LIABILITY OF OFFICERS:
No provision of this code designating the duties of any officer or employee
shall be so construed as to make such officer or employee liable for any fine
or penalty provided for a failure to perform such duty, unless the intention of
the board of trustees to impose such fine or penalty on such officer or
employee is specifically and clearly expressed in the section creating the
duty. (1977 Code)
1-4-5: ADMINISTRATIVE COMPLIANCE TICKETS:
   A.   Definition: "Administrative compliance ticket", hereinafter referred to
as ACT, is defined as a courtesy ticket used in the case of ordinance
violations in lieu of arrest or penalty as provided in this code.
   B.   Issuance Of ACT: An ACT may be issued by village police officers and
village code enforcement officers or such other persons as authorized by the
board of trustees.
   C.   Procedure: Any person accused of violating a provision of this code,
except traffic offenses that must be reported to the secretary of state in
accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204, may be issued an ACT in
lieu of arrest or penalty as provided in this code, which requires the violator
to:
      1.   Pay the administrative fee as set forth in subsection E of this
section to the Village within thirty (30) days of the issuance of an ACT as a
settlement and compromise of the claims against the violator.
      2.   Correct, repair or rectify any condition which constitutes a
continuing violation of this Code within the period specified in the ACT.
   D.   Compliance With ACT: If any person to whom ACT has been issued fails
to:
      1.   Settle and pay the claim within the period specified in subsection C
of this section; and/or
      2.   Correct, repair or rectify the violation within the period specified
in the ACT,
   then a hearing date shall be issued to said person for the violation, and
that person shall be subject to fines and penalties as authorized by law/
ordinance, with the maximum amount as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this chapter and all other applicable provisions of this Code.
   E.   Fee Schedule: The administrative fee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00)
unless as otherwise specified. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
Description Code No. Fee
Description                                                                     Code    Fee
                                                                                No.
                                                                                        $25.00
Insufficient funds                                                              1-12-1  plus bank
                                                                                        fees
                                                                                Title
Licensing                                                                       3,      $100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                1
                                                                                Title
Solicitors                                                                      3,      50.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                2
                                                                                Title
Liquor Control Act                                                              3,      250.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                4
Sale of alcohol to a minor                                                      3-4-17A 250.00
Possession/consumption of alcohol by a minor                                    3-4-17B 100.00
Consumption of alcohol in public                                                3-4-20A 75.00
Public intoxication                                                             3-4-20D 75.00
Underage use of video gaming terminal                                           3-5-8A  100.00
Permitting underage person (<21) to use video gaming terminal                   3-5-8B  500.00
Violations of Video Gaming Act or Village Code provisions related to the
licensure of video gaming terminals, except violations related to underage use
of a video gaming terminal (includes, but is not limited to, violations of the  3-5-8C  150.00
Act's requirements regarding: 1) maintenance of a valid liquor license, 2)
hours of operation, and 3) the location of each video gaming terminal)
                                                                                Title
Contractors                                                                     3,      100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                7
                                                                                Title
Tobacco:                                                                        3,       
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                11
                                                                                Section
   First violation in a 24- month period                                     3-11-   200.00
                                                                                2  (A-
                                                                                F)
                                                                                Section
   Second violation in a 24-month period                                     3-11-   400.00
                                                                                2  (A-
                                                                                F)
                                                                                Section
   Third violation in a 24-month period                                      3-11-   600.00
                                                                                2  (A-
                                                                                F)
                                                                                Section
   Fourth or subsequent violation in a 24-month period                       3-11-   800.00
                                                                                2  (A-
                                                                                F)
Possession or use of tobacco by a person under twenty-one (21) years of age     3-11-2  50.00
                                                                                (I)
Failure to obtain a tobacco retailer’s license; selling, or offering for sale
at retail, giving away, delivering to or keeping with the intention of selling  3-11-   $100.00
at retail, tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products with 5  (E)  per day
a suspended or revoked tobacco retailer’s license
                                                                                Title
Business registration:                                                          3,      100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                15
   Failure to cure within 14 days                                                   $100.00
                                                                                        plus fee
   After 14 days, amount per day                                                    $25.00
                                                                                        plus fee
                                                                                Title   See
Building Code and Code regulations                                              4,      section
                                                                                chapter 4-2-12 of
                                                                                2       this Code
                                                                                Title
Swimming pool                                                                   4,      $100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                6
                                                                                Title
Trailer coach and trailer coach parks                                           4,      25.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                11
                                                                                        $100.00
                                                                                        plus cost
Failure to register                                                             4-15-3  of
                                                                                        ownership
                                                                                        search
                                                                                        See
Zoning                                                                          Title 5 section
                                                                                        5-11-10 of
                                                                                        this Code
Parking restrictions for trailers, mobile homes, boats, recreational vehicles,  5-3-10  $ 50.00
and motor vehicles
                                                                                Title
Signs                                                                           5,      50.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                13
Subdivisions                                                                    Title 6 25.00
Nuisance                                                                        7-1-1   100.00
Burning of waste materials                                                      7-1-4   100.00
                                                                                Title
Garbage and refuse                                                              7,      100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                2
Littering                                                                       7-2-4   100.00
                                                                                Title   $200.00
Weeds                                                                           7,      plus cost
                                                                                chapter of mowing
                                                                                3
Disorderly conduct:                                                             8-2-1    
   First violation                                                                  $100.00
   Second violation in a calendar year                                              200.00
   Third violation in a calendar year                                               400.00
Damaging property                                                               8-2-2   200.00
Posting handbills/injuring property                                             8-2-5   200.00
Public indecency                                                                8-2-6   750.00
Fireworks:                                                                      8-2-7    
   First violation                                                                  200.00
   Second violation in a calendar year                                              400.00
   Third violation in a calendar year                                               600.00
Trespass                                                                        8-2-8   100.00
Truancy                                                                         8-3-3   50.00
                                                                                Title
Animal control                                                                  8,      50.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                4
                                                                                Title   $200.00
                                                                                8,      plus cost
Abandoned vehicles                                                              chapter of towing
                                                                                5       and
                                                                                        storage
                                                                                        See
False alarm systems                                                             8-6-7B  subsection
                                                                                        8-6-7B of
                                                                                        this Code
                                                                                        See
Burglar alarm systems                                                           8-6-7C  subsection
                                                                                        8-6-7C of
                                                                                        this Code
                                                                                        $400.00
                                                                                        plus cost
Administrative tow fee                                                          8-7-3   of towing
                                                                                        and
                                                                                        storage
                                                                                Title   See
Disabled person                                                                 9,      section
                                                                                chapter 9-1-27 of
                                                                                1       this Code
                                                                                Title
Parking at the curb                                                             9,      $30.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                1
                                                                                Title
Traffic violations, except moving violations                                    9,      60.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                1
Distracted driving                                                              9-1-19  60.00
Prohibited parking                                                              9-1-20  30.00
                                                                                        See
Overweight                                                                      9-1-21  section
                                                                                        9-1-27 of
                                                                                        this Code
Exhibition driving                                                              9-1-22  $60.00
                                                                                        $50.00
Snowfall parking                                                                9-1-24  plus cost
                                                                                        of tow
Engine braking                                                                  9-1-25  $250.00
                                                                                        $100.00
                                                                                        plus
Connection of water without permit                                              10-3-9  estimated
                                                                                        cost of
                                                                                        water
                                                                                        usage
Water meter required                                                            10-3-17 $100.00
Emergency water conservation                                                    10-3-18 100.00
                                                                                Title
Water cross connection                                                          10,     100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                4
                                                                                Title
Village parks                                                                   10,     100.00
                                                                                chapter
                                                                                5
 
(Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011; amd. Ord. 2012-09, 4-24-2012; Ord. 2013-04, 1-22-
2013; Ord. 2014-24, 7-22-2014; Ord. 2015-23, 9-22-2015; Ord. 2016-23, 7-26-
2016; Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017; Ord. 2019-08, 2-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
1-4-6: FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE:
The fine payment schedule shall read as follows:
FINE PAYMENT SCHEDULE
 
                            Standing And Parking
                            Violations
                            (Except Handicap),
                            Condition And Use Of     Handicapped Parking
                            Vehicle Equipment, And
                            Display Of Wheel Tax
                            License
Step 1: If you are served
with a "violation notice"
and pay before the first    Amount of the fine per   Amount of the fine per
hearing, or appear at the   village ordinance        state statute
first hearing and found
liable, the fine shall be:
Step 2: If you fail to
appear at the first         Double the amount of the Double the amount of the
hearing, the fine must be   fine                     fine; maximum amount
paid before the second                               $1,000.00
hearing and shall be:
Step 3: If you fail to
appear at the second        Double the amount due;   Double the amount due;
hearing, the fine must be   maximum amount $250.00   maximum amount $1,000.00
paid before the third
hearing and shall be:
Step 4: If you fail to
appear at the third         Double the amount due;   Double the amount due;
hearing, or upon a final    maximum amount $250.00   maximum amount $1,000.00
determination of liability,
the fine shall be:
 
(Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
1-4-7: THIRD-PARTY COLLECTIONS; FEES AND PENALTIES:
   A.   In the event that any fine, charge, fee, penalty, or payment, however
described, due and owing to the Village pursuant to any provision of the
Village Code (a “Debt”) goes unpaid for more than thirty (30) days (unless
another timeframe is specified elsewhere in this Code) after the person
responsible for such payment (the “Responsible Person”) has been notified of
the existence of such outstanding Debt as set forth in the various provisions
of this Code, or if none is stated by written notice personally delivered or
mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Responsible Person
at their last known address on file with the Village (or if none then at their
last known address as determined by the Village after a diligent search), the
Village may transfer or assign said Debt to a private collection agency or
attorney of the Village’s choosing for collection purposes. Any such collection
agency or attorney shall, for the purposes of collecting any Debt so
transferred or assigned, be deemed an agent of the Village. Nothing in this
Section is intended or shall be deemed to limit or restrict the Village’s
ability to pursue any and all rights, remedies, and causes of action as may be
available to it at law or in equity in the normal course of its business.
   B.   In the event that the Village transfers or assigns any Debt to a
private collection agency or attorney for collection, a collection fee equal to
thirty-five percent (35%) of the outstanding Debt will be assessed against the
Responsible Person and added to the balance of the Debt in order to offset the
Village’s costs, expenses, and fees associated with collection.
   C.   In the event that the Village pursues collection of any Debt by any
other means, the Responsible Person shall be held liable to the Village for any
and all costs, expenses, and fees, including without limitation a reasonable
attorney’s fee, incurred by the Village for the collection of such Debt, which
shall be added to the balance of the Debt as an additional fine, charge, fee,
penalty, or payment, as the case may be, subject to any applicable statutory
limitations. (Ord. 2022-12, 3-22-2022; amd. Ord. 2023-10, 2-28-2023)
1-4-8: PERSONS AND ENTITIES INDEBTED TO THE VILLAGE:
   A.   Delinquent Debts. No license, permit, inspection, approval,
professional service, or other Village service or benefit required or permitted
by this Code and necessary for the engaging in any business or the sale of any
article shall be issued to or renewed, granted, performed, or otherwise
approved for any person or entity indebted to the Village or any department
thereof where such indebtedness is due and owing in excess of thirty (30) days,
unless such indebtedness is first paid in full, unconditionally, and without
protest.
   B.   Delinquent Fines and Penalties. No license, permit, inspection,
approval, professional service, or other Village service or benefit required or
permitted by this Code and necessary for the engaging in any business or the
sale of any article shall be issued to or renewed, granted, performed, or
otherwise approved for any person or entity indebted to the Village for any
fine or penalty adjudged against such person or entity for the violation of any
ordinance or ordinances of the Village where such fine or penalty is due and
owing in excess of thirty (30) days, unless such fine or penalty is first paid
in full, unconditionally, and without protest.
   C.   Village Staff to Determine Indebtedness. Before any Village official or
employee considers any application or request for the issuance, renewal,
granting, performance, or approval of any license, permit, inspection,
approval, professional service, or other Village service or benefit required or
permitted by this Code, such official or employee shall first determine whether
the applicant is indebted to the Village for any amount due and owing in excess
of thirty (30) days. If any monies are found to be due and owing to the Village
in excess of thirty (30) days, said official or employee shall refuse to
consider the application or request until such a time as all monies due and
owing to the Village have been paid in full and without protest.
   D.   Appeals. Any person or entity, however described, desiring to challenge
any bill, fee, or expense issued by the Village under any provision of this
Code shall have the right to appeal such bill, fee, or expense to the finance
committee of the Village Board within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of
the invoice. The appeal must be in writing and shall contain a specific request
for a hearing. If a hearing is requested, a hearing before the finance
committee shall take place at the next regular meeting of the finance
committee, but not earlier than fourteen (14) days after the written appeal is
submitted. The finance committee shall issue a written decision within fourteen
(14) days of the hearing. Where a hearing is not requested, the appealing party
shall submit all supporting documentation with the written appeal and the
finance committee shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14) days
after the consideration of the appeal at a regular meeting of the finance
committee. The failure of any such person or entity to file a written appeal
shall be deemed to constitute acceptance and approval of the amount(s) owed
and/or services performed.
   E.   Non-exclusivity of Remedy. Notwithstanding any provision of this
section, the Village shall have all other rights and remedies as may be
available to it at law or equity for the collection of outstanding debts. (Ord.
2023-9, 2-28-2023)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PRESIDENT
SECTION:
1-5-1 Election; Term Of Office
1-5-2 Bond; Oath
1-5-3 Duties
1-5-4 Appointment Of Officers
1-5-1: ELECTION; TERM OF OFFICE:
The Village President shall be elected every other odd numbered year for a term
of four (4) years, and serve as President of the Board of Trustees, as provided
by statute. (1977 Code)
1-5-2: BOND; OATH:
   A.   Bond: Before entering upon the duties of his office, the President
shall give bond in the sum of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), with surety
to be approved by the Board of Trustees, conditioned upon his faithful
performance of his duties.
   B.   Oath: He shall take the oath of office prescribed by statute. (1977
Code)
1-5-3: DUTIES:
The Village President is the chief executive officer of the Village, and shall
perform all duties required of him by statute or ordinance. He shall supervise
the executive officers of the Village, and have the power and authority to
inspect all books and records kept by any officer of the Village at any time.
(1977 Code)
1-5-4: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
The Village President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the
Board of Trustees, all officers of the Village whose appointment or election is
not otherwise provided for.
He may delegate to any officer any duty to be performed; and whenever there is
a question as to the respective duties and powers of any officer of the
Village, this shall be settled by the Village President. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 6
VILLAGE BOARD OF TRUSTEES
SECTION:
1-6-1 Meetings
1-6-2 Quorum
1-6-3 Village President To Advise
1-6-4 Committees
1-6-5 Rules Of Order
1-6-1: MEETINGS:
   A.   Regular Meetings: There shall be a regular meeting of the Village
President and Board of Trustees at the Village Hall on the following days:
      1.   The fourth Tuesday of each month at six thirty o'clock (6:30) P.M.
      2.   If any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, then the Board
shall designate another meeting date.
   B.   Special Meetings: The Village President or any two (2) Trustees may
call special meetings of the Board of Trustees and each Trustee, if in the
Village, shall be notified of all special meetings.
   C.   Meetings Open To The Public: All meetings shall be open to the public
in compliance with State law. (Ord. 2017-21, 10-24-2017)
1-6-2: QUORUM:
   A.   In order to constitute a quorum for all public meetings of the Village
Board, a majority of the Corporate Authorities must be physically present for
the transaction of business, but a lesser number may organize and adjourn, from
day to day, and may compel the attendance of absent members.
   B.   At a regular meeting, special meeting or committee meeting of the Board
of Trustees, if a quorum is physically present, a Trustee or the Village
President ("Board member") may attend the meeting by video or audio conference
if the Board member is prevented from physically attending because of: 1)
personal illness or disability, 2) employment purposes or the business of the
Village, or 3) family or other emergency, so long as the Board member notifies
the Village Clerk before the meeting (unless advance notice is impractical) and
the Board member participates by video or audio conference.
   C.   After a roll call establishing that a quorum is physically present
where a Board member desires to attend by video or audio conference, the
presiding officer shall state that: 1) notice was received by a Board member to
attend by video or audio conference, and 2) the Board member will be deemed
authorized to attend, unless a motion objecting to the Board member's
attendance is made, seconded, and approved by two-thirds (2/3) of the Corporate
Authorities physically present at the meeting. (Ord. 2006-52, 12-19-2006)
1-6-3: VILLAGE PRESIDENT TO ADVISE:
The Village President shall, annually and from time to time, give the Board of
Trustees information relative to the affairs of the Village, and shall
recommend for their consideration such measures as he may deem expedient. (1904
Code § 2.4)
1-6-4: COMMITTEES:
At the first regular meeting of the Board of Trustees held after the regular
Village election and qualification of the Village President and members of the
Board, or as soon thereafter as is convenient, and at the first regular meeting
in the month of May in nonelection years, the Village President, with the
advice and consent of the Board of Trustees, shall:
   A.   Name the standing committees and Commission members, which shall
include:
      1.   Finance.
      2.   Economic development/public relations.
      3.   Public works.
      4.   Parks and recreation.
      5.   Public safety.
      6.   Ordinances/building.
      7.   Board of local improvements, to consist of two (2) trustees with the
village president as chairman.
      8.   Budget, to consist of all trustees to annually review the budget for
presentation to the village board prior to the beginning of the fiscal year.
      9.   Liquor Commission, to consist of two (2) trustees with the village
president as chairman.
      10.   Forestry Commission, with membership as set forth in Section
2-6-1 of this Code.
Unless otherwise specified above, the committees shall consist of up to three
(3) trustees, each with one trustee to be designated as committee chair.
Members of the above specified committees shall hold their offices for one year
or until their successors are appointed. When a vacancy shall occur in any of
the above committees, the village president shall fill the same forthwith with
the advice and consent of the village board. No member of the board of trustees
shall be excused from serving on committees.
   B.   There is established a standing committee known as the committee of the
whole, which shall consist of the village president and all of the trustees.
      1.   The committee of the whole shall consider and discuss, but not act
upon, affairs of the village.
      2.   A quorum of the committee of the whole shall not be less than four
(4). The village president shall serve as chair of the committee of the whole
and conduct the order and consideration of business of the committee of the
whole. In the absence of the village president, the trustees shall appoint one
of their number to act as temporary chairman, who shall perform the duties of
chair for the time being.
      3.   The committee of the whole shall meet on the dates as determined by
the annual reorganizational meeting or thereafter. If any committee of the
whole meeting falls on a legal holiday, then the committee of the whole shall
designate another meeting date. The village president or any two (2) trustees
may call special meetings of the committee of the whole and each trustee shall
be notified of all special meetings.
      4.   Committee of the whole agendas will be prepared by the village
administrator or clerk at direction of the village president and village board.
Any village board member can place an item on the agenda by contacting the
president, administrator, or clerk.
   C.   Ad hoc committees may be established by the village president, subject
to advice and consent of the village board, for matters that the village
president and board deem appropriate. (Ord. 2007-26, 5-22-2007; Ord. 2019-19,
8-27-2019; Ord. 2021-10, 5-5-2021)
1-6-5: RULES OF ORDER:
At all meetings of the village president and board of trustees the following
rules of order shall be observed:
   Rule 1. The village president shall preside at all meetings of the board of
trustees, and shall take the chair at the time appointed for the board to meet,
and shall immediately call the members to order; and the president may and
shall, at the request of the members present, order the attendance of absent
members.
   Rule 2. In the absence of the village president at any meeting, the board of
trustees shall appoint one of their number to act as chairman pro tem, who
shall perform the duties of chairman for the time being.
   Rule 3. At each meeting of the board of trustees, business shall be taken up
(unless otherwise ordered) in the following order:
      1.   Calling the roll of members, noting those absent as well as those
present.
      2.   Reading minutes of previous meeting.
      3.   Reading and referring communications other than petitions.
      4.   Unfinished business.
      5.   Reports of committees.
      6.   Petitions and accounts.
      7.   New business.
   Rule 4. The village president shall have the right to decide all questions
of order, subject to an appeal to the board of trustees.
   Rule 5. The village president shall preserve decorum, and if any member
transgresses the rules of the board of trustees, the village president shall,
or any member may, call to order, in which case the member called to order
shall immediately sit down and be silent, unless permitted to explain; and the
board of trustees, if applied to, shall decide the matter.
   Rule 6. Every member present when a question is put, shall vote, unless
personally interested, or the board of trustees shall, for special reason
excuse him; except the village president shall not vote except in case of a
tie, when he shall give the casting vote.
   Rule 7. Every motion, resolution or proposition shall, if the village
president, village clerk or any other member require it, be reduced to writing.
   Rule 8. When a motion is made, it shall be deemed to be in possession of the
board of trustees, and shall be started by the president, or, being in writing,
shall be read previous to debate.
   Rule 9. After the motion is stated by the village president, or read, it may
be withdrawn by the mover thereof at any time before decision or amendment, on
leave of the board of trustees.
   Rule 10. All questions shall be put: "As many as are in favor of (as the
case may be) say 'aye', contrary, 'no'", and in doubtful cases the president
may direct or any member may call for a division.
   Rule 11. No vote of the board of trustees shall be considered at a special
meeting unless at such special meeting there be present as large a number of
trustees as were present when such vote was taken.
   Rule 12. Upon request of any two (2) trustees present, final action on any
report of a committee of the board of trustees shall be deferred to the next
regular meeting of the board after the report is made.
   Rule 13. When a question is before the board of trustees, no motion shall be
received, unless to adjourn, to lay on the table, the previous question, to
amend, to refer or to postpone, the first three (3) of which shall be decided
without debate.
   Rule 14. A motion to adjourn shall always be in order, unless the board of
trustees is engaged in voting.
   Rule 15. The previous question shall be put in these words, "Shall the main
question now be put?" and if decided in the affirmative, the question shall be
immediately taken on the main question, and amendments thereto pending, in
their order.
   Rule 16. Any member may call for a division of the question when the sense
will admit thereof.
   Rule 17. The ayes and nays shall be taken and recorded upon the passage of
all ordinances, and on all propositions to create any liability against the
village, or for the expenditure of its money, and in all other cases upon the
call of any one member; and the concurrence of a majority of all the trustees
elected shall be necessary to the passage of any such ordinance or proposition;
but a concurrence of two-thirds (2/3) of all the trustees elected shall be
required to sell any village property.
   Rule 18. Any member may protest against the passage of any ordinance,
resolution or order of the board of trustees, and have such protest entered
upon the journal.
   Rule 19. All committees shall be appointed by the village president, unless
otherwise ordered by the board of trustees; provided, that the standing
committees of the board of trustees shall always be appointed by the village
president.
   Rule 20. No member shall leave the meetings of the board of trustees in
session, except by unanimous consent.
   Rule 21. All ordinances shall be read before final passage, and shall not be
ordered to be put upon their final passage at the same meeting at which they
are introduced, if objections are made by any member of the board of trustees
to any further consideration until the next regular meeting.
   Rule 22. No personalities or reflections injurious to the feelings or
harmony of the board of trustees shall be tolerated, and the members indulging
in the same shall be called to order by the village president.
   Rule 23. Members shall rise to speak or make a motion and shall respectfully
address the chair as "Mr. President" and shall not proceed until their names
are called by that officer.
   Rule 24. When the village president is personally interested in the decision
of any question, the village clerk shall put the motion.
   Rule 25. All ordinances passed by the board of trustees shall be signed by
the village president and attested by the village clerk. (1904 Code § 2.6; amd.
1997 Code)
   Rule 26. The village president or village clerk shall be responsible for
meeting agenda. All subjects to be placed on the agenda shall be requested or
submitted to either the village president or village clerk before twelve
o'clock (12:00) noon on the Friday prior to the meeting. Only business on the
meeting agenda shall be presented to the board of trustees, except by majority
agreement of the board of trustees. (Ord. 1978-8, 1978; amd. 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 7
VILLAGE OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-7-1 Appointment Of Officers
1-7-2 Bonds Of Officers
1-7-3 Removal Of Officers
1-7-4 Vacancies
1-7-5 Salaries, Compensation Of Certain Officers
1-7-6 Village Clerk
1-7-7 Village Treasurer
1-7-8 Village Attorney
1-7-9 Illinois Municipal Retirement Fund, Agent
1-7-10 Lions Park Director (Rep. by Ord. 2016-26, 7-26-2016)
1-7-11 Village Administrator
1-7-12 Budget Officer
1-7-1: APPOINTMENT OF OFFICERS:
   A.   At the first regular meeting of the board of trustees held after the
regular village election and qualification of the village president and/or
members of the board (every 2 years), or as soon thereafter as is convenient,
the village president and board of trustees shall appoint a village attorney
and village engineer who shall hold office during the municipal years for which
they are appointed, unless sooner removed and until their successors are
appointed and qualified.
   B.   All officers not specifically listed in subsection A of this section
shall be appointed by the village president, subject to the advice and consent
of the village board, and shall serve for the term of office of the village
president unless sooner removed and until their successors are appointed and
qualified. (Ord. 2007-26, 5-22-2007)
1-7-2: BONDS OF OFFICERS:
The village clerk and the village treasurer shall each, before entering upon
the duties of his office, execute a bond with security to be approved by the
village president and board of trustees payable to the village in such penal
sum as may, by resolution, be directed by the board, conditioned for the
faithful performance of the duties of his office, and the payment of all monies
received by such officers according to law and the provisions of this code. All
such bonds shall be filed with the village clerk, except that of the clerk,
which shall be filed with the village treasurer. (1904 Code § 29.2; amd. 1977
Code)
1-7-3: REMOVAL OF OFFICERS:
Any officer appointed by the village president and board of trustees may be
removed by a vote of four-fifths (4/5) of the board for incompetency or for any
neglect, deviation or violation of his duty, whenever the board of trustees
deems the interests of the village shall require such removal; provided, that
no officer shall be removed as aforesaid without being first notified by the
village president or village clerk of such intended removal and the grounds
therefor, and shall have the opportunity to exculpate himself before the board
from the charges against him. (1904 Code § 29.12)
1-7-4: VACANCIES:
Whenever any vacancies shall occur in any manner whatever in any of the offices
provided for in this chapter, the village president and board of trustees shall
fill such vacancy at their next regular meeting, unless the interests of the
village require it to be done sooner, in which event the village president or
any two (2) members of the board may call a special meeting for that purpose.
(1904 Code § 29.13)
1-7-5: SALARIES, COMPENSATION OF CERTAIN OFFICERS:
   A.   The village president and board of trustees may establish and fix the
amount of salary to be paid any and all village officers as the case may be,
except members of such legislative body, in the annual appropriation bill or
ordinance made for the purpose of providing for the annual expenses of the
village, or by some ordinance prior to the passage of such annual appropriation
bill or ordinance; and the salaries or compensation thus fixed or established
shall neither be increased nor diminished by such legislative authority during
the year for which such appropriation is made, and no extra compensation shall
ever be allowed to any such officer or employee over and above that provided in
the manner aforesaid, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
   B.   Compensation of certain village officers shall be as follows:
      1.   The village president shall receive as compensation the sum of ten
thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per year. In addition, the village president
shall be reimbursed for his/her telephone expenses.
      2.   Each member of the board of trustees shall receive as compensation
for his/her services the sum of sixty dollars ($60.00) for each meeting of the
board of trustees attended by him/her, and the sum of twenty five dollars
($25.00) for each committee meeting of the board of trustees attended by him/
her.
      3.   Each member of the planning and zoning commission shall receive as
compensation for his/her services the sum of thirty five dollars ($35.00) for
each meeting of the planning and zoning commission attended by him/her. (Ord.
2017-06, 2-28-2017)
1-7-6: VILLAGE CLERK:
It shall be the duty of the village clerk:
   A.   To attend all meetings of the board of trustees.
   B.   To keep a full record of the board's proceedings in the journal of the
board.
   C.   To record in a book to be kept for that purpose all ordinances which
are passed by the board.
   D.   To post in three (3) public places in the village copies of such
ordinances as are required by law to be published, within ten (10) days after
the passage thereof, or cause the same to be published in pamphlet form, or in
some newspaper of general circulation published in the village.
   E.   To make at the foot of the record of each ordinance a memorandum of the
date of its passage and of publishing or posting thereof.
   F.   To keep and safely preserve all papers, books and documents pertaining
to his office.
   G.   To have the custody and charge of the corporate seal and all papers,
books, maps and documents belonging to the village when not in actual use by
some village officer.
   H.   To deliver, without delay, to the village president and board of
trustees all communications and documents addressed to the same which may come
to his hands.
   I.   To provide, at the expense of the village, all necessary books and
stationery for the use of the village president and board of trustees.
   J.   To keep a correct account between the village and the treasurer by
charging the treasurer with all monies received by him as shown by his
duplicate receipts accompanying the treasurer's monthly reports, and crediting
him with all monies paid out by him by order of the village president and board
of trustees, and such other credits as he may be entitled to by law and the
village ordinances.
   K.   To make out and countersign all warrants drawn upon the treasurer by
order of the village president and board of trustees, and keep in his office
memoranda thereof showing the date of each order, the amount, in whose favor
and for what purpose the same was drawn.
   L.   To perform such other acts in addition to the above as are now or
hereafter may be required of him by the ordinances of the village or resolution
of the village president and board of trustees. (1904 Code § 29.3)
1-7-7: VILLAGE TREASURER:
It shall be the duty of the village treasurer:
   A.   To receive all monies belonging to the village, and to keep correct and
true account of the same in an intelligible manner, showing when and for whom
and on what account received, and when, to whom and on what account paid out,
keeping a separate account of each fund or appropriation, and the debits and
credits belonging thereto.
   B.   To give every person paying money to the treasury a receipt therefor
specifying the date of payment and upon what account paid, copies of which
receipts he shall file with the village clerk at the date of his monthly
reports.
   C.   To render to the village president and board of trustees at each
regular monthly meeting of the same a report, under oath, showing the state of
the treasury at the date of such report and the balance of money in the
treasury, which report he shall accompany with a detailed statement of all
monies received into the treasury from the date of the preceding monthly
report, together with all warrants redeemed and paid by him, which warrants he
shall stamp or mark "paid", and he shall deliver the same with any and all
other vouchers held by him to the village clerk upon every day of such
settlement to be filed in the clerk's office.
   D.   To pay out all monies that may be ordered by the board of trustees,
upon warrants signed by the village president of the board and countersigned by
the village clerk, and keep a register of all warrants redeemed and paid
describing such warrants by showing the amount, number, the fund from which
paid, of each warrant and the name of the person to whom paid, and when paid.
   E.   To, annually between May 1 and May 10, make out and file with the
village clerk a full and detailed statement or account of all receipts and
expenditures of the village as shown by the books of his office, up to the date
of the statement, and of all his transactions as village treasurer, and shall
show in such account the state of the treasury at the close of each fiscal
year, which account the clerk of the village shall immediately post in place of
holding meetings of the board of trustees.
   F.   In addition to the duties herein enumerated, the village treasurer
shall perform such other duties as now are, or hereafter may be, required of
him by ordinance of the village or by the laws of the state. (1904 Code § 29.4)
1-7-8: VILLAGE ATTORNEY:
   A.   The duties of the village attorney shall be:
      1.   To prepare such ordinances as the same may be requested by the
village board or any of its members.
      2.   To confer with and advise the village board or any of its members on
any legal matters.
      3.   To prosecute violations of its ordinances and in general to do
everything in and about the premises as may be designated from time to time by
the village board. (Ord. 1931-1, 5-8-1931)
   B.   The salary of the village attorney shall be established by the village
board. (1977 Code; amd. 1997 Code)
1-7-9: ILLINOIS MUNICIPAL RETIREMENT FUND, AGENT:
The village treasurer is hereby appointed the authorized agent for the village
in the performance of all duties in regard to the administration of the
Illinois municipal retirement fund act, effective May 7, 1973. He shall have
the following powers and duties as such agent:
   A.   To certify to the fund whether or not a person is authorized to
participate in the fund.
   B.   To file a petition for nomination, and to case the ballot for election
of an executive trustee of the fund.
   C.   To certify to the fund that a participating employee is on an
authorized leave of absence. (Res. 73-6, 5-7-1973; amd. 1977 Code)
1-7-10: LIONS PARK DIRECTOR:
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-26, 7-26-2016)
1-7-11: VILLAGE ADMINISTRATOR:
The office of village administrator is hereby created subject to the provisions
of this section.
   A.   Qualifications: The village administrator shall be appointed by the
village president with the advice and consent of the board of trustees solely
on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications with special
reference to specific professional education for, actual experience in, and
knowledge of accepted practice in respect to the administration of local
government and to the duties of the office as specified below. The appointment
shall be made without consideration of the candidate's race, sex, politics, or
religious beliefs. The person appointed to this office need not be a resident
of the village or of the state of Illinois at the time of appointment. Neither
the village president nor any member of the village board shall receive such
appointment during their term of office or within two (2) years after the
expiration of that term.
   B.   Employment Contract; Term: The village administrator shall be employed
by contract, the terms of which shall be agreed upon by both the village
administrator and a majority of the corporate authorities of the village. The
term of the village administrator shall be for no less than one year and no
longer than the term of the village president holding office at the time the
contract is entered.
   C.   Compensation: The rate of compensation of the village administrator
shall be set by the village president and board of trustees and may be adjusted
from time to time as the village board deems appropriate. Subject to the terms
and conditions of state law and this section, the village board and the
administrator shall enter into an employment contract which specifies in
writing the level of compensation and other appropriate agreements describing
the working relationship between the administrator and the village board.
   D.   Removal: The village administrator shall serve at the pleasure of the
village president and the board of trustees. The administrator may be removed
from office by the village president with the advice and consent of four (4)
members of the board of trustees.
   E.   Oath And Bond: Before entering upon the duties of this office, the
village administrator shall furnish a bond in such amount and with such surety
as may be approved by the board of trustees, but not to be less than twenty
thousand dollars ($20,000.00). The cost of such bond shall be paid by the
village.
   Before entering upon the duties of this office, the village administrator
shall take and subscribe the oath prescribed by the statutes of the state of
Illinois in such case provided.
   F.   Temporary Absence: During the temporary absence or disability of the
village administrator, the village president with the advice and consent of the
board of trustees may designate some qualified person to act as village
administrator until such time as the village administrator returns to duty.
   G.   Powers And Duties: The village administrator under and subject to the
direction of the village president and the board of trustees shall be the chief
administrator of the village and shall be responsible to the village president
and board of trustees for the proper administration of the affairs of the
village. To that end, the village administrator shall have the authority and
shall be required to:
      1.   On behalf of the village president and board of trustees,
administer, supervise and control the affairs of the village in accordance with
the policies set by the village president and board of trustees.
      2.   Cooperate with such advisory boards and commissions that the village
board has and shall create at the direction from the village board.
      3.   Supervise and coordinate the work of all departments of the village
in accordance with policies set by the president and board of trustees.
      4.   Recommend for appointment, promotion, and dismissal the department
heads and all personnel necessary to fill all positions created by the village
board which are vacant.
      5.   Receive and investigate all complaints in relation to matters
concerning the administration of the government of the village and the services
maintained by the public utilities in the village and see that all franchises,
permits and privileges granted by the village are faithfully observed.
      6.   Purchase all materials, supplies and equipment subject to and
pursuant to directives of the village board and within the bounds of the
appropriations. These purchases shall be subject to and conform with the law as
set forth in the statutes of the state of Illinois, especially those laws
pertaining to the creation of liabilities against the village and pertaining to
the expenditure of monies appropriated by the village. The village
administrator shall make all necessary purchases of supplies and equipment for
all departments of the village and for that purpose is authorized to make
expenditures of up to one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) without
preliminary authorization of the village board. All expenditures are subject to
the confirmation or approval of the village board and must be limited to the
budget or special appropriation. The village administrator may propose rules
and regulations governing requisitions and the transaction of the business of
purchasing between himself as purchasing agent and the heads of departments,
officers and employees of the village.
      7.   Prepare or cause to be prepared on or before April 1 of each year a
budget report indicating the funds necessary to defray the estimated expenses
of the village for the fiscal year:
         a.   Prepare or cause to be prepared the annual appropriation
ordinance in time for consideration and enactment by the village board as
required by statute.
         b.   Prepare or cause to be prepared the annual tax levy. Nothing
herein set forth shall give the village administrator powers not permitted by
professional ethics and standards.
      8.   Promptly following the end of the fiscal year, submit to the village
board a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the
village for said fiscal year.
      9.   Each month present to the village board a joint statement with the
village treasurer showing the financial condition of the village as of the end
of the preceding month and showing expended amounts and unexpended balances for
each department in accordance with the annual budget.
      10.   Keep a current inventory of all real and personal property of the
village and location of such property. The village administrator shall be
responsible for the care and the custody of all village property which is not
by statute or ordinance assigned to some other officer or body for caring and
control.
      11.   Devote his entire time to the discharge of his official duties, or
in the case of a part time village administrator, shall devote the time agreed
upon with the village to the discharge of his official duties.
      12.   Submit to the village board all matters requiring village board
action or attention. All offices and departments shall submit all matters
requiring village board action or attention to the village administrator. All
requests by the village board of employees or departments relating to the
village board's administrative supervision and control of the affairs of the
village and employees shall be submitted to the village administrator who shall
then act on behalf of the village board in accordance with the board's
direction.
      13.   Attend all meetings of the village board. The village administrator
shall have the right to take part in the discussion of all matters coming
before the village board, but shall have no right to vote. (Ord. 1999-14, 6-8-
1999)
1-7-12: BUDGET OFFICER:
   A.   Adoption Of Budget Law: The village of Minooka hereby adopts sections
8-2-9.1 through 8-2-9.10 of the Illinois municipal code1. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.1 –
5/8-2-9.10.1 to establish a budget officer, to be designated by the village
president with the approval of the corporate authorities. The budget officer
shall take an oath and post a bond as provided in section 3.1-10-25 of the
Illinois municipal code2. 65 ILCS 5/3.1-10-25.2.
   B.   Position Established: The position of village budget officer is hereby
established as an officer of the village of Minooka. The village administrator
shall serve as village budget officer.
   C.   Duties: The village budget officer shall have the following powers and
duties:
      1.   To permit and encourage and establish the use of efficient planning,
budgeting, auditing, reporting, accounting and other fiscal management
procedures in all village departments, commissions and boards.
      2.   To compile an annual budget in accordance with state law governing
the compilation and contents of budgets3. 65 ILCS 5/8-2-9.3.3 .
      3.   To examine all books and records of all village departments,
commissions and boards which relate to monies received by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards; and paid out by the village, its
departments, commissions and boards, debts and accounts receivable; and amounts
owed by or to the village, its departments, commissions and boards.
      4.   To obtain such additional information from the village, its
departments, commissions and boards as may be useful to the village budget
officer for purposes of compiling a municipal budget, such information to be
furnished by the village, its departments, commissions and boards in the form
required by the village budget officer. Any department, commission or board
which refuses to make such information as is requested of it available to the
village budget officer shall not be permitted to make expenditures under any
subsequent budget for the village until such department, commission, or board
has complied in full with the request of the village budget officer.
      5.   To establish and maintain such procedures as shall ensure that no
expenditures are made by the village, its departments, commissions or boards
except as authorized by the budget. (Ord. 2003-05, 2-11-2003)
CHAPTER 8
VILLAGE ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-8-1 Election Regulations
1-8-2 Inauguration Of Officers
1-8-1: ELECTION REGULATIONS:
The elections within the Village shall be conducted pursuant to 10 Illinois
Compiled Statutes. (1977 Code)
1-8-2: INAUGURATION OF OFFICERS:
The terms of newly elected Village officers shall commence on the first day of
May following the proclamation of the results of the election within the
Village at which such officers are elected. (Ord. 1987-11, 9-28-1987)
CHAPTER 9
VILLAGE DEPOSITORIES
SECTION:
1-9-1 Depositories Designated
1-9-1: DEPOSITORIES DESIGNATED:
CIBC, BMO Harris Bank, N.A., Illinois Funds, Heartland Bank, Busey Bank,
Illinois Metropolitan Investment Fund ("IMET"), First Midwest Bank, Illinois
National Bank, Charles Schwab, 5/3 Securities, Inc., PFM Asset Management,
Illinois Trust, PMA Asset Management, OSB Bank, Republic Bank, U.S. Bank and
Wells Fargo Bank are designated as depositories in which the funds of the
Village may be deposited to its credit by any officer, agent, or employee of
the Village.
Any two (2) of the following persons are designated to sign checks withdrawing
funds from such accounts and said banks are hereby authorized and directed to
honor, pay and charge the account of the Village all checks and orders for the
payment of money so drawn when so signed by both persons:
   A.   Village Treasurer.
   B.   Village Clerk.
   C.   Village President.
   D.   Village Administrator.
For the police department bank accounts, any two (2) of the following persons
are designated to sign checks withdrawing funds from such accounts and said
banks are hereby authorized and directed to honor, pay and charge the account
of the Village all checks and orders for the payment of money so drawn when so
signed by both persons along with the persons noted above:
   A.   Police Chief.
   B.   Police Clerk Supervisor.
   C.   Village Treasurer.
   D.   Village Administrator. (Ord. 2018-11, 5-22-2018; amd. Ord. 2021-11, 5-
5-2021; Ord. 2022-1, 1-25-2022; Ord. 2022-11, 2-22-2022)
CHAPTER 10
CORPORATE SEAL
SECTION:
1-10-1 Design Of Seal
1-10-2 Custody
1-10-1: DESIGN OF SEAL:
A seal, the margin or upper outer circle of which shall contain the words,
VILLAGE OF MINOOKA, ILLINOIS, the lower outer circle of which shall contain the
words, GRUNDY, KENDALL & WILL COUNTIES. The interior and center of said circle
the words, VILLAGE SEAL, shall be the seal of this corporation (village), to be
used in all cases that have been or shall hereafter be provided by the laws of
the United States, the laws of the several respective states of the United
States and the ordinances of the village, and in all cases in which, by the
laws and customs of nations, it is necessary to use a seal by a village.
(Per correspondence dated 2-9-2017)
1-10-2: CUSTODY:
The corporate seal shall be and remain in the custody of the village clerk, to
be used by the village clerk and the village president as is provided in
section
1-10-1 of this chapter. (1904 Code § 4.2)
CHAPTER 11
PERSONNEL MANUAL
SECTION:
1-11-1 Personnel Manual Adopted
1-11-1: PERSONNEL MANUAL ADOPTED:
The "Personnel Manual of the Village of Minooka, Illinois, (collectively
referred to as "Personnel Manual") is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by
reference, verbatim, with the same force and effect as if the same were fully
set out herein. Said Personnel Manual, which sets forth the personnel rules for
the Minooka Village employees, shall be and remain on file in the office of the
Village Clerk. (Ord. 2015-04, 1-27-2015; amd. Ord. 2020-19, 6-23-2020; Ord.
2021-13, 7-27- 2021; Ord. 2023-56, 12-19-2023)
CHAPTER 12
COLLECTION CHARGE
SECTION:
1-12-1 Collection Charge
1-12-1: COLLECTION CHARGE:
There is hereby imposed a collection charge of twenty five dollars ($25.00)
upon any person who shall present a check or other payment instrument to the
Village in payment of any of the fees and charges of the Village as listed
hereafter in the event such check or payment instrument is dishonored; a)
because the drawer of the check or payment instrument does not have sufficient
funds on account with the bank or other financial institution upon which the
check or other payment instrument is drawn, or b) because a stop order has been
issued by one of the account owners with regard to the check or payment
instrument. The collection charge as set forth above shall be in addition to
any other charge, fee or penalty imposed by this Code, and may be imposed one
time for each such check or payment instrument which is presented to the
Village and subsequently dishonored. The following fees and charges imposed by
this Code may be the subject of a collection charge as imposed by this
regulation: charges for the collection of garbage; fees for water service and
sewer service connections; rates and charges for water services, sewer
services, or combined water and sewer services; water and sewer deposits;
building permit fees; charges and fees with regard to the inspection of
buildings pursuant to the Minooka Building Code and the Minooka Fire Prevention
Code; fines or penalties as may be imposed for violations of the provisions of
this Code; and fees or charges with regard to any licenses or permits which may
be issued pursuant to this Code. (Ord. 1989-14, 10-10-1989)
CHAPTER 13
DEVELOPERS AND PROFESSIONAL FEES
SECTION:
1-13-1 Professional Fees Paid By Developer
1-13-2 Disclosure Of Ownership Interest
1-13-1: PROFESSIONAL FEES PAID BY DEVELOPER:
   A.   Execution Of Agreement:
      1.   Initial Request: Any developer, person, entity, corporation,
association or group requesting, seeking or applying for a zoning change,
annexation, subdivision, resubdivision, development, redevelopment and the like
shall at the time of the initiation of said request execute a professional fee
agreement with the village, on file in the office of the village clerk, as set
forth in appendix A attached to the ordinance codified herein, which is
incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 2005-48, 10-25-2005)
      2.   Pending Actions: Any developer, person, entity, corporation,
association or group who presently has any pending matter with the village
shall execute an agreement in the form as described in subsection A1 of this
section before the village will proceed further in any respect with the
development. (Ord. 1996-4, 2-13-1996)
      3.   Payment Of Fees: The developer shall pay the village any and all
professional staff fees, including residential and nonresidential engineering
fees and administrative costs, attorney fees and architecture review fees,
costs and expenses as set forth in the schedule attached as appendix B to the
ordinance codified herein, which is incorporated herein by reference. In the
event the village incurs fees that are not covered in appendix B, the developer
shall pay such professional staff fees, costs, and expenses as may be billed by
the village pursuant to the payment terms as set forth in appendix A attached
to the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 2005-48, 10-25-2005)
   B.   Issuance/Renewal:
      1.   Prior to the consideration, issuance, granting or renewal of any
license, permit, approval or inspection required under any provision of this
code, the village department or employee charged with the duty to issue or
renew such license or permit, or conduct inspections, shall contact the finance
department to determine whether any monies are due and owing in excess of sixty
(60) days to the village from the applicant in relation to the project in
regard to which the license or permit is intended to be used. If monies are
found to be due and owing the village in excess of sixty (60) days, said
license, permit, approval, or inspection shall not be issued, renewed, or
approved until all monies due and owing to the village have been paid in full,
and the finance department so certifies.
      2.   If the finance department contacts an employee who issues or renews
such license or permit, or conducts inspections for a project that monies in
excess of sixty (60) days are owed, said license, permit, approval, or
inspection shall not be issued, renewed, or approved until all monies due and
owing to the village have been paid in full, and the finance department so
certifies.
   C.   Appeals: Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association or
group desiring to challenge a bill, fee or expense issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall have the right to appeal the bill, fee or expense to the
finance committee within fourteen (14) days after the receipt of the invoice.
The appeal must be in writing and shall contain a specific request for a
hearing. If a hearing is requested, a hearing before the finance committee
shall take place at the next regular meeting of the finance committee, but not
earlier than fourteen (14) days after the written appeal is submitted. The
finance committee shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14) days of
the hearing. Where a hearing is not requested, the appealing party shall submit
all supporting documentation with the written appeal and the finance committee
shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14) days after the
consideration of the appeal at a regular meeting of the finance committee. The
failure to file a written appeal shall be deemed to approve the amount(s) owed
and/or services performed.
   D.   Nonexclusivity Of Remedy: Notwithstanding any provision of this
section, the village shall have all other rights and remedies as may be
available to it at law or equity for violations of this section.
   E.   Incorporation Into Titles 3, 4, 5 And 6: The provisions of subsections
B, C and D of this section are expressly incorporated by reference into titles
3, 4, 5 and 6 of this code and shall apply to all monies owed pursuant to those
provisions and any regulations or rules adopted in conjunction therewith. (Ord.
2005-11, 3-22-2005)
1-13-2: DISCLOSURE OF OWNERSHIP INTEREST:
   A.   Application: Any developer, person, entity, corporation, association,
limited liability company, partnership, limited partnership or group
requesting, seeking or applying for a zoning change, annexation, subdivision,
resubdivision, development, redevelopment, preliminary plat, preliminary PUD,
final plat, final PUD, site plan review, special use, or variation, shall
certify and file with the village clerk a disclosure of ownership interest
application. The application shall contain such information as the village
administrator may from time to time provide, including, but not limited to, the
following information:
      1.   The nature of the benefit sought;
      2.   The nature and characteristics of the applicant;
      3.   The name and address of each person or entity who is at least a five
percent (5%) shareholder in the case of a corporation, a beneficiary in the
case of a trust or land trust, a joint venture in the case of a joint venture,
general and limited partners in the case of a partnership or limited
partnership, members in the case of a limited liability company, or who
otherwise had a proprietary interest, interest in profits and losses, or right
to control such entity (if applicable), and attach documentation to corroborate
ownership interest. If the applicant includes a land trust or trust, you must
attach a sworn statement from the trustee listing the beneficiaries;
      4.   Person making the disclosure on behalf of the applicant; and
      5.   A statement under oath that the applicant has withheld no
disclosures as to economic interests in the undertaking nor reserved any
information, data or plan as to the intended use or purpose for which it seeks
village action.
   B.   Information To Be Kept Current: All disclosures and information shall
be current as of the date upon which the application is presented to the
village, and shall be maintained current until such time as the village shall
take final action on the application.
   C.   Failure To Comply: Any failure to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall render any ordinance, ordinance amendment, village board approval
or other village action on behalf of the applicant failing to comply, voidable
at the option of a majority of the corporate authorities. (Ord. 2007-43, 9-11-
2007)
CHAPTER 14
BIDDING AND CONTRACTING PROCEDURES
SECTION:
1-14-1 Competitive Bidding Required
1-14-2 Formal Contract Procedure
1-14-3 Advertisements For Bids
1-14-4 Scope Of Notice
1-14-5 Bid Deposits
1-14-6 Bid Opening Procedure
1-14-7 Rejection Of Bids
1-14-8 Bidders In Default To Village
1-14-9 Award Of Contract
1-14-10 Open Market Procedure
1-14-11 Professional Services Exempt From Bidding Requirements
1-14-12 Emergency Purchases
1-14-13 Cooperative Purchasing
1-14-1: COMPETITIVE BIDDING REQUIRED:
Any work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessment or special taxation, and all purchases, orders or
contracts for supplies, materials, equipment or certain other contractual
services shall be based whenever required by state statute on competitive bids.
(Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998; amd. Ord. 2024-38, 8-27-2024)
1-14-2: FORMAL CONTRACT PROCEDURE:
All work or other public improvement that is not to be paid for in whole or in
part by special assessment or special taxation, when the estimated cost thereof
shall exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), shall be purchased from
the lowest responsible bidder, after due notice inviting bids, unless
competitive bidding is waived by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Village
Board of Trustees then holding office. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-21-2017; amd. Ord.
2024-38, 8-27-2024)
1-14-3: ADVERTISEMENTS FOR BIDS:
A notice inviting bids shall be published at least once in a newspaper with
general circulation within the Village. The Village shall also advertise all
pending work or purchases by posting a notice on the public bulletin board in
the Village office. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-4: SCOPE OF NOTICE:
The newspaper notice required herein shall include a general description of the
work to be performed or the articles to be purchased, shall state where
specifications may be secured, and shall specify the time and place for opening
bids. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-5: BID DEPOSITS:
When deemed necessary by the Village, bid deposits shall be prescribed in the
public notices inviting bids. Unsuccessful bidders shall be entitled to the
return of their bid deposits upon the award of the contract by the Board of
Trustees. A successful bidder shall forfeit any bid deposit to the Village upon
failure on his part to enter into a contract within ten (10) days after the
award.
Such bid deposit may be in the form of a certified check, bond, or letter of
credit in an amount as specified in the advertisement for bids to ensure
finalization of the contract and to indemnify the Village against all loss,
damages, and claims that may accrue against the Village as a consequence of the
granting of the contract. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-6: BID OPENING PROCEDURE:
   A.   Sealed: Bids shall be submitted sealed to the Village and shall be
identified as bids on the envelope.
   B.   Opening: Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in
the public notice.
   C.   Tabulation: A tabulation of all bids received shall be made by the
Village Board of Trustees or by a Village employee in which event a tabulation
of the bids shall be furnished to the Board of Trustees at its next meeting.
(Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-7: REJECTION OF BIDS:
The Village, through its Corporate Authorities, shall have the authority to
reject all bids or parts of all bids when the public interest will be served
thereby. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-8: BIDDERS IN DEFAULT TO VILLAGE:
The Village shall not accept the bid of a contractor who is in default on the
payment of any taxes, licenses, or other monies due the Village. (Ord. 1998-10,
5-26-1998)
1-14-9: AWARD OF CONTRACT:
   A.   Authority In Village: The Village shall have the authority to award
contracts within the purview of this section.
   B.   Lowest Responsible Bidder: Contracts shall be awarded to the lowest
responsible bidder on the basis of the bid that is in the best interest of the
Village to accept. In awarding the contract, in addition to price, the Village
shall consider:
      1.   The ability, capacity, and skill of the bidder to perform the
contract or provide the service required;
      2.   Whether the bidder can perform the contract or provide the service
promptly, or within the time specified, without delay or interference;
      3.   The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and
efficiency of the bidder;
      4.   The quality of the performance of previous contracts or services;
      5.   The previous and existing compliance by the bidder with laws and
ordinances relating to the contract or service;
      6.   The sufficiency of the financial resources and ability of the bidder
to perform the contract or provide the service;
      7.   The quality, availability, and adaptability of the supplies or
contractual services to the particular use required;
      8.   The ability of the bidder to provide future maintenance and service
for the use of the subject of the contract;
      9.   Compliance with prequalification requirements of the Village or the
Village Engineer;
      10.   The number and scope of conditions attached to the bid;
      11.   All applicable laws prerequisite to doing business in Illinois;
      12.   Evidence of compliance with:
         a.   Federal employer tax identification number or social security
number (for individuals), and
         b.   Provision of section 2000(e) of chapter 21, title 42 of the
United States Code and Federal executive order 11246 as amended by executive
order 11375 (known as the equal opportunity employer provisions);
      13.   Certificates of insurance indicating the following coverage:
general liability, workers' compensation, completed operations, automobile,
hazardous occupation, product liability and professional liability;
      14.   Compliance with all provisions of the Illinois Prevailing Wage Act
(the "Act"), including wages, medical and hospitalization insurance and
retirement for those trades as covered in the Act; and
      15.   Only for contracts in excess of one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00), participation in apprenticeship and training programs approved
and registered with the United States Department of Labor's Bureau of
Apprenticeship and Training for each of the trades of work contemplated under
the awarded contract, except for that participation in apprenticeship and
training programs will not be considered in awarding annual service and
maintenance contracts.
   C.   Performance Bonds: The Village shall have the authority to require a
performance bond, before entering into a contract, in such amounts as it shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the Village and to
conform to the statutory requirements for such bonds. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998;
amd. Ord. 2006-28, 7-11-2006; Ord. 2009-30, 9-22-2009; Ord. 2024-38, 8-27-2024)
1-14-10: OPEN MARKET PROCEDURE:
All work and purchases of supplies, materials, equipment and services of less
than the estimated value of twenty five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) may be
made in the open market, without newspaper advertisement and without observing
the procedures prescribed by this chapter for the award of formal contracts in
such a manner so as to ensure the best interest of the public after
solicitation of bids or proposals by mail, telephone, facsimile transmission,
or otherwise. (Ord. 2017-30, 11-21-2017)
1-14-11: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES EXEMPT FROM BIDDING REQUIREMENTS:
All contracts for professional services, including, but not limited to,
attorneys, engineers, land planners, real estate appraisers, and architects,
and any other profession whose ethical code prohibits or discourages
involvement in normal bidding procedures, may be entered into by the Village
without observing the bidding procedures prescribed by this chapter for the
award of formal contracts. Regular employment contracts for Municipal service
shall likewise be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-
26-1998)
1-14-12: EMERGENCY PURCHASES:
In case of an apparent emergency that requires immediate work or purchase of
supplies, materials, equipment or services, the Village shall be empowered to
secure by open market procedure as herein set forth, at the lowest obtainable
price, any work, supplies, materials, equipment or services regardless of the
amount of the expenditure. A finding of such an emergency shall be made by an
affirmative vote of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the Village Board of Trustees
at the time of such emergency contract or no later than the first regular
Village Board meeting thereafter. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
1-14-13: COOPERATIVE PURCHASING:
The Village shall have the authority to join with other units of government in
cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the Village would be
served thereby. (Ord. 1998-10, 5-26-1998)
CHAPTER 15
STATE OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES ETHICS ACT
SECTION:
1-15-1 Adoption
1-15-2 Definitions
1-15-3 Prohibited Political Activities
1-15-4 Gift Ban
1-15-5 Exceptions
1-15-6 Disposition Of Gifts
1-15-7 Ethics Advisor
1-15-8 Ethics Commission
1-15-9 Complaints
1-15-10 Penalties
1-15-1: ADOPTION:
The state officials and employees ethics act, 5 Illinois Compiled Statutes 430/
1-1 et seq., is hereby adopted as required by the act. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-
2004)
1-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
CAMPAIGN FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE: Any activity in furtherance of an effort to
influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual
to any federal, state, or local public office or office in a political
organization, or the selection, nomination, or election of presidential or vice
presidential electors, but does not include activities relating to the support
or opposition of any executive, legislative, or administrative action, relating
to collective bargaining, or that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's
official duties.
CANDIDATE: A person who has filed nominating papers or petitions for nomination
or election to an elected office, or who has been appointed to fill a vacancy
in nomination, and who remains eligible for placement on the ballot at a
regular election, as defined in section 1-3 of the election code1. 10 ILCS 5/1-
3.1 .
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section
3 of the Illinois public labor relations act2. 5 ILCS 315/3.2 .
COMPENSATED TIME: With respect to an employee, any time worked by or credited
to the employee that counts toward any minimum work time requirement imposed as
a condition of his or her employment, but for purposes of this chapter, does
not include any designated holidays, vacation periods, personal time,
compensatory time off or any period when the employee is on a leave of absence.
With respect to officers or employees whose hours are not fixed, "compensated
time" includes any period of time when the officer is on premises under the
control of the employer and any other time when the officer or employee is
executing his or her official duties, regardless of location.
COMPENSATORY TIME OFF: Authorized time off earned by or awarded to an employee
to compensate in whole or in part for time worked in excess of the minimum work
time required of that employee as a condition of his or her employment.
CONTRIBUTION: Has the same meaning as that term is defined in section 9-1.4 of
the election code3. 10 ILCS 5/9-1.4.3.
EMPLOYEE: A person employed by the village of Minooka, whether on a full time
or part time basis or pursuant to a contract, whose duties are subject to the
direction and control of an employer with regard to the material details of how
the work is to be performed, but does not include an independent contractor.
EMPLOYER: The village of Minooka.
GIFT: Any gratuity, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or
other tangible or intangible item having monetary value including, but not
limited to, cash, food and drink, and honoraria for speaking engagements
related to or attributable to government employment or the official position of
an officer or employee.
LEAVE OF ABSENCE: Any period during which an employee does not receive
compensation for employment, service credit towards pension benefits, and
health insurance benefits paid for by the employer.
OFFICER: A person who holds, by election or appointment, an office created by
statute or ordinance, regardless of whether the officer is compensated for
service in his or her official capacity.
POLITICAL ACTIVITY: Any activity in support of or in connection with any
campaign for elective office or any political organization, but does not
include activities relating to the support or opposition of any executive,
legislative, or administrative action, relating to collective bargaining, or
that are otherwise in furtherance of the person's official duties.
POLITICAL ORGANIZATION: A party, committee, association, fund, or other
organization (whether or not incorporated) that is required to file a statement
of organization with the state board of elections or a county clerk under
section 9-3 of the election code 1. 10 ILCS 5/9-3.1, but only with regard to
those activities that require filing with the state board of elections or a
county clerk.
PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITY: A. Preparing for, organizing, or participating
in any political meeting, political rally, political demonstration, or other
political event.
         B.   Soliciting contributions, including, but not limited to, the
purchase of, selling, distributing, or receiving payment for tickets for any
political fundraiser, political meeting, or other political event.
         C.   Soliciting, planning the solicitation of, or preparing any
document or report regarding anything of value intended as a campaign
contribution.
         D.   Planning, conducting, or participating in a public opinion poll
in connection with a campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political
organization for political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
         E.   Surveying or gathering information from potential or actual
voters in an election to determine probable vote outcome in connection with a
campaign for elective office or on behalf of a political organization for
political purposes or for or against any referendum question.
         F.   Assisting at the polls on election day on behalf of any political
organization or candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum
question.
         G.   Soliciting votes on behalf of a candidate for elective office or
a political organization or for or against any referendum question or helping
in an effort to get voters to the polls.
         H.   Initiating for circulation, preparing, circulating, reviewing, or
filing any petition on behalf of a candidate for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
         I.   Making contributions on behalf of any candidate for elective
office in that capacity or in connection with a campaign for elective office.
         J.   Preparing or reviewing responses to candidate questionnaires.
         K.   Distributing, preparing for distribution, or mailing campaign
literature, campaign signs, or other campaign material on behalf of any
candidate for elective office or for or against any referendum question.
         L.   Campaigning for any elective office or for or against any
referendum question.
         M.   Managing or working on a campaign for elective office or for or
against any referendum question.
         N.   Serving as a delegate, alternate, or proxy to a political party
convention.
         O.   Participating in any recount or challenge to the outcome of any
election.
PROHIBITED SOURCE: Any person or entity who:
         A.   Is seeking official action:
          1. By an officer or
          2. By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee;
         B.   Does business or seeks to do business:
          1. With the officer or
          2. With an employee, or with the officer or another employee
directing that employee;
         C.   Conducts activities regulated:
          1. By the officer or
          2. By an employee, or by the officer or another employee directing
that employee; or
         D.   Has interests that may be substantially affected by the
performance or nonperformance of the official duties of the officer or
employee. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-3: PROHIBITED POLITICAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   No officer or employee shall intentionally perform any prohibited
political activity during any "compensated time", as defined herein. No officer
or employee shall intentionally use any property or resources of the village of
Minooka in connection with any prohibited political activity.
   B.   At no time shall any officer or employee intentionally require any
other officer or employee to perform any prohibited political activity as part
of that officer's or employee's duties, as a condition of employment, or during
any compensated time off (such as holidays, vacation or personal time off).
   C.   No officer or employee shall be required at any time to participate in
any prohibited political activity in consideration for that officer or employee
being awarded additional compensation or any benefit, whether in the form of a
salary adjustment, bonus, compensatory time off, continued employment or
otherwise, nor shall any officer or employee be awarded additional compensation
or any benefit in consideration for his or her participation in any prohibited
political activity.
   D.   Nothing in this section prohibits activities that are permissible for
an officer or employee to engage in as part of his or her official duties, or
activities that are undertaken by an officer or employee on a voluntary basis
which are not prohibited by this chapter.
   E.   No person either in a position that is subject to recognized merit
principles of public employment or in a position the salary for which is paid
in whole or in part by federal funds and that is subject to the federal
standards for a merit system of personnel administration applicable to grant in
aid programs, shall be denied or deprived of employment or tenure solely
because he or she is a member or an officer of a political committee, of a
political party, or of a political organization or club. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-
2004)
1-15-4: GIFT BAN:
Except as permitted by this chapter, no officer or employee, and no spouse of
or immediate family member living with any officer or employee (collectively
referred to herein as "recipients"), shall intentionally solicit or accept any
gift from any "prohibited source", as defined herein, or which is otherwise
prohibited by law or ordinance. No prohibited source shall intentionally offer
or make a gift that violates this section. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-5: EXCEPTIONS:
Section
1-15-4 of this chapter is not applicable to the following:
   A.   Opportunities, benefits, and services available on the same conditions
as for the general public.
   B.   Anything for which the officer or employee, or his or her spouse or
immediate family member, pays the fair market value.
   C.   Any contribution that is lawfully made under the election code or
activities associated with a fundraising event in support of a political
organization or candidate.
   D.   Educational materials and missions.
   E.   Travel expenses for a meeting to discuss business.
   F.   A gift from a relative, meaning those people related to the individual
as father, mother, son, daughter, brother, sister, uncle, aunt, great aunt,
great uncle, first cousin, nephew, niece, husband, wife, grandfather,
grandmother, grandson, granddaughter, father-in-law, mother-in-law, son-in-law,
daughter-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, stepfather, stepmother,
stepson, stepdaughter, stepbrother, stepsister, half brother, half sister, and
including the father, mother, grandfather, or grandmother of the individual's
spouse and the individual's fiance or fiancee.
   G.   Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal
friendship unless the recipient has reason to believe that, under the
circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position or
employment of the recipient or his or her spouse or immediate family member and
not because of the personal friendship. In determining whether a gift is
provided on the basis of personal friendship, the recipient shall consider the
circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as:
      1.   The history of the relationship between the individual giving the
gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts
between those individuals;
      2.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who
gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or
business reimbursement for the gift; and
      3.   Whether to the actual knowledge of the recipient the individual who
gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other
officers or employees, or their spouses or immediate family members.
   H.   Food or refreshments not exceeding seventy five dollars ($75.00) per
person in value on a single calendar day; provided that the food or
refreshments are consumed on the premises from which they were purchased or
prepared or catered. For the purposes of this section, "catered" means food or
refreshments that are purchased ready to consume which are delivered by any
means.
   I.   Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits
resulting from outside business or employment activities (or outside activities
that are not connected to the official duties of an offi
cer or employee), if the benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of
the official position or employment of the officer or employee, and are
customarily provided to others in similar circumstances.
   J.   Intragovernmental and intergovernmental gifts. For the purpose of this
section, "intragovernmental gift" means any gift given to an officer or
employee from another officer or employee, and "intergovernmental gift" means
any gift given to an officer or employee by an officer or employee of another
governmental entity.
   K.   Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
   L.   Any item or items from any one prohibited source during any calendar
year having a cumulative total value of less than one hundred dollars
($100.00).
Each of the exceptions listed in this section is mutually exclusive and
independent of every other. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-6: DISPOSITION OF GIFTS:
An officer or employee, his or her spouse or an immediate family member living
with the officer or employee, does not violate this chapter if the recipient
promptly takes reasonable action to return a gift from a prohibited source to
its source or gives the gift or an amount equal to its value to an appropriate
charity that is exempt from income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the
internal revenue code of 1986, as now or hereafter amended, renumbered, or
succeeded. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-7: ETHICS ADVISOR:
   A.   The village administrator of the village of Minooka is appointed to
serve as ethics advisor of the village. This duty shall be in addition to the
other duties as set forth in section
1-7-11 of this title.
   B.   The ethics advisor shall provide guidance to the officers and employees
of the village of Minooka concerning the interpretation of and compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and state ethics laws. The ethics advisor shall
perform such other duties as may be delegated by the board of trustees. (Ord.
2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-8: ETHICS COMMISSION:
   A.   There is hereby created a commission to be known as the ethics
commission of the village of Minooka. The commission shall be comprised of the
village president and the two (2) village trustees with the most years of
service as members of the corporate authorities.
   B.   The commission shall have the following powers and duties:
      1.   Upon receipt of a signed and notarized complaint alleging a
violation of this chapter by any officer or employee, to review, investigate,
conduct hearings and act upon such complaints as provided in this chapter or
other applicable law. The commission shall act only upon the receipt of a
complaint and not upon its own prerogative.
      2.   To issue subpoenas and compel testimony and the production of
documents and other tangible things in accordance with Illinois law. It is the
obligation of all officers and employees of the village of Minooka to cooperate
with the commission during the course of its investigations. Failure or refusal
to cooperate with requests by the commission shall constitute grounds for
discipline or discharge. When necessary or required by law, assistance may be
requested from other appropriate agencies.
      3.   To promulgate rules for the conduct of investigatory proceedings,
including procedural rules consistent with the requirements of due process of
law.
      4.   To receive information from the public pertaining to its
investigations and to require additional information and documents from persons
who may have violated the provisions of this chapter.
      5.   The powers and duties of the commission are limited to matters
clearly within the purview of this chapter. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-9: COMPLAINTS:
   A.   Complaints alleging a violation of this chapter must be signed and
notarized and shall be filed with the ethics commission.
   B.   In the event that the alleged violator is a member of the commission,
the alleged violator shall not serve as a member of the commission for purposes
of the pending investigation and hearing. The village trustee not already a
member of the commission with the next most years of service as a member of the
corporate authorities shall then serve as a member of the commission in the
place of the disqualified commissioner.
   C.   Within fourteen (14) business days after the receipt of a complaint,
the commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt requested, a notice
to the respondent that a complaint has been filed against him or her and a copy
of the complaint. The commission shall send by certified mail, return receipt
requested, a confirmation of the receipt of the complaint to the complainant
within fourteen (14) business days after receipt by the commission. The notices
to the respondent and the complainant shall also advise them of the date, time,
and place of the hearing to determine the sufficiency of the complaint and to
establish whether probable cause exists.
   D.   Upon not less than forty eight (48) hours' public notice, the
commission shall meet and conduct a hearing. A quorum shall consist of two (2)
commissioners, and official action by the commission shall require the
affirmative vote of two (2) members. The commission shall review the
sufficiency of the complaint and determine whether there is probable cause,
based on all of the evidence. The commission shall allow both parties the
opportunity to present testimony and evidence at the hearing. The meeting may
be closed to the public to the extent authorized by the open meetings act.
   E.   The commission shall issue notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the complainant and the respondent of the commission's ruling
within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the hearing. The particular
findings in the case shall be a matter of public information.
      1.   If the complaint is deemed sufficient to allege a violation and
there is a determination of probable cause, then the commission may request in
writing that the attorney designated by the corporate authorities prosecute
such actions as a local ordinance violation. The commission shall also transmit
to the attorney the complaint and all additional documents in its custody
concerning the alleged violation.
      2.   If the complaint is deemed not sufficient to allege a violation or
if there is no determination of probable cause, then the commission shall
dismiss the complaint.
   F.   The commission shall complete its investigation, hearing, and ruling
within ninety (90) days after receipt of the complaint.
   G.   A complaint alleging the violation of this chapter must be filed within
one year after the alleged violation. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
1-15-10: PENALTIES:
   A.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-15-3 of this chapter may be punished by a term of incarceration in a penal
institution other than a penitentiary for a period of not more than three
hundred sixty four (364) days, and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two
thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). A violation of section
1-15-3 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a criminal offense by an attorney
for the village of Minooka by filing in the circuit court an information,
signed by the complainant, charging such offense. The prosecution shall be
under and conform to the rules of criminal procedure. Conviction shall require
the establishment of the guilt of the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.
   B.   A person who intentionally violates any provision of section
1-15-4 of this chapter is subject to a fine in an amount of not less than one
thousand one dollars ($1,001.00) and not more than five thousand dollars
($5,000.00). A violation of section
1-15-4 of this chapter shall be prosecuted as a quasi-criminal offense by an
attorney for the village of Minooka, signed by the complainant, charging such
offense. Conviction shall require the establishment of the guilt of the
defendant by a preponderance of the evidence.
   C.   Any person who intentionally makes a false report alleging a violation
of any provision of this chapter to the local enforcement authorities, the
commission, the state's attorney or any other law enforcement official may be
punished by a term of incarceration in a penal institution other than a
penitentiary for a period of not more than three hundred sixty four (364) days,
and may be fined in an amount not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars
($2,500.00).
   D.   In addition to the penalties as set forth above, and any other penalty
that may apply, whether criminal or civil, an employee who violates any
provision of this chapter is subject to discipline or discharge; provided,
however, that no such action shall be taken except after all process due under
applicable federal, state, or local law is taken. (Ord. 2004-17, 5-11-2004)
CHAPTER 16
CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
1-16-1 Code Hearing Department Established
1-16-2 Definitions
1-16-3 Procedures Not Exclusive
1-16-4 Instituting Code Hearing Proceedings
1-16-5 Subpoenas
1-16-6 Defaults
1-16-7 Continuances
1-16-8 Representation At Code Hearings
1-16-9 Hearing; Evidence
1-16-10 Qualifications Of Hearing Officers
1-16-11 Findings, Decision, And Order
1-16-12 Review Under Administrative Review Law
1-16-13 Judgment On Findings, Decision, And Order
1-16-1: CODE HEARING DEPARTMENT ESTABLISHED1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-10.1:
   A.   There is hereby established a code hearing department. The function is
to expedite the prosecution and correction of ordinance violations in the
manner as set forth in this chapter. The provisions as set forth in this
chapter are for the adjudication of village ordinances except for:
      1.   The standing and parking of vehicles, the condition and use of
vehicle equipment, and the display of wheel tax licenses;
      2.   Village, building code or zoning ordinances that establish
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or
other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in the
village or any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of
weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor
vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property;
      3.   Building code violations that must be adjudicated pursuant to 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1 et seq.; and
      4.   Any offense under the Illinois vehicle code or similar offense that
is a traffic regulation governing the movement of vehicles, and except for any
reportable offense under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-204. (Ord. 2011-28,
12-20-2011)
1-16-2: DEFINITIONS2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-5.2:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village,
other than a law enforcement officer, whose duty it is to:
   A.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not
a code violation exists;
   B.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from all interested parties relevant
to the existence of a code violation;
   C.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing; and
   D.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision, and order stating whether a
code violation exists. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-3: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE3. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-15.3:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
the provisions of its code. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-4: INSTITUTING CODE HEARING PROCEEDINGS1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-20.1:
   A.   When a police officer or other individual authorized to issue a code
violation finds a code violation to exist, they shall note the violation on a
multiple copy violation notice and report form that indicates:
      1.   The name and address of the defendant,
      2.   The type and nature of the violation,
      3.   The date and time the violation was observed, and
      4.   The names of witnesses to the violation.
   B.   The violation report form shall be forwarded to the code hearing
department where a docket number shall be stamped on all copies of the report
and a hearing date shall be noted in the blank spaces provided for that purpose
on the form. The hearing date shall not be less than thirty (30) nor more than
forty (40) days after the violation is reported. However, if the code violation
involves a village ordinance regulating truants, the hearing date shall not be
less than seven (7) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is
reported.
   C.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the code hearing department and shall be part of the record of hearing, one
copy of the report form shall be returned to the individual representing the
village in the case so that they may prepare evidence of the code violation for
presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report
form shall be served by first class mail to the defendant along with a summons
commanding the defendant to appear at the hearing. If the violation report form
requires the respondent to answer within a certain amount of time, the village
must reply to the answer within the same amount of time afforded to the
respondent. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-5: SUBPOENAS2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25.2:
At any time prior to the hearing date, the hearing officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to appear and give
testimony at the hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-6: DEFAULTS3. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-25.3:
If on the date set for hearing the defendant or their attorney fails to appear,
the hearing officer may find the defendant in default and shall proceed with
the hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-7: CONTINUANCES4. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-30.4:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the defendant. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds
for a continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this
chapter shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-8: REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS5. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-30.5:
The case for the village may be presented by an attorney designated by the
village or by any other village employee, except that the case for the village
shall not be presented by an employee of the code hearing department. The case
for the defendant may be presented by the defendant, their attorney, or any
other agent or representative of the defendant. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE1. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-35.1:
At the hearing a hearing officer shall preside, shall hear testimony, and shall
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation. The strict rules of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings
shall not apply. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-10: QUALIFICATIONS OF HEARING OFFICERS2. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-40.2:
   A.   Prior to conducting proceedings, hearing officers shall successfully
complete a formal training program that includes the following:
      1.   Instruction on the rules of procedure of the hearing that they will
conduct;
      2.   Orientation to each subject area of the code violations that they
will administer;
      3.   Observation of administrative hearings; and
      4.   Participation in hypothetical cases, including rules on evidence and
issuing final orders.
   B.   In addition, every hearing officer must be an attorney licensed to
practice law in the state of Illinois for at least three (3) years. (Ord. 2011-
28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-11: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER 3. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-45.3:
   A.   At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall make a
determination on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing as to
whether or not a code violation exists. The determination shall be in writing
and shall be designated as findings, decision, and order. The findings,
decision, and order shall include:
      1.   The hearing officer's findings of fact;
      2.   A decision of whether or not a code violation exists based upon the
findings of fact; and
      3.   An order that states the sanction or dismisses the case if a
violation is not proved.
   B.   A monetary sanction for a violation under this chapter shall not exceed
the amount as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this title. A copy of the findings, decision, and order shall be
served on the defendant within five (5) days after it is issued. Service shall
be in the same manner that the report form and summons are served under section
1-16-4 of this chapter. Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of
fine money shall be in the same manner as set forth in this code, unless the
corporate authorities provide otherwise. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-12: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW4. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-50.4:
The findings, decision, and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of Grundy County. The provisions of the
administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant thereto, shall apply
to and govern every action for the judicial review of the findings, decision,
and order of a hearing officer under this chapter. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-16-13: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER5. 65 ILCS 5/1-2.2-55.5:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction, or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction, or costs imposed, remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review
law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Grundy
County for purpose of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision, and
order. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from consolidating
multiple findings, decisions, and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision, and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision, and order
was issued in accordance with this chapter and the applicable village
ordinance. Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any
method provided for by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified
mail, return receipt requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other
sanctions, and costs imposed by the findings, decision, and order does not
exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied
that the findings, decision, and order was entered in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the applicable village ordinance and that the
defendant had an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial
review as provided in this chapter:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the defendant for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and order,
plus costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the
same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money.
      2.   The court may also issue any other orders and injunctions that are
requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct
a code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 17
ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION1. 625 ILCS 5/11-208.3.1
SECTION:
1-17-1 Administrative Adjudication Of Violations Of Traffic Regulations
Concerning The Standing, Parking, Or Condition Of Vehicles
1-17-2 Definitions
1-17-3 Violation Notice
1-17-4 Service
1-17-5 Hearing
1-17-6 Additional Notices
1-17-7 Final Determinations Of Violation Liability
1-17-8 Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension
1-17-9 Petition To Set Aside
1-17-10 Procedures For Nonresidents
1-17-11 Schedule Of Fines
1-17-12 Review Under Administrative Review Law
1-17-13 Judgment On Findings, Decision, And Order
1-17-1: ADMINISTRATIVE ADJUDICATION OF VIOLATIONS OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
CONCERNING THE STANDING, PARKING, OR CONDITION OF VEHICLES:
   A.   There is hereby established a system of administrative adjudication.
The function is to provide for the fair and efficient enforcement of village
regulations through the administrative adjudication of violations of village
ordinances in the manner set forth in this chapter. The provisions as set forth
in this chapter are for the administrative adjudication of:
      1.   The standing and parking of vehicles;
      2.   The condition and use of vehicle equipment; and
      3.   The display of wheel tax licenses.
   B.   The system of administrative adjudication shall only have authority to
adjudicate civil offenses carrying fines not in excess of five hundred dollars
($500.00) or requiring the completion of a traffic education program, or both.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
COMPLIANCE VIOLATION: A violation of a village regulation governing the
condition or use of equipment on a vehicle or governing the display of a wheel
tax license.
TRAFFIC COMPLIANCE ADMINISTRATOR: An administrator who is authorized to:
   A.   Adopt, distribute and process parking and compliance violation notices
and other notices;
   B.   Collect money paid as fines and penalties for violation of parking and
compliance ordinances;
   C.   Operate an administrative adjudication system; and
   D.   Make a certified report to the secretary of state under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-3: VIOLATION NOTICE:
   A.   A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice shall specify:
      1.   The date, time, and place of violation of a parking, standing, or
compliance regulation;
      2.   The particular regulation violated;
      3.   Any requirement to complete a traffic education program;
      4.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or
failure to complete a required traffic education program, or both;
      5.   The vehicle make and state registration number; and
      6.   The identification number of the person issuing the notice.
   B.   The violation notice shall also:
      1.   State that the completion of any required traffic education program,
the payment of any indicated fine, and the payment of any applicable penalty
for late payment or failure to complete a required traffic education program,
or both, shall operate as a final disposition of the violation;
      2.   Contain information as to the availability of a hearing in which the
violation may be contested on its merits; and
      3.   Specify the time and manner in which a hearing may be had. (Ord.
2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-4: SERVICE:
   A.   Service of the parking, standing, or compliance violation notice shall
be by affixing the original or a facsimile of the notice to an unlawfully
parked vehicle or by handing the notice to the operator of a vehicle if they
are present.
   B.   A person authorized by ordinance to issue and serve parking, standing,
and compliance violation notices shall certify as to the correctness of the
facts entered on the violation notice by signing their name to the notice at
the time of service or in the case of a notice produced by a computerized
device, by signing a single certificate to be kept by the traffic compliance
administrator attesting to the correctness of all notices produced by the
device while it was under their control.
   C.   The original or a facsimile of the violation notice or, in the case of
a notice produced by a computerized device, a printed record generated by the
device showing the facts entered on the notice, shall be retained by the
traffic compliance administrator, and shall be a record kept in the ordinary
course of business.
   D.   A parking, standing, or compliance violation notice issued, signed and
served in accordance with this chapter, a copy of the notice, or the computer
generated record shall be prima facie correct and shall be prima facie evidence
of the correctness of the facts shown on the notice. The notice, copy, or
computer generated record shall be admissible in any subsequent administrative
or legal proceedings. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-5: HEARING:
   A.   An opportunity for an administrative hearing shall be granted for the
registered owner of the vehicle or the lessee of a vehicle under 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1306 cited in the parking, standing, or compliance
violation notice to contest the merits of the alleged violation.
   B.   Formal or technical rules of evidence shall not apply at the hearing.
   C.   The hearings shall be recorded.
   D.   The person conducting the hearing on behalf of the traffic compliance
administrator shall be empowered to administer oaths and to secure by subpoena
both the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of relevant
books and papers.
   E.   Persons appearing at a hearing under this chapter may be represented by
counsel at their expense. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-6: ADDITIONAL NOTICES:
Service of additional notices, sent by first class United States mail, postage
prepaid, to the address of the registered owner of the cited vehicle as
recorded with the secretary of state or, if any notice to that address is
returned as undeliverable, to the last known address recorded in a United
States post office approved database, or 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
1306 or 5/11-208.6(p) to the lessee of the cited vehicle at the last address
known to the lessor of the cited vehicle at the time of lease or, if any notice
to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address
recorded in a United States post office approved database. The service shall be
deemed complete as of the date of deposit in the United States mail. The
notices shall be in the following sequence and shall include, but not be
limited to, the information specified herein:
   A.   Second Notice: A second notice of parking, standing, or compliance
violation shall specify:
      1.   The date and location of the violation cited in the parking,
standing, or compliance violation notice;
      2.   The particular regulation violated;
      3.   The vehicle make and state registration number;
      4.   Any requirement to complete a traffic education program;
      5.   The fine and any penalty that may be assessed for late payment or
failure to complete a traffic education program, or both;
      6.   The availability of a hearing in which the violation may be
contested on its merits;
      7.   The time and manner in which the hearing may be had;
      8.   That the failure to complete a required traffic education program,
to pay the indicated fine and any applicable penalty, or to appear at a hearing
on the merits in the time and manner specified, will result in a final
determination of violation liability for the cited violation in the amount of
the fine or penalty indicated; and
      9.   That, upon the occurrence of a final determination of violation
liability for the failure, and the exhaustion of, or failure to exhaust,
available administrative or judicial procedures for review, any incomplete
traffic education program or any unpaid fine or penalty, or both, will
constitute a debt due and owing the village.
   B.   Final Notice: A notice of final determination of parking, standing, or
compliance violation liability shall be sent following a final determination of
parking, standing, or compliance violation liability and the conclusion of
judicial review procedures taken under this chapter. The notice shall:
      1.   State that the incomplete traffic education program or the unpaid
fine or penalty, or both, is a debt due and owing the village; and
      2.   Contain warnings that failure to complete any required traffic
education program or to pay any fine or penalty due and owing the village,
within the time specified may result in the village's filing of a petition in
the circuit court to have the incomplete traffic education program or unpaid
fine or penalty, or both, rendered a judgment as provided by this chapter, or
may result in suspension of the person's driver's license for failure to
complete a traffic education program or to pay fines or penalties, or both, for
ten (10) or more parking violations under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-
306.5. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-7: FINAL DETERMINATIONS OF VIOLATION LIABILITY:
A final determination of violation liability shall occur following failure to
complete the required traffic education program or to pay the fine or penalty,
or both, after a hearing officer's determination of violation liability and the
exhaustion of or failure to exhaust any administrative review procedures
provided by ordinance. Where a person fails to appear at a hearing to contest
the alleged violation in the time and manner specified in a prior mailed
notice, the hearing officer's determination of violation liability shall become
final: a) upon denial of a timely petition to set aside that determination, or
b) upon expiration of the period for filing the petition without a filing
having been made. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-8: NOTICE OF IMPENDING DRIVER'S LICENSE SUSPENSION:
A notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent to the person
liable for failure to complete a required traffic education program or to pay
any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on ten (10) or more
parking violations. The notice shall state that failure to complete a required
traffic education program or to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both, within
forty five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village notifying
the secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5. The notice shall
also state that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an original ticket
imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped envelope to the
village along with a request for the photostatic copy. The notice of impending
driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class United States mail,
postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary of state or, if any
notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the last known address
recorded in a United States post office approved database. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-
20-2011)
1-17-9: PETITION TO SET ASIDE:
   A.   A petition to set aside a determination of parking, standing, or
compliance violation liability that may be filed by a person owing an unpaid
fine or penalty. A petition to set aside a determination of liability may also
be filed by a person required to complete a traffic education program. The
petition shall be filed with and ruled upon by the traffic compliance
administrator in the manner and within the time specified by ordinance. The
grounds for the petition may be limited to:
      1.   The person not having been the owner or lessee of the cited vehicle
on the date the violation notice was issued;
      2.   The person having already completed the required traffic education
program or paid the fine or penalty, or both, for the violation in question;
and
      3.   Excusable failure to appear at or request a new date for a hearing.
   B.   After the determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation
liability has been set aside upon a showing of just cause, the registered owner
shall be provided with a hearing on the merits for that violation. (Ord. 2011-
28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-10: PROCEDURES FOR NONRESIDENTS:
Procedures by which persons who are not residents of the village may contest
the merits of the alleged violation without attending a hearing. (Ord. 2011-28,
12-20-2011)
1-17-11: SCHEDULE OF FINES:
A schedule of civil fines for violations of vehicular standing, parking, or
compliance regulations enacted by ordinance pursuant to this chapter, and a
schedule of penalties for late payment of the fines or failure to complete
required traffic education programs, provided, however, that the total amount
of the fine and penalty for any one violation shall not exceed two hundred
fifty dollars ($250.00), except as provided in 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/11-1301.3(c). (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-12: REVIEW UNDER ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW LAW:
Judicial review of final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance
violations and final administrative decisions issued after hearings regarding
vehicle immobilization and impoundment made under this chapter shall be subject
to the provisions of the administrative review law. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-17-13: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER:
   A.   Any fine, penalty, incomplete traffic education program, or part of any
fine or any penalty remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the failure to
exhaust, administrative remedies and the conclusion of any judicial review
procedures shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be
collected in accordance with applicable law. Completion of any required traffic
education program and payment in full of any fine or penalty resulting from a
standing, parking, or compliance violation shall constitute a final disposition
of that violation.
   B.   After the expiration of the period within which judicial review may be
sought for a final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation,
the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Grundy County for
purposes of obtaining a judgment on the final determination of violation.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the village from consolidating multiple
final determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violations against a
person in a proceeding. Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file
a certified copy or record of the final determination of parking, standing, or
compliance violation, which shall be accompanied by a certification that
recites facts sufficient to show that the final determination of violation was
issued in accordance with this chapter and the applicable village ordinance.
Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided
by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided that the total amount of fines and penalties for final
determinations of parking, standing, or compliance violations does not exceed
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that
the final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation was
entered in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the applicable
village ordinance, and that the registered owner or the lessee, as the case may
be, had an opportunity for an administrative hearing and for judicial review as
provided in this chapter, the court shall render judgment in favor of the
village and against the registered owner or the lessee for the amount indicated
in the final determination of parking, standing, or compliance violation, plus
costs. The judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced in the same
manner as other judgments for the recovery of money. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 18
BUILDING CODE ADJUDICATION
SECTION:
1-18-1 Adjudication Of Building Code Violations
1-18-2 Definitions
1-18-3 Procedures Not Exclusive
1-18-4 Instituting Building Code Adjudication Proceedings
1-18-5 Subpoenas
1-18-6 Defaults
1-18-7 Continuances
1-18-8 Representation At Code Hearings
1-18-9 Hearing; Evidence
1-18-10 Eviction; Rights Of The Occupants
1-18-11 Defenses To Code Violations
1-18-12 Findings, Decision, And Order
1-18-13 Administrative Review
1-18-14 Judgment On Findings, Decision, And Order
1-18-15 Sanctions Applicable To Owner And Property
1-18-16 Liability For Rent Collected During Time Of Violation
1-18-17 Maintenance Of Vacant Residential Real Estate
1-18-1: ADJUDICATION OF BUILDING CODE VIOLATIONS:
There is hereby established a system of building code adjudication. The
function is to expedite the prosecution and correction of building code
violations as set forth in this chapter. The provisions as set forth in this
chapter are for the administrative adjudication of:
   A.   Any village, building code or zoning ordinance that establishes
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or
other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in the
village; and
   B.   Any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of
weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor
vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property. (Ord. 2011-28,
12-20-2011)
1-18-2: DEFINITIONS1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-1.1:
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
BUILDING INSPECTOR: A full time state, county or village employee whose duties
include the inspection or examination of structures or property in the village
to determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
CODE: Any village, building code or zoning ordinance that establishes
construction, plumbing, heating, electrical, fire prevention, sanitation or
other health and safety standards that are applicable to structures in the
village or any village ordinance that requires, after notice, the cutting of
weeds, the removal of garbage and debris, the removal of inoperable motor
vehicles, or the abatement of nuisances from private property.
HEARING OFFICER: A village employee or an officer or agent of the village,
other than a building inspector or law enforcement officer, whose duty it is
to:
   A.   Preside at an administrative hearing called to determine whether or not
a code violation exists;
   B.   Hear testimony and accept evidence from the building inspector, the
building owner and all interested parties relevant to the existence of a code
violation;
   C.   Preserve and authenticate the transcript and record of the hearing and
all exhibits and evidence introduced at the hearing;
   D.   Issue and sign a written finding, decision and order stating whether a
code violation exists.
PROPERTY OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a structure. (Ord. 2011-28,
12-20-2011)
1-18-3: PROCEDURES NOT EXCLUSIVE1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-3.1:
This chapter does not preclude the village from using other methods to enforce
the provisions of its code. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-4: INSTITUTING BUILDING CODE ADJUDICATION PROCEEDINGS2. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-
4.2:
   A.   When a building inspector finds a code violation while inspecting a
structure, they shall note the violation on a multiple copy violation notice
and report form, indicating the name and address of the structure owner, the
type and nature of the violation, the date and time the violation was observed,
the names of witnesses to the violation, and the address of the structure where
the violation is observed.
   B.   The violation report form shall be forwarded by the building inspector
to the building code adjudication department where a docket number shall be
stamped on all copies of the report, and a hearing date noted in the blank
spaces provided for that purpose on the form. The hearing date shall not be
less than thirty (30) nor more than forty (40) days after the violation is
reported by the building inspector.
   C.   One copy of the violation report form shall be maintained in the files
of the building code adjudication department and shall be part of the record of
hearing, one copy of the report form shall be returned to the building
inspector so that they may prepare evidence of the code violation for
presentation at the hearing on the date indicated, and one copy of the report
form shall be served by first class mail on the owner of the structure, along
with a summons commanding the owner to appear at the hearing. If the name of
the owner of the structure cannot be ascertained or if service on the owner
cannot be made by mail, service may be made on the owner by posting or nailing
a copy of the violation report form on the front door of the structure where
the violation is found, not less than twenty (20) days before the hearing is
scheduled. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-5: SUBPOENAS3. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-5.3:
At any time prior to the hearing date the hearing officer assigned to hear the
case may, at the request of the building inspector or the attorney for the
village, or the owner or his attorney, issue subpoenas directing witnesses to
appear and give testimony at the hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-6: DEFAULTS4. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-5.4:
If on the date set for hearing the owner or his attorney fails to appear, the
hearing officer may find the owner in default and shall proceed with the
hearing and accept evidence relevant to the existence of a code violation.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-7: CONTINUANCES5. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-6.5:
No continuances shall be authorized by the hearing officer in proceedings under
this chapter except in cases where a continuance is absolutely necessary to
protect the rights of the owner. Lack of preparation shall not be grounds for a
continuance. Any continuance authorized by a hearing officer under this chapter
shall not exceed twenty five (25) days. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-8: REPRESENTATION AT CODE HEARINGS1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-6.1:
The case for the village may be presented by the building inspector, by any
other village employee or by an attorney designated by the village. However, in
no event shall the case for the village be presented by an employee of the
building code adjudication department. The case for the dwelling owner may be
presented by the owner, their attorney, or any other agent or representative.
(Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-9: HEARING; EVIDENCE2. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-7.2:
At the hearing, a hearing officer shall preside and shall hear testimony and
accept any evidence relevant to the existence or nonexistence of a code
violation in the structure indicated. The strict rules of evidence applicable
to judicial proceedings shall not apply. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-10: EVICTION; RIGHTS OF THE OCCUPANTS3. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-8.3:
No action for eviction, abatement of a nuisance, forcible entry and detainer or
other similar proceeding shall be threatened or instituted against an occupant
of a dwelling solely because such occupant agrees to testify or testifies at a
code violation hearing. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-11: DEFENSES TO CODE VIOLATIONS4. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-9.4:
It shall be a defense to a code violation charged under this chapter if the
owner, their attorney, or any other agent or representative proves to the
hearing officer's satisfaction that:
   A.   The code violation alleged in the notice does not in fact exist, or at
the time of the hearing the violation has been remedied or removed;
   B.   The code violation has been caused by the current property occupants
and that in spite of reasonable attempts by the owner to maintain the dwelling
free of such violations, the current occupants continue to cause the
violations;
   C.   An occupant or resident of the dwelling has refused entry to the owner
or their agent to all or a part of the dwelling for the purpose of correcting
the code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-12: FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER5. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-10.5:
At the conclusion of the hearing the hearing officer shall make a determination
on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing whether or not a code
violation exists. The determination shall be in writing and shall be designated
as findings, decision and order. The findings, decision and order shall include
the hearing officer's findings of fact, a decision whether or not a code
violation exists based upon the findings of fact, and an order, ordering the
owner to correct the violation or dismissing the case, in the event a violation
is not proved. If a code violation is proved, the order may also impose the
sanctions that are provided in the code for the violation proved. A copy of the
findings, decision, and order shall be served on the owner within five (5) days
after they are issued; service shall be in the same manner as the report form
and summons are served pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-31.1-4.
Payment of any penalty or fine and the disposition of fine money shall be in
the same manner as set forth in this code, unless the corporate authorities
adopting this chapter provide otherwise. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-13: ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1:
The findings, decision and order of the hearing officer shall be subject to
review in the circuit court of the county where the village is located, and the
provisions of the administrative review law, and the rules adopted pursuant
thereto are adopted and shall apply to and govern every action for the judicial
review of the final findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under
this chapter. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-14: JUDGMENT ON FINDINGS, DECISION, AND ORDER 2. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-11.1.2:
   A.   Any fine, other sanction or costs imposed, or part of any fine, other
sanction or costs imposed remaining unpaid after the exhaustion of, or the
failure to exhaust, judicial review procedures under the administrative review
law shall be a debt due and owing the village and, as such, may be collected in
accordance with applicable law.
   B.   After expiration of the period within which judicial review under the
administrative review law may be sought for a final determination of the code
violation, the village may commence a proceeding in the circuit court of Grundy
County for purposes of obtaining a judgment on the findings, decision and
order. Nothing in this section shall prevent the village from consolidating
multiple findings, decisions and orders against a person in such a proceeding.
Upon commencement of the action, the village shall file a certified copy of the
findings, decision and order, which shall be accompanied by a certification
that recites facts sufficient to show that the findings, decision and order was
issued in accordance with this chapter and the applicable village ordinance.
Service of the summons and a copy of the petition may be by any method provided
by 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/2-203 or by certified mail, return receipt
requested, provided that the total amount of fines, other sanctions and costs
imposed by the findings, decision and order does not exceed two thousand five
hundred dollars ($2,500.00). If the court is satisfied that the findings,
decision and order were entered in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter and the applicable village ordinance, and that the property owner had
an opportunity for a hearing under this chapter and for judicial review as
provided in this chapter:
      1.   The court shall render judgment in favor of the village and against
the property owner for the amount indicated in the findings, decision and
order, plus costs. Such judgment shall have the same effect and may be enforced
in the same manner as other judgments for the recovery of money; and
      2.   The court may also issue such other orders and injunctions as are
requested by the village to enforce the order of the hearing officer to correct
a code violation. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-15: SANCTIONS APPLICABLE TO OWNER AND PROPERTY3. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-12.3:
The order to correct a code violation and the sanctions imposed by the village
as the result of a finding of a code violation under this chapter shall attach
to the property as well as to the owner of the property, so that a finding of a
code violation against one owner cannot be avoided by conveying or transferring
the property to another owner. Any subsequent transferee or owner of property
takes subject to the findings, decision and order of a hearing officer under
this chapter. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-16: LIABILITY FOR RENT COLLECTED DURING TIME OF VIOLATION4. 65 ILCS 5/11-
31.1-12.1.4:
   A.   The owner of a building located in a village in a county having a
population in excess of one hundred thousand (100,000) inhabitants who,
directly or indirectly, has collected, or caused to be collected, rentals from
an occupant of that building during a period in which the number of apartments
or family units in that building exceeded the number permitted for that
building by an ordinance of the village in which the building is located, is
liable to any such occupant in an amount equal to not more than three (3) times
the amount of any rentals paid by any such occupant, or in their behalf, after
January 1, 1970, together with court costs and reasonable attorney fees. If the
occupant is a recipient of public aid under 305 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-
1 et seq., 5/4-1 et seq., or 5/6-1 et seq., in whose behalf vendor payment of
the rental was made by the Illinois department of public aid, the department of
human services (acting as successor to the department of public aid under 20
Illinois Compiled Statutes 1305/1-1 et seq.), or a local governmental unit, as
the case may be, the liability as herein provided is to the Illinois department
of public aid, the department of human services (acting as successor to the
department of public aid under the department of human services act), or the
local governmental unit making the vendor payment of the rental.
   B.   For the purposes of this section:
   FAMILY UNIT: A room or group of rooms used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. The fact that any
such family unit is used or intended to be used with cooking or eating
accommodations in common with another family unit in any such building does not
affect liability hereunder.
   OWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of a building.
   C.   No liability accrues under this section until thirty (30) days after
the owner of record of a building has been notified in writing that such owner
is in violation of any such village ordinance. Such notice shall be personally
served upon such owner of record or sent by registered mail to the last known
address of such owner. (Ord. 2011-28, 12-20-2011)
1-18-17: MAINTENANCE OF VACANT RESIDENTIAL REAL ESTATE1. 65 ILCS 5/11-31.1-
12.2.1:
   A.   A person who contracts with the federal government or any of its
agencies, including, without limitation, the department of housing and urban
development, to care for vacant residential real estate shall be responsible
for maintaining the property to prevent and correct village health and safety
code violations.
   B.   A person who intentionally violates this section is guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined not less than five hundred one dollars
($501.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). (Ord. 2011-28,
12-20-2011)
TITLE 2
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
CHAPTER 1
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-1-1 Planning And Zoning Commission Created, Members
2-1-2 Terms Of Office
2-1-3 Organization
2-1-4 Powers
2-1-5 Maps, Plats Of Subdivision
2-1-6 Meetings And Rules
2-1-1: PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION CREATED, MEMBERS:
A Plan Commission for the Village is hereby created under the authority of 65
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-12-4. For the purposes of this Code, the Plan
Commission shall be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission. A Board of
Appeals for the Village is hereby created under the authority of 65 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-3. For the purposes of this Code, the Board of
Appeals shall be known as the Planning and Zoning Commission. It is the intent
of the Board of Trustees to create a single commission to serve the function of
a "Plan Commission" and "Board of Appeals", as those functions are defined by
statute. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall consist of seven (7) members,
to be appointed from citizens of the Village by the Village President of the
Board of Trustees, with the consent and approval of the Board of Trustees.
(Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2-1-2: TERMS OF OFFICE:
The seven (7) members of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall serve
respectively the following terms: one for one year, one for two (2) years, one
for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, one for five (5) years, one for
six (6) years, and one for seven (7) years, the successor to each member so
appointed to serve for a term of five (5) years. In the event vacancies occur,
other than by expiration of terms, appointments shall only be for the remaining
term of the position so vacated. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2-1-3: ORGANIZATION:
As soon as possible after their appointment, the members of the Planning and
Zoning Commission shall organize by the election of a chairman and secretary
and such other officers as may in their judgment be necessary. All the members
of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall receive compensation of twenty five
dollars ($25.00) for each meeting of the Planning and Zoning Commission
attended by that member. If the Planning and Zoning Commission shall deem it
advisable to secure technical advice or service, it may do so upon authority
from the Board of Trustees and appropriation by the Board of Trustees therefor.
The Village Clerk shall keep the minutes, showing the vote of each member upon
every question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and
shall also keep records of its examinations and other official actions, prepare
the reports and perform all other administrative matters involving the Planning
and Zoning Commission. The Village Clerk shall attend all meetings of the
Planning and Zoning Commission without additional compensation. (Ord. 1995-19,
6-13-1995)
2-1-4: POWERS:
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers,
jurisdiction, and authority: (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   A.   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees a comprehensive plan
of public improvements looking to the present and future development of the
Village, which plan shall be known as the official plan of the Village. Such
plan shall include reasonable requirements with reference to streets, alleys
and public grounds in unsubdivided land situated within the corporate limits of
the Village and in contiguous territory not more than one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond such corporate limits, and not included in any city, village or
incorporated town. Such requirements shall be effective whenever this
unsubdivided land is subdivided after the adoption of such plan. (Ord. 1961-1,
1-17-1961)
   B.   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees from time to time
such changes in the plan as the Planning and Zoning Commission may deem
necessary and to report and make recommendations to the Board of Trustees with
respect to any other suggested changes about which the Board of Trustees may
desire information; provided, however, that such changes shall not affect the
general principles of the Plan as adopted. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961; amd. Ord.
1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   C.   To prepare and recommend to the Board of Trustees, from time to time,
plans for specific improvements pursuant to such official plan.
   D.   To give aid to the officials of the Village charged with the direction
of projects for improvements embraced within the official plan, to further the
making of such projects and generally to promote the realization of the
official plan.
   E.   To exercise such other powers germane to the powers granted by the
statute, as may be conferred by the Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961)
   F.   To initiate, direct, and review, from time to time, a study of the
provisions of the text and map comprising the zoning regulations, and to make
reports of its recommendations to the Board of Trustees not less frequently
than annually.
   G.   To hear and decide on appeal from any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Building and Zoning Officer or other authorized
official of the Village having jurisdiction under the Zoning Title (Title 5 of
this Code).
   H.   To receive copies of all applications for proposed variations from this
Code, and to hold public hearings on those proposed variations in the manner
and subject to the standards set forth in this Title.
   I.   To receive all applications for proposed amendments to this Code, and
to hold public hearings on those proposed amendments in the matter and subject
to the standard set forth in this Title.
   J.   To receive all applications for proposed conditional permitted uses,
and to hold public hearings on those conditional permitted uses in the matter
and subject to the standards set forth in this Title.
   K.   To hear and decide upon all matters referred to it or upon which it is
required to pass under the Zoning Title, in accordance with applicable Illinois
statutes. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
2-1-5: MAPS, PLATS OF SUBDIVISION:
No map or plat of any subdivision presented for record affecting land within
the corporate limits of the Village, and in contiguous territory not more than
one and one-half (1 1/2) miles beyond such corporate limits, and not included
in any city, village or incorporated town, after the adoption of the official
plan, shall be entitled to record or shall be valid unless the subdivision
thereon shown shall provide for streets, alleys and public grounds in
conformity with any requirements applicable thereto1. See Title 6 of this
Code.1. (Ord. 1961-1, 1-17-1961)
2-1-6: MEETINGS AND RULES:
All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall be held at the call of
the chairman and at such times and places within the Village as the Planning
and Zoning Commission may determine. All testimony by witnesses at any hearing
provided for in the Zoning Title shall be given under oath. The chairman, or in
his absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the
attendance of witnesses. All meetings of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall be open to the public. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall keep
minutes of its proceedings, and the concurring vote of four (4) members of the
Planning and Zoning Commission shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Building and Zoning Officer or to
decide in favor of the applicant on any matter which is authorized by the
Zoning Title to render a decision.
Every rule, regulation, every amendment or repeal thereof and every order,
requirement, decision or determination of the Planning and Zoning Commission
shall immediately be filed in the office of the Planning and Zoning Commission
and shall be a public record. In the performance of its duties, the Planning
and Zoning Commission may incur such expenditures as shall be authorized by the
Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
CHAPTER 2
EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (EMA)
SECTION:
2-2-1 Establishment
2-2-2 Coordinator
2-2-3 Functions
2-2-4 Service As Mobile Support Team
2-2-5 Agreements With Other Political Subdivisions
2-2-6 Emergency Action
2-2-7 Compensation
2-2-8 Reimbursement By State
2-2-9 Purchases And Expenditures
2-2-10 Oath
2-2-11 Office
2-2-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is hereby created the Minooka EMA to prevent, minimize, repair and
alleviate injury or damage resulting from disaster caused by enemy attack,
sabotage, or other hostile action, or from natural or manmade disaster, in
accordance with the Illinois Emergency Management Agency Act1. 20 ILCS 3305/
1 et seq.1.
The EMA shall consist of the Coordinator and such additional members as may be
selected by the Coordinator. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-2: COORDINATOR:
The Coordinator of the Village EMA shall be appointed by the Village President
and shall serve until removed by same.
The Coordinator shall have direct responsibility for the organization,
administration, training and operation of the EMA, subject to the direction and
control of the Village President as provided by statute.
In the event of the absence, resignation, death or inability to serve as the
Coordinator, the Village President or any person designated by him, shall be
and act as Coordinator until a new appointment is made as provided in this
Chapter. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-3: FUNCTIONS:
The Village EMA shall perform such EMA functions within the Village as shall be
prescribed in and by the State EMA plan and program prepared by the Governor,
and such orders, rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Governor,
and in addition shall perform such duties outside the corporate limits as may
be required pursuant to any mutual aid agreement with any other political
subdivision, municipality or quasi-municipality entered into as provided by the
State EMA Act. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-4: SERVICE AS MOBILE SUPPORT TEAM:
All or any members of the Village EMA organization may be designated as members
of a mobile support team created by the Director of the State EMA as provided
by law.
The leader of such mobile support team shall be designated by the Coordinator
of the Village EMA organization.
Any member of a mobile support team who is a Village employee or officer while
serving on call to duty by the Governor, or the State Director, shall receive
the compensation and have the powers, duties, rights and immunities incident to
such employment or office. Any such member who is not a paid officer or
employee of the Village, while so serving, shall receive from the State
reasonable compensation as provided by law. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-5: AGREEMENTS WITH OTHER POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS:
The Coordinator of EMA may negotiate mutual aid agreements with other villages
or political subdivisions of the State, but no such agreement shall be
effective until it has been approved by the Village Board of Trustees and by
the State Director of EMA. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-6: EMERGENCY ACTION:
If the Governor proclaims that a disaster emergency exists in the event of
actual enemy attack upon the United States or the occurrence within the State
of a major disaster resulting from enemy sabotage or other hostile action, or
from manmade or natural disaster, it shall be the duty of the Village EMA to
cooperate fully with the State EMA and with the Governor in the exercise of
emergency powers as provided by law. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-7: COMPENSATION:
Members of the EMA who are paid employees or officers of the Village, if called
for training by the State Director of EMA, shall receive for the time spent in
such training the same rate of pay as is attached to the position held; members
who are not such Village employees or officers shall receive for such training
time such compensation as may be established by the President. (1977 Code; 1997
Code)
2-2-8: REIMBURSEMENT BY STATE:
The State Treasurer may receive and allocate to the appropriate fund, any
reimbursement by the State to the Village for expenses incident to training
members of the EMA prescribed by the State Director of EMA, compensation for
services and expenses of members of a mobile support team while serving outside
the Village in response to a call by the Governor or State Director of EMA, as
provided by law, and any other reimbursement made by the State incident to EMA
activities as provided by law. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-9: PURCHASES AND EXPENDITURES:
The Village Board of Trustees, on recommendation of the Village Coordinator of
EMA, may authorize any purchase or contracts necessary to place the Village in
a position to combat effectively any disaster resulting from the explosion of
any nuclear or other bomb or missile, and to protect the public health and
safety, protect property and provide emergency assistance to victims in the
case of such disaster, or from manmade or natural disaster.
In the event of enemy-caused or other disaster, the Village Coordinator of EMA
is authorized, on behalf of the Village, to procure such services, supplies,
equipment or material as may be necessary for such purposes, in view of the
exigency without regard to the statutory procedures or formalities normally
prescribed by law pertaining to Village contracts or obligations, as authorized
by the State EMA Act, provided that if the Village Board of Trustees meets at
such time, he shall act subject to the directions and restrictions imposed by
that body. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-10: OATH:
Every person appointed to serve in any capacity in the Village EMA organization
shall, before entering upon his duties subscribe the following oath, which
shall be filed with the Coordinator:
   "I,                        , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend and bear true faith and allegiance to the Constitution of
the United States and the Constitution of the State of Illinois, and the
territory, institutions and facilities thereof, both public and private,
against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I take this obligation freely,
without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and
faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do
further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I nor have I been a
member of any political party or organization that advocates the overthrow of
the government of the United States or of this State by force or violence; and
that during such time as I am affiliated with the Minooka EMA organization, I
will not advocate nor become a member of any political party or organization
that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this
State by force or violence."
(1977 Code; 1997 Code)
2-2-11: OFFICE:
The Village President is authorized to designate space in a Village building,
or elsewhere, as may be provided for by the Village President for the Village
EMA as its office. (1977 Code; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 3
RECREATION BOARD
(Rep. by Ord. 2016-27, 7-26-2016)
CHAPTER 4
POLICE PENSION FUND BOARD
SECTION:
2-4-1 Fund Established
2-4-2 Board Created; Duties
2-4-3 Appointment; Compensation
2-4-1: FUND ESTABLISHED:
There is hereby created and established a police pension fund in and for the
village of Minooka, Grundy County, Kendall County and Will County, Illinois, in
accordance with 40 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq. (article 3 of the
Illinois pension code). (Ord. 2001-17, 9-25-2001)
2-4-2: BOARD CREATED; DUTIES:
   A.   For the purpose of this chapter the term "police" and "Board" or "Board
of Trustees" are defined, respectively, as full-time police officers or full-
time police officers entitled to participate in the benefits of said pension
fund as provided by said article 3 of said Illinois pension code and the board
of trustees of said pension fund.
   B.   The rights, powers, duties and functions of said board and the members
thereof, as such, and the rights and benefits of the various beneficiaries of
the pension fund shall be and are hereby declared to be in accordance with the
law and particularly of article 3 of the Illinois pension code and all
amendments thereof. (Ord. 2001-17, 9-25-2001)
2-4-3: APPOINTMENT; COMPENSATION:
Such board shall be appointed and elected as therein provided; shall exercise
such powers and perform such duties that shall be required of them by law. All
monies and securities belonging to said fund shall be held by the municipal
treasurer subject to the order of the board of trustees of the pension fund. An
annual list of beneficiaries and report of funds shall be made as required by
law. Members of said board of trustees of the pension fund shall serve without
compensation. (Ord. 2001-17, 9-25-2001)
CHAPTER 5
BOARD OF LOCAL IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
2-5-1 Establishment
2-5-2 Powers And Duties
2-5-3 Membership
2-5-1: ESTABLISHMENT:
There is established a board of local improvements in and for the village.
(Ord. 2003-01, 1-14-2003)
2-5-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The board of local improvements shall have all powers and duties conferred and
imposed by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/9-2-1 et seq., as supplemented by 50
Illinois Compiled Statutes 460/1 et seq. (Ord. 2003-01, 1-14-2003)
 2-5-3: MEMBERSHIP:
The board of local improvements shall consist of the village president and two
(2) trustees. The two (2) trustee members shall be two (2) trustees who serve
as members of the public works committee pursuant to an annual appointment by
the village president, with the advice and consent of the village board, at the
same time that committee appointments are made or as soon thereafter as is
reasonably practical. In the event that the two (2) trustee members are not
appointed when committee appointments are annually made, the two (2) trustee
members appointed for the previous year shall remain as members of the board of
local improvements until an appointment of their successors is made. (Ord.
2003-01, 1-14-2003)
CHAPTER 6
FORESTRY COMMISSION
SECTION:
2-6-1:
 Forestry Commission Created; Members
2-6-2:
 Terms Of Office; Vacancies; Removal; Organization
2-6-3:
 Powers; Advisory Body
2-6-4:
 Meetings; Rules
2-6-5:
 Compensation
2-6-1: FORESTRY COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERS:
   A.   There is hereby created a Forestry Commission for the Village of
Minooka, Will, Kendall, and Grundy Counties, Illinois. The Commission shall
consist of five (5) voting members along with the Superintendent of Public
Works and at least one (1) certified arborist employed or engaged by the
village. The Superintendent and any and all certified arborists on the
Commission shall serve as ex officio members, but shall not be entitled to vote
on any matter or proceeding before the Commission.
   B.   The voting membership on the Commission shall be as follows:
      1.   At least two (2) voting members of the Commission shall be village
trustees.
      2.   The remaining members of the Commission shall be residents of the
village appointed by the Village President with the advice and consent of the
village board.
      C.   The Village President shall designate one (1) voting member of the
Commission to serve as its chairperson. The chairperson shall serve for a
period of one (1) year or until their successor is designated. (Ord. 2019-19,
8-27-2019)
2-6-2:     TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES; REMOVAL; ORGANIZATION:
   A.   Each voting member of the Forestry Commission shall sit on the
Commission for one (1) year or until their successors are selected and assigned
(in the case of village trustees) or else appointed by the Village President
(in the case of resident members).
   B.    All vacancies on the Commission shall be filled by the Village
President, who shall designate or appoint successor members, subject to the
advice and consent of the Village Board, as the case may be. In the event that
a vacancy occurs other than by the expiration of a term, appointments shall
only be for the remaining term of the position so vacated.
   C.   The Village President may remove any voting member of the Commission,
but only for cause and subject to the advice and consent of the Village Board.
The Village President shall initiate removal proceedings by filing written
charges with the Village Board, and thereafter the member to be removed shall
be provided with notice and afforded an opportunity to be heard at a public
hearing before the Village Board prior to their removal.
   D.   The Village Clerk shall keep the minutes of the Forestry Commission,
showing the vote of each member upon every question, or if absent or failing to
vote indicating such fact, and shall also keep records of the Commission's
examinations and other official actions, prepare the Commission's reports, and
perform any and all other administrative functions necessary for the proper
function of the Forestry Commission. The Village Clerk shall attend all
meetings of the Forestry Commission without additional compensation. (Ord.
2019-19, 8-27-2019)
2-6-3:    POWERS; ADVISORY BODY:
   A.   The Forestry Commission shall have the following powers:
      1.   To prepare an Urban Forest Management Plan and recommend the
approval and adoption thereof; and
      2.   To review the Urban Forest Management Plan of the village at least
annually and to make any and all recommendations for amendments of, additions
to, and deletions from said Plan; and
      3.   To administer and oversee the enforcement of
Title 7, Chapter 5 of this Code; and
      4.   To review, consider, and make recommendations regarding any other
matter submitted to the Commission for review and consideration by the
Corporate Authorities of the Village.
   B.   The decisions, determinations, recommendations, and proposals of the
Forestry Commission shall in every instance be advisory in nature only and
shall be subject to final consideration, evaluation, and determination by the
Corporate Authorities of the Village. Every decision, determination,
recommendation, and/or proposal of the Forestry Commission shall be submitted
to the Corporate Authorities of the Village for final action. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-
27-2019)
2-6-4:    MEETINGS; RULES:
   A.   All meetings of the Forestry Commission shall be held at the call of
the chairperson and at such times and places within the village as the Forestry
Commission may determine. All meetings of the Forestry Commission shall be open
to the public and the Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings.
   B.   Every rule or regulation; every amendment or repeal thereof; and every
order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Forestry Commission shall
immediately be filed in the office of the Village Clerk and shall be a public
record. In the performance of its duties, the Forestry Commission may incur
such expenditures as shall be pre-approved by the Board of Trustees.
   C.   Every meeting of the Forestry Commission meeting shall be subject to
the Illinois Open Meetings Act. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019)
2-6-5:    COMPENSATION:
The members of the Forestry Commission shall serve without compensation. (Ord.
2019-19, 8-27-2019)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL LICENSING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
3-1-1 Licensing Requirements
3-1-2 Applications For Licenses
3-1-3 Investigation Of Applicant; Inspection Of Premises
3-1-4 Building And Premises Requirements
3-1-5 Payment Of Fees
3-1-6 Vehicle Tags
3-1-7 Posting License
3-1-8 Inspections
3-1-9 Nuisances
3-1-10 Change Of Location
3-1-11 Termination Of Licenses
3-1-12 Revocation Of License
3-1-13 Appeal Procedure
3-1-14 Penalties
3-1-1: LICENSING REQUIREMENTS:
Whenever in this Code a license is required for the maintenance, operation or
conduct of any business or establishment, or for doing business or engaging in
any activity or occupation, any person shall be subject to the requirement if
by himself or through an agent, employee or partner, he holds himself forth as
being engaged in the business or occupation or solicits patronage therefor,
actively or passively, or performs or attempts to perform any part of such
business or occupation in the Village. (1997 Code)
3-1-2: APPLICATIONS FOR LICENSES:
Applications for all licenses and permits required by ordinance shall be made,
in writing, to the Village Clerk on forms providing such information as is
required by such officer, in the absence of provisions to the contrary. (1997
Code)
3-1-3: INVESTIGATION OF APPLICANT; INSPECTION OF PREMISES:
Upon receipt of an application for a license or permit where ordinances of the
Village require an inspection or investigation before the issuance of such
permit or license, the Village Clerk shall refer such application to the proper
officer for making such inspection or investigation. (1997 Code)
3-1-4: BUILDING AND PREMISES REQUIREMENTS:
No license shall be issued for the conduct of any business and no permit shall
be issued for any thing or act if the premises and buildings to be used for the
purpose do not fully comply with the requirements of the Village. No such
license or permit shall be issued for the conduct of any business or
performance of any act which would involve a violation of the zoning ordinance
of the Village1. See Title 5 of this Code.1. (1997 Code)
3-1-5: PAYMENT OF FEES:
In the absence of provision to the contrary, all fees and charges for licenses
or permits shall be paid in advance at the time application therefor is made to
the Village Clerk. (1997 Code)
3-1-6: VEHICLE TAGS:
Whenever the number of vehicles used is the basis of a license fee, the Village
Clerk shall furnish each licensee with a tag or sticker which shall be posted
in a conspicuous place on each such vehicle while it is in use. (1997 Code)
3-1-7: POSTING LICENSE:
It shall be the duty of any person conducting a licensed business in the
Village to keep his license posted in a prominent place on the premises used
for such business at all times. (1997 Code)
3-1-8: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   Right Of Entry: Whenever inspections of the premises used for or in
connection with the operation of a licensed business or occupation are provided
for or required by ordinance or are reasonably necessary to secure compliance
with any Code provision or to detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty
of the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected, to
admit thereto for the purpose of making the inspection any officer or employee
of the Village who is authorized or directed to make such inspection at any
reasonable time that admission is requested upon proper presentation of
identification and legal authorization as required by law.
   B.   Submittal Of Samples: Whenever an analysis of any commodity or material
is reasonably necessary to secure conformance with any Code provision or to
detect violations thereof, it shall be the duty of the licensee whose business
is governed by such provision to give to any authorized officer or employee of
the Village requesting the same sufficient samples of such material or
commodity for such analysis upon request upon proper presentation of
identification and legal authorization as required by law.
   C.   Failure To Comply; Revocation Of License: In addition to any other
penalty which may be provided, the Village President may, on first cause,
revoke the license 1. See Section
3-1-12 of this Chapter for revocation procedures.1 of any licensed proprietor
of any licensed business in the Village who refuses to permit any such officer
or employee who is authorized to make such inspection or take such sample to
make the inspection or take an adequate sample of the said commodity, or who
interferes with such officer or employee while in the performance of his duty
in making such inspection. Provided, that no license shall be revoked for such
cause unless written demand is made upon the licensee or person in charge of
the premises, in the name of the Village, stating that such inspection or
sample is desired at the time it is sought to make the inspection or obtain the
sample. (1997 Code)
3-1-9: NUISANCES2. See Title 7, Chapter 1 of this Code for nuisance
provisions.2:
No business, licensed or not, shall be so conducted or operated as to amount to
a nuisance in fact. (1997 Code)
3-1-10: CHANGE OF LOCATION:
The location of any licensed business or occupation or of any permitted act,
other than license for the sale at retail of alcoholic beverages, may be
changed; provided, ten (10) days' notice thereof is given to the Village Clerk,
in the absence of any provision to the contrary; provided, that the building,
zoning and frontage consent requirements of the ordinances of the Village are
complied with. (1997 Code)
3-1-11: TERMINATION OF LICENSES:
   A.   All annual licenses shall terminate on April 30 where no provision to
the contrary is made.
   B.   The Village Clerk shall mail to all licensees of the Village a
statement of the time of expiration of the license held by the licensee, if an
annual, three (3) weeks prior to the date of such expirations. Provided, that a
failure to send out such notice or the failure of the licensee to receive it
shall not excuse the licensee from a failure to obtain a new license or a
renewal thereof nor shall it be a defense in an action from operation without a
license. (1988 Code § 10.106)
3-1-12: REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
Any license or permit, for a limited time, may be revoked by the Village
President and Village Board during the life of such license or permit for the
violation by the licensee or permittee of any provision relating to the license
or permit, the subject of the license or permit, or the premises occupied; such
revocation may be in addition to any fine imposed. The Village President and
Village Board shall be authorized to summarily order the cessation of business,
the closing of the premises, and the suspension of any business license or
permit for a period not to exceed fifteen (15) days.
   A.   Hearing: Within ten (10) days after the Village officials have so
acted, the Village President shall call a hearing for the purpose of
determining whether or not the license or permit should be revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: Notice of hearing for revocation of a license or
permit shall be given in writing setting forth specifically the grounds for the
complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be sent to the
licensee or permittee at his last known address at least five (5) days prior to
the date for the hearing.
   C.   Hearing Procedures: At the hearing, the licensee or permittee shall be
permitted counsel and shall have the right to submit evidence and cross-examine
witnesses. The Village President shall preside and shall render the decision
and recommendation.
   D.   Causes For Revocation: Business licenses and permits issued under the
ordinances of the Village, unless otherwise provided, may be revoked by the
Village President and the Village Board after notice and hearing as provided in
subsections B and C of this Section for any of the following causes:
      1.   Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for the license or permit.
      2.   Any violation by the licensee or permittee of ordinance provisions
or State law relating to the license or permit, the subject matter of the
license or permit or the premises occupied.
      3.   Conviction of the licensee or permittee of any felony or of a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.
      4.   Failure of the licensee or permittee to pay any fine or penalty
owing to the Village.
      5.   Refusal to permit any inspection or sampling or any interference
with a duly authorized Village officer or employee while in the performance of
his duties in making such inspections, as provided in the Village Code. (1997
Code)
3-1-13: APPEAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Any applicant aggrieved by the refusal of the Village to issue a
license or permit or by the revocation of a license or permit shall have the
right to appeal the Village's decision to the Village Board. Such appeal shall
be requested by submitting a written request to the Village President within
five (5) days of the action of the Village which is appealed.
   B.   The Village Board shall consider the appeal at its next regularly
scheduled meeting, at which time the applicant shall be entitled to present his
appeal orally or in writing. The Board shall act on the appeal within seven (7)
days of the hearing and shall either uphold the action of the Village or shall
direct the issuance of a license or permit which the Village had denied or the
reissuance of a license or permit which the Village has revoked. (1997 Code)
3-1-14: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any provisions of this Title
shall be subject to penalty as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. (1988 Code § 10.114; 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SOLICITORS
SECTION:
3-2-1 Definitions
3-2-2 Certificate Of Registration Required
3-2-3 Application And Issuance Of Certificate Of Registration
3-2-4 Revocation And Appeal Of Certificate Of Registration
3-2-5 Village Policy On Soliciting
3-2-6 Notice Regulating Soliciting
3-2-7 Duty Of Solicitors
3-2-8 Uninvited Soliciting Prohibited
3-2-9 Hours Of Soliciting
3-2-10 Soliciting Contributions From The Occupant Of Any Vehicle
3-2-11 Penalty
3-2-12 Mobile Food Vendor Permits
3-2-13 Locations Of Mobile Food Vendors
3-2-14 Hours Of Operation Of Mobile Food Vendors
3-2-15 Standards And Sanitary Regulations For Mobile Food Vendors
3-2-16 Revocation Of Permits For Mobile Food Vendors
3-2-17 Violations And Penalties - Mobile Food Vendors
3-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
CONVICTED: Shall mean and include a disposition of court supervision,
probation, adjudication, or conditional discharge.
HAWKER: Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any
goods, wares, merchandise or other commodities and cries his wares or exhibits
them for sale.
ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person who transports tangible personal property for
retail sale who does not maintain in an established office, distribution house,
sales house, warehouse, service center or residence from which such business is
conducted. However, this does not apply to any person who delivers tangible
personal property who is fulfilling an order for such property which was
solicited or placed by mail or other means. This does not apply to any person
holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to engage in
retail sales.
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE: A self-contained food service operation located in a
readily moveable, motorized, wheel or towed vehicle, with facilities for
storing, preparing, displaying and/or serving food or non-alcoholic beverages
for retail sale intended for individual consumption, commonly referred to as a
food truck.
MOBILE FOOD VENDOR: An individual, corporation, firm, partnership, association,
proprietorship, not-for-profit corporation or other legal entity engaged in the
business of selling food or non-alcoholic beverages from a mobile food vehicle.
Mobile food vendors do not include ice cream truck operators that do not park
on private property for the purpose of serving customers.
PEDDLER: Any person who shall sell or offer for sale, barter, or exchange any
goods, wares, merchandise or other commodities while traveling from residence
to residence on, along or upon the streets and sidewalks of the village.
REGISTERED SOLICITOR: Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of
registration as hereinafter provided, and which certificate is in the
possession of the solicitor on his or her person while engaged in soliciting.
RESIDENCE: Every separate living unit occupied for residential purposes by one
or more persons, contained within any type of building or structure.
SOLICITING: The word "soliciting" shall mean and include any one or more of the
following activities and persons:
   A.   Seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods, wares, merchandise,
foodstuffs, services, of any kind, character or description whatever, for any
kind of consideration whatever; or
   B.   Seeking to obtain prospective customers for application or purchase of
insurance of any type, kind or character; or
   C.   Seeking to obtain subscriptions to books, magazines, periodicals,
newspapers and every other type or kind of publications; or
   D.   Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money, clothing or any
other valuable thing for the support or benefit of any charitable or nonprofit
association, organization, corporation or project; or
   E.   Seeking to enlist support for or against a particular religion,
philosophy, ideology, political party, issue or candidate, whether accepting
donations of money or not, or distributing handbills or fliers advertising any
event or service; or
   F.   Seeking to advertise, promote, sell and/or explain any product,
service, organization or cause; or
   G.   Any person who is a hawker, peddler, transient merchant, or itinerant
vendor.
   H.   Mobile food vendor, as defined in this Chapter.
SPECIAL EVENT: An event held on public or private property including but not
limited to, parades, festivals, block parties, athletic events, outdoor
concerts, firework displays, carnivals, movie or television productions, or
other public meetings or events which significantly impact the Village or meet
some or all of the following criteria:
   A.   Closure of roads, streets, or Village blocks.
   B.   Use of Village owned property.
   C.   Use of Village services.
   D.   Use of amplified sound.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT: Any person who is engaged temporarily in the retail sale of
goods, wares or merchandise and who, for the purpose of conducting such
business, occupies any building, room, vehicle, structure of any kind, or
vacant lot. However, this does not apply to any person selling goods, wares or
merchandise which are raised, produced or manufactured by him, to any person
selling vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products at an established city or
village market, to any person operating a store or refreshment stand at a
resort, to any person operating a stand or booth on or adjacent to property
owned by him or upon which he resides, to any person operating a stand or booth
at a state or county fair, or to any person operating a stand or booth at a
trade show, exposition, convention or similar event. This does not apply to any
person holding a valid license, issued by a county or municipality, to engage
in retail sales. (Ord., 5-5-1970; amd. Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007; Ord. 2023-30,
7-18-2023)
3-2-2: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every person desiring to engage in, operate as, or conduct the business of a
hawker, peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor as herein defined,
within the village, is hereby required to obtain a certificate of registration
as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-3: APPLICATION AND ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Application: The application for a certificate of registration shall be
made upon a form provided by and filed with the village clerk. Each applicant
shall submit a nonrefundable application processing fee of fifty dollars
($50.00) and state in full the information requested on the application under
oath: (Ord. 2016-24, 7-26-2016)
      1.   Name and address of present place of residence and length of
residence at such address; also business address if other than residence
address; also social security number;
      2.   Address of place of residence during the past three (3) years if
other than present address;
      3.   Proof that applicant is over the age of eighteen (18);
      4.   Physical description of the applicant;
      5.   Name and address of the person whom the applicant is employed by or
represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation;
      6.   Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of
the soliciting which the applicant will engage in;
      7.   Period of time for which the certificate is applied for;
      8.   The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application
for certificate under this chapter, if any;
      9.   A list of all certificates of registration or licenses to conduct
business as a hawker, peddler, transient merchant or itinerant vendor obtained
by the applicant in Illinois in the twelve (12) months preceding the date of
filing of the application;
      10.   A statement as to whether a certificate of registration or license
issued to the applicant under this chapter or any other Illinois municipality
regulating soliciting has been revoked in the twelve (12) months preceding the
date of filing of the application;
      11.   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or the ordinances of any
other Illinois municipality regulating soliciting, in the twelve (12) months
preceding the date of filing of the application;
      12.   A statement as to whether the applicant has ever been convicted of
the commission of: a) a felony or b) a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or
false statements, under the laws of the state of Illinois or any other state or
federal law of the United States in the five (5) years preceding the date of
filing of the application;
      13.   A statement as to whether the applicant is required to register as
a sex offender under the Illinois sex offender registration act; and
      14.   Also such additional information as the chief of police or his
designee may deem necessary to process the application.
   The chief of police may require the applicant to submit to fingerprinting by
the police department in connection with the application.
   The chief of police shall cause to be kept in his office an accurate record
of every application received and acted upon together with all other
information and date pertaining thereto and all certificates of registration
issued under the provisions of this chapter and of the denial of applications.
Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed,
and every certificate issued and any renewal thereof shall be identified with
the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued.
   B.   Persons Ineligible For Certificate Of Registration: No certificate of
registration shall be issued to any person who has made a false material
statement in the application, or:
      1.   Has been convicted of the commission of: a) a felony, or b) a
misdemeanor involving dishonesty or false statements, under the laws of the
state of Illinois or any other state, or under the laws of the United States,
within five (5) years of the date of the application; or
      2.   Has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter or the ordinances of any other municipality regulating soliciting
within one year of the date of the application; or
      3.   Has had his certificate of registration issued under this chapter
revoked as provided in this chapter within one year of the date of the
application; or
      4.   Is required to register as a sex offender under the Illinois sex
offender registration act, 730 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/3, under the laws
of any other state, or under the laws of the United States. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-
27-2007)
   C.   Fees:
      1.   The fee for a transient merchant or itinerant vendor certificate of
registration shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, nonrefundable,
and shall expire on December 31 of the year it was issued.
      2.   The fee for a hawker or peddler certificate of registration shall be
fifty dollars ($50.00) for thirty (30) days, or two hundred dollars ($200.00)
for one year, nonrefundable, and the certificate of registration shall state
the expiration date thereof. (Ord. 2016-24, 7-26-2016)
   D.   Issuance And Display Of Certificate Of Registration: Within ten (10)
business days of filing the application, after consideration, investigation and
review of the application, each hawker, peddler, transient merchant or
itinerant vendor who is found to be fully qualified, upon payment of the
appropriate fee and deposit, shall be issued a certificate of registration,
signed by the village clerk bearing the seal of the village. The certificate of
registration shall at all times while soliciting within the village be carried
upon the person and worn in such a way as to be conspicuous, and exhibit the
same to any police officer or other person requesting to see the same. (Ord.
2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-4: REVOCATION AND APPEAL OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
   A.   Any certificate of registration issued under this chapter shall be
revoked by the chief of police or his designee if the holder of the certificate
of registration is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or
otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of
registration under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation,
written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police or his designee to
the holder of the certificate of registration in person or by certified U.S.
mail addressed to his residence address as set forth in the application.
Immediately upon the giving of such notice, the certificate of registration
shall become null and void.
   B.   Any person aggrieved by the denial or revocation of a certificate of
registration under the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to
appeal to the village board within twenty one (21) days after the date of
denial of the application or revocation of the certificate of registration. The
appeal must be in writing, and shall contain a specific request for or waiver
of a hearing.
   C.   If a hearing is requested, the hearing before the village board shall
take place within thirty (30) days of the written appeal. At the hearing, the
village board shall not be bound by the rules of evidence in the courts of law,
but shall, in ascertaining the conditions and practices involved in the
decision appealed, take into account all reliable, probative and substantial
evidence. The village board shall issue a written decision within fourteen (14)
days of the hearing.
   D.   Where a hearing is waived, the appealing party shall submit all
supporting documentation with the written appeal. The village board shall issue
a written decision within twenty one (21) days of the filing of the written
appeal. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-5: VILLAGE POLICY ON SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the governing body of this village
that the occupant or occupants of the residences in this village shall make the
determination of whether solicitors shall be or shall not be invited to their
respective residences between nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. of any weekday or Saturday. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-6: NOTICE REGULATING SOLICITING:
Every person desiring to secure the protection intended to be provided by the
regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter shall comply
with the following directions:
Notice of the determination by the occupant of giving invitation to solicitors,
or the refusal of invitation to solicitors, to any residence, shall be given in
the manner following:
A weatherproof card, approximately three inches by four inches (3" x 4") in
size, shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence,
indicating the determination by the occupant, containing the applicable words,
as follows:
   NO SOLICITORS INVITED
   or
   NO HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS
The letters shall be at least one-third inch (1/3"). For the purpose of
uniformity the village clerk shall provide the cards to persons requesting, at
the cost thereof.
Such card so exhibited shall constitute sufficient notice to any solicitor of
the determination by the occupant of the residence of the information contained
thereon. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-7: DUTY OF SOLICITORS:
It shall be the duty of every solicitor upon going onto any premises in the
municipality upon which a "residence" as herein defined is located to first
examine the notice provided for in section
3-2-6 of this chapter, if any is attached, and be governed by the statement
contained in the notice. If the notice states "NO SOLICITORS INVITED", then the
solicitor, whether registered or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises; and if the notice states "NO HAWKERS, PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT
MERCHANTS OR ITINERANT VENDORS", then the solicitor who is a hawker, peddler,
transient merchant or itinerant vendor shall immediately and peacefully depart
from the premises.
Any solicitor who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not,
shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do
so by the occupant. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-8: UNINVITED SOLICITING PROHIBITED:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person to go upon any premises and ring the doorbell upon or near any door, or
create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the
occupant of such residence, for the purpose of securing an audience with the
occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as herein defined, in defiance of
the notice exhibited at the residence in accordance with the provisions of
section
3-2-6 of this chapter. (Ord., 5-5-1970)
3-2-9: HOURS OF SOLICITING:
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any
person, whether registered under this chapter or not, to go upon any premises
and ring the doorbell upon or near any door of a residence located thereon, or
rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated
to attract the attention of the occupant of such residence, for the purpose of
securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in "soliciting" as
herein defined, prior to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00)
P.M. of any weekday, or Saturday, or at any time on a Sunday or on a state or
national holiday. (Ord. 2007-52, 11-27-2007)
3-2-10: SOLICITING CONTRIBUTIONS FROM THE OCCUPANT OF ANY VEHICLE:
   A.   No person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle except by a soliciting agency
who shall be:
      1.   Registered with the attorney general as a charitable organization as
provided by "an act to regulate solicitation and collection of funds for
charitable purposes, providing for violations thereof, and making an
appropriation therefor" 1. 225 ILCS 460/1 et seq. 1, approved July 26, 1963, as
amended; and
      2.   Engaged in a statewide fundraising activity; and
      3.   Liable for any injuries to any person or property during the
solicitation which is causally related to an act of ordinary negligence of the
soliciting agent; and
      4.   Authorized by village officials pursuant to an application for a
certificate of registration. (Ord. 2003-18, 4-22-2003)
   B.   Other restrictions on soliciting contributions from the occupant of any
vehicle:
      1.   Solicitation is allowed only at locations approved and/or designated
by the village board and shall not interfere with traffic flow or the operation
of official traffic control devices; and (Ord. 2016-24, 7-26-2016)
      2.   Any person engaged in the act of solicitation shall be eighteen (18)
years of age or more and wearing a high visibility vest; and (Ord. 2003-18, 4-
22-2003)
      3.   Solicitation is allowed on Saturday and Sunday between sunrise and
sunset; and (Ord. 2011-08, 3-22-2011)
      4.   The soliciting agency must provide proof of a one million dollar
($1,000,000.00) general liability insurance policy naming the village as an
additional insured; and
      5.   The soliciting agency must sign a hold harmless agreement provided
by the village; and
      6.   The village reserves the right to accept or reject any application
for certificate of registration, and the soliciting agency must comply with all
other policies and provisions the village may require. (Ord. 2003-18, 4-22-
2003)
3-2-11: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
in addition to revocation of his certificate of registration, if applicable, be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
3-2-12: MOBILE FOOD VENDOR PERMITS:
   A.   Permit required. Except as otherwise provided by this article, no
person shall operate a mobile food vehicle within the Village without first
obtaining a permit from the Village Clerk or designee. Permits shall be issued
either as (i) special event permits or (ii) annual permits.
   B.   Permit Duration; Fee.
      1.   Special event permits shall be issued in connection with a Special
Event and shall be valid for the duration of such event. The fee for a special
event permit shall be one hundred dollars ($100). A special event permit shall
specify the dates, times, and locations for which it is valid on its face,
which may differ from the dates, times, and locations otherwise permitted under
this Chapter.
      2.   Annual permits shall be valid until and through the April 30th
following their issuance. The fee for an annual permit shall be two hundred
dollars ($200), but said fee shall be prorated based on the number of whole or
partial months remaining before its expiration.
   C.   Application for Permit. The Village clerk or designee shall provide a
form for application for a mobile food vehicle permit as required under this
article. A mobile food vendor shall submit an application for a mobile food
vehicle permit at least seven (7) days in advance of the intended date for
beginning food sales upon the form provided by the Village clerk or designee
and filed with such. The permit application (for both special event and annual
permits) shall require the following:
      1.   The name, address and phone number of the owner and/or authorized
agent of the sponsoring business;
      2.   The name, address and phone number of the mobile food vendor;
      3.   The make, model, vehicle identification number, and photograph of
the mobile food vehicle;
      4.   Proof of registration and automobile insurance for the mobile food
vehicle;
      5.   A general description of the types of items to be sold from the
mobile food vehicle;
      6.   The specific location (common address or PIN) of the real property
within the corporate boundaries of the Village where the mobile food vehicle
will be operated along with a description of where the mobile food vehicle will
be operated on the real property;
      7.   Written permission from the owner(s) of the property(ies) on which
the mobile food truck will be operated;
      8.   The specific hours the mobile food vendor will operate the mobile
food vehicle; and
      9.   Valid copies of all applicable permits from the local health
departments;
      10.   A $50 non-refundable application fee.
   D.   Conditions for Approval and Operation. All mobile food vehicles must be
operated in compliance with the following regulations and conditions:
      1.   Mobile food vehicles must comply with all applicable ordinances and
regulations of the Village.
      2.   Mobile food vehicles must provide adequate receptacles for refuse
and properly dispose of all waste.
      3.   The Mobile Food Vendor must note its point of sale as the Village of
Minooka for all sales occurring within the Village’s corporate boundaries.
   E.   Issuance of Permit. If the Village Clerk determines that a mobile food
vendor permit application is complete and complies with all requirements of
this Chapter, the Village Clerk shall issue the permit requested, but only
after the Applicant has paid the appropriate permit fee. The non-refundable
application fee shall be credited against the permit fee.
   F.   Permit displayed. A copy of the approved mobile food vehicle permit
shall be clearly displayed on the mobile food vehicle at all times while
operating in the Village.
   G.   Written permission displayed. A copy of the written permission from the
owner of the property on which the mobile food truck will be operated shall be
clearly displayed on the mobile food vehicle at all times while operating in
the Village. (Ord. 2023-30, 7-18-2023)
3-2-13: LOCATIONS OF MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:  
   A.   Mobile food vendors are permitted at the following locations:
      1.   For annual permits: on private property with written permission of
the owner; and
      2.   For special event permits: on private property with written
permission of the owner and/or on public property (i.e. parks, Village parking
lots, and side street parking) only upon written permission given by Village.
   B.   The Village shall have the ability to restrict the location of mobile
food vendors should it be determined the location creates a parking shortage,
parking issue, or unsafe parking conditions. (Ord. 2023-30, 7-18-2023)
3-2-14: HOURS OF OPERATION OF MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
   A.   Mobile food vendors may conduct business from 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.,
Sunday through Saturday, unless otherwise specified in a special event permit.
   B.   Mobile food vendors are not licensed to conduct business door to door.
(Ord. 2023-30, 7-18-2023)
3-2-15: STANDARDS AND SANITARY REGULATIONS FOR MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
All mobile food vendors and mobile food vehicles shall at all times be in
compliance with the following standards and provisions:
   A.   All food preparation shall be conducted in strict accordance with all
applicable Village ordinances, State and County health department codes,
regulations and ordinances.
   B.   No person or entity shall offer for sale, or keep for the purpose of
selling, or offering for sale any food of any kind intended for human
consumption which is spoiled or tainted or is unwholesome and unfit for human
consumption for any reason. All tainted and unwholesome food intended for human
consumption may be condemned by the board of health and shall be seized and
destroyed by the heath officer or any police officer.
   C.   It is unlawful to sell, offer for sale, or keep for such purpose any
food or drink intended for human consumption which has been adulterated by any
material harmful in any way or which does not comply with statutes governing
the same.
   D.   Premises used for the sale or storage of food intended for human
consumption must be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. It is unlawful to
permit any accumulation of refuse or waste of any kind to remain therein for
more than 24 hours, and it is unlawful to permit any decaying matter or
decaying animal or plant material to remain on such premises.
   E.   Premises used for the storage, preparation or sale of food intended for
human consumption shall be kept free from flies, vermin, and rodents.
   F.   All persons engaged in handling or coming in contact with food intended
for sale or human consumption shall keep themselves clean, both as to person
and clothing. It is unlawful for any person who is afflicted with a carrier of
any infectious or contagious disease to handle or be engaged in the care or
preparation of any such food, and it is unlawful to permit any such person to
be employed in or about any premises where food is stored, prepared, or sold,
or to deliver such food.
   G.   Drive-through service shall be prohibited. (Ord. 2023-30, 7-18-2023)
3-2-16: REVOCATION OF PERMITS FOR MOBILE FOOD VENDORS: 
Any permit will be subject to revocation by the police chief if the holder of
the permit violates any of the provisions of this article or has made a false
material statement in the application or ceases to possess the character or
qualifications required by this article for the issuance of the permit under
the terms of this article. Violators shall be entitled to notice and the
opportunity for a hearing in the event that the Village seeks to revoke the
mobile food vendor’s license pursuant to this section. (Ord. 2023-30, 7-18-
2023)
3-2-17: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $25.00 and not more
than $750.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2023-30,
7-18-2023)
CHAPTER 3
ITINERANT AND TRANSIENT MERCHANTS1. See
Chapter 2 of this title.1 
(Rep. by Ord. 2008-18, 6-10-2008)
CHAPTER 4
LIQUOR CONTROL
SECTION:
3-4-1 Definitions
3-4-2 Liquor Control Commissioner
3-4-3 License Required
3-4-4 Restrictions On Issuance Of License
3-4-5 Application For License
3-4-6 Classification Of Licenses
3-4-7 Number Of Licenses; Fees
3-4-8 Term Of License, Fee Adjustments, Rebates And Disposition
3-4-9 Bond; Insurance
3-4-10 Issuance Of License
3-4-11 Record Of Licenses
3-4-12 Renewal Of License
3-4-13 Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-4-14 Hours Of Operation
3-4-15 Licensed Premises, Transfer
3-4-16 Posting License
3-4-17 Sales To Certain Persons Prohibited; Minors
3-4-18 Prohibitions Applying To Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One
3-4-19 View Of Premises
3-4-20 Liquor Prohibition
3-4-21 Disorderly Conduct On Premises
3-4-22 Responsibility Of Licensee
3-4-23 Sanitary Conditions
3-4-24 Penalty
3-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
                        Any alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and every liquid or
                        solid, patented or not, containing alcohol, spirits,
                        wine or beer and capable of being consumed as a
                        beverage by a human being. The provisions of this
                        chapter shall not apply to alcohol used in the
                        manufacture of denatured alcohol nor to any liquid or
                        solid containing one-half of one percent (0.5%) or less
                        of alcohol by volume, nor shall the provisions of this
ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS:      chapter apply to flavoring extracts, concentrates,
                        syrups or medicinal, mechanical, scientific, culinary
                        or toilet preparations, or food products unfit for
                        beverage purposes. But the provisions of this chapter
                        shall not be construed to exclude or not apply to
                        alcoholic liquor used in the manufacture, preparation
                        or compounding of such products. None of the provisions
                        of this chapter shall apply to wine intended for use
                        and used by any church or religious organization for
                        sacramental purposes.
                        A room or rooms in a building specifically set aside
BANQUET FACILITIES:     for private parties scheduled in advance. Food and
                        drinks are not normally served in these rooms on a
                        regular basis.
                        A counter over and upon which alcoholic beverages are
BAR:                    prepared from the area where consumers of alcoholic
                        beverages sit or stand to receive and/or consume such
                        beverages.
LICENSEE:               Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club
                        holding a license under the provisions of this chapter.
                        A person or persons acting, singing, playing an
LIVE ENTERTAINMENT:     instrument, disc jockey, or otherwise performing in
                        person, whether the same be for compensation or not.
                        Any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and
                        held out to the public as a place where meals are
                        served, and where meals are actually served, without
RESTAURANT:             sleeping accommodations. Such space being provided with
                        adequate and sanitary kitchen and dining equipment,
                        capacity and having employed therein a sufficient
                        number of employees to prepare, cook, and serve
                        suitable food for its guests.
                        Any transfer, exchange or barter in any manner or by
SELL:                   any means whatsoever for consideration and includes all
                        sales made by any person whether principal, proprietor,
                        agent, servant or employee.
SELL OR SALE AT RETAIL: Selling or offering for sale alcoholic liquor for use
                        or consumption and not for resale in any form.
                        Counter over or upon which alcoholic beverages are
SERVICE BAR:            prepared to be served to customers not seated at or in
                        the bar area.
TAVERN:                 An establishment where alcoholic liquors are sold to be
                        consumed on the premises.
VIDEO GAMING:           The ownership, placement, maintenance, operation or use
                        of a video gaming terminal.
                        An establishment for which the primary or major
VIDEO GAMING CAFÉ:     business focus is video gaming and the service of
                        alcohol and food is incidental to the operation of the
                        video gaming terminals.
                        Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
                        of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a
                        video game, including, but not limited to, video poker,
                        line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the Illinois
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL:  Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and
                        microprocessors in which the player may receive free
                        games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The
                        term does not include a machine that directly dispenses
                        coins, cash, or tokens or is for amusement purposes
                        only.
                        Any alcoholic beverage obtained by fermentation of the
                        natural contents of fruits or vegetables containing
WINE:                   sugar, including such beverages when fortified by the
                        addition of alcohol or spirits. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-
                        2001; amd. Ord. 2006-33, 8-22-2006; Ord. 2023-22, 5-23-
                        2023)
 
3-4-2: LIQUOR CONTROL COMMISSIONER:
   A.   The president of the board of trustees shall be the local liquor
control commissioner for the village, and he shall annually appoint two (2)
members of the village board of trustees as the liquor control commission to
assist him in the exercise of the powers and performance of duties herein
provided for the local liquor control commissioner. The liquor control
commission herein created shall have power to grant and revoke for cause all
local licenses; to enter or authorize any law enforcing officer to enter at any
time upon any premises licensed hereunder, to determine whether any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated; to receive complaint from any
citizen within the village that any provisions of this chapter have been or are
being violated; and to act upon such complaint in the manner hereinafter
provided; and to receive local license fees and pay the same forthwith to the
village treasurer.
   B.   The local liquor control commission shall have the right to examine or
cause to be examined under oath any applicant for a local license, or for any
renewal thereof, or any licensees upon whom notice of revopcation has been
served in the manner hereinafter provided, and to examine or cause to be
examined the books and records of any such applicants or licensee; to hear
testimony and take proof for his information in the performance of his duties,
and for such purpose to issue subpoenas.
   C.   Where an applicant for a liquor license is (i) a governmental entity or
(ii) a not-for-profit organization with a significant economic, political,
social or charitable relationship to the Minooka community, the local liquor
control commission is authorized to waive or defer (i) fingerprinting and/or
background check and (ii) any fees that would otherwise be payable to the
village. For purposes of this section, a not-for-profit organization will be
deemed to have a significant economic, political, social or charitable
relationship to the Minooka community if it can demonstrate at least one (1) of
the following.
      1.   Having a membership of which fifty percent (50%) or more reside
within the corporate limits of the village; or
      2.   Having a charter or other official recognition by a parent state or
national organization that designates it a Minooka chapter. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-
25-2001; amd. Ord. 2025-15, 5-27-2025)
3-4-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall be engaged in the business of selling alcoholic liquors at
retail within the limits of the village without having first procured a license
therefor. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-4: RESTRICTIONS ON ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
   A.   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance, unless formally revoked as herein provided, and shall
not be transferable.
   B.   No license of any kind shall be issued by the local liquor control
commission to:
      1.   A person under the age of twenty one (21).
      2.   A person who is not a resident of the village unless such person
shall appoint a registered agent for the purpose of receiving a summons, mail
and notices; provided, that such registered agent shall be a resident of the
village and shall be a person who would be eligible to receive a license
hereunder.
      3.   A person who is not of good character and reputation in the
community in which he resides. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
      4.   A person who is not a legal resident of the United States. (Ord.
2005-08, 3-8-2005)
      5.   A person who has been convicted of a felony under any federal or
state law.
      6.   A person who has been convicted of being the keeper or is keeping a
house of ill fame.
      7.   A person who has been convicted of pandering or other crime or
misdemeanor opposed to decency and morality.
      8.   A person whose license issued under the laws of the state or this
chapter has been revoked for cause.
      9.   A person who, at the time of application for renewal of any license
issued hereunder, would not be eligible for such license upon a first
application.
      10.   A copartnership unless all of the members of such copartnership
shall be qualified to obtain a license.
      11.   A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof, or any
stockholder or stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five percent (5%)
of the stock of such corporation, would not be eligible to receive a license
hereunder for any reason other than citizenship and residence within the
village.
      12.   A corporation unless it is incorporated in Illinois or unless it is
a foreign corporation which is qualified under the Illinois business
corporation act1. 805 ILCS 5/1.01 et seq.1 to transact business in Illinois.
      13.   A person whose place of business is conducted by a manager or agent
unless the manager or agent possesses the same qualifications required by the
licensee.
      14.   A person who has been convicted of a violation of any federal or
state law concerning the manufacture, possession or sale of alcoholic liquor
subsequent to the effective date hereof or has forfeited his bond to appear in
court to answer charges for any such violations.
      15.   A person who does not beneficially own the premises for which a
license is sought or does not have a lease thereon for the full period for
which the license is to be issued.
      16.   Any law enforcing public official, any mayor, alderman or member of
a city council or commission, any president of the village board of trustees,
any member of the village board of trustees or any president or member of a
county board, and no such official shall be interested in any way either
directly or indirectly in the manufacture, sale or distribution of alcoholic
liquor.
      17.   A person who is not a beneficial owner of the business to be
operated by the licensee.
      18.   A person who has been convicted of a gambling offense as proscribed
by any of subsections (a)(3) through (a)(11) of section 5/28-1, or as
proscribed by section 28-1.1 or section 5/28-3 of the criminal code, as
heretofore or hereafter amended1. 720 ILCS 5/28-1, 5/28-1.1, or 5/28-3.1 or as
proscribed by a statute replaced by any of the aforesaid statutory provisions.
      19.   A person to whom a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
      20.   A copartnership to which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period or if any of the partners have been issued a federal gaming device stamp
or federal wagering stamp by the federal government for the current tax period.
      21.   A corporation if any officer, manager or director thereof or any
stockholder owning in the aggregate more than twenty percent (20%) of the stock
of such corporation has been issued a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp for the current tax period.
      22.   Any premises for which a federal gaming device stamp or a federal
wagering stamp has been issued by the federal government for the current tax
period.
   C.   No license shall be issued for the purpose of selling or offering for
sale, at retail, any intoxicating liquor in any dwelling, house, flat or
apartment building. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
   D.   A licensee is further subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person having a retailer's license or any
agent of such licensee to accept, receive, or borrow money or anything of
value, or accept or receive credit (other than merchandising credit in the
ordinary course of business for a period not to exceed 30 days) directly or
indirectly from any manufacturer, importing distributor, or distributor of
alcoholic liquor.
      2.   No licensee shall deny or permit his agents and employees to deny
any person the full and equal enjoyment of the accommodations, advantages,
facilities, and privileges of any licensed premises.
      3.   No licensee shall sell liquor to any persons on credit, or in
payment for services rendered, but this does not apply to clubs and hotels and
liquor purchased for consumption off the premises.
      4.   No licensee shall fill or refill any original package of alcoholic
liquor with the same or any other kind or quality of liquor. No liquor shall be
sold except in original packages. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-8-2002)
3-4-5: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   An applicant for license shall submit to the local liquor control
commission an application in writing under oath, stating:
      1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof, and in case of a corporation, the date of incorporation,
the purpose for which it was organized, the names and addresses of the officers
and directors and if a majority in interest of the stock of such corporation is
owned by one person or his nominees, the name and address of such person.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, and if a naturalized citizen, the
time and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The location and description of the premises which is to be operated
under such license.
      4.   The character of business of the applicant and, in case of a
corporation, the object for which it was formed.
      5.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character or, in case of a corporation, the date on which it was chartered.
      6.   A statement that applicant has never been convicted of a felony and
is not disqualified to receive a license by reason of any matter or thing
contained in this chapter.
      7.   A statement whether applicant has made similar application for a
similar other license on premises other than described in this application, and
the disposition of such application.
      8.   That applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of
Illinois, of the United States or the provisions of this code in the conduct of
his place of business.
      9.   Whether a previous license by any state or subdivision thereof or by
the federal government has been revoked and the reasons therefor.
   B.   All applications for license shall be accompanied by a certified check,
cashier's check, United States postal money order or cash in the full amount of
the license fee required to be paid, which fee shall be returned to such
applicant if such application is denied. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-6: CLASSIFICATION OF LICENSES:
Every person engaged in the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in the village
shall pay an annual license fee. Such licenses shall be divided into the
following classes:
   A.   Class A - Restaurant, Permitting Bar, Carryouts, And Live
Entertainment: Class A licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption upon the specified premises in conjunction with the
operation of a “restaurant”, as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, service
bar and/or at tables. Including the sale, at retail, of alcoholic beverages in
their original containers, with seals unbroken, for consumption elsewhere than
upon the premises (carryouts) are permitted. Live entertainment is permitted.
   B.   Class A1 - Restaurant, Permitting Bar, And Carryouts, Live
Entertainment Prohibited: Class A1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption upon the specified premises in conjunction
with the operation of a “restaurant”, as herein defined. Sales at or over a
bar, service bar and/or tables. Including the sale, at retail, of alcoholic
beverages in their original containers, with seals unbroken, for consumption
elsewhere than upon the premises (carryouts) are permitted. Live entertainment
is expressly prohibited.
   C.   Class A2 - Restaurant, Prohibiting Bars, Carryouts And Live
Entertainment: Class A2 licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic liquor
for consumption upon the specified premises in conjunction with a “restaurant”
as herein defined. The sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption off the
premises (carryouts) is expressly prohibited. Live entertainment is expressly
prohibited. A service bar(s) is permitted. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
   D.   Class A3 - Restaurant, Permitting Bar And Live Entertainment,
Prohibiting Carryouts: Class A3 licenses shall authorize the sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption upon the specified premises in conjunction with the
operation of a “restaurant” as herein defined. Sales at or over a bar, service
bar and/or tables is permitted. Live entertainment is permitted. The sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption off the premises (carryouts) is expressly
prohibited. (Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004)
   E.   Class A4 - Restaurant, Wine And Beer Only, Prohibiting Bars, And
Permitting Carryouts And Live Entertainment: Class A4 licenses shall authorize
the sale of wine and beer only for consumption upon the specified premises in
conjunction with the operation of a “restaurant” as herein defined. A service
bar is permitted. Including the sale, at retail, of wine only in its original
container, with seals unbroken, for consumption elsewhere than upon the
premises (carryouts) is permitted. Live entertainment is permitted. The
following restrictions shall apply to class A4 licenses:
      1.   All wine shall be dispensed in returnable or disposable bottles or
cups, or sold in its original container, with seals broken and cap and/or cork
removed, for consumption on the premises.
      2.   The retail sale or distribution of wine and/or beer through a drive-
through is strictly prohibited.
      3.   All entertainment must be confined solely within the fully enclosed
building of the licensed premises.
      4.   Sound from the entertainment must not be audible outside the
enclosed building of the licensed premises. (Ord. 2010-08, 1-26-2010)
   F.   Class A5 License - Video Gaming Café: Class A5 Licenses authorize the
retail sale of all kinds of alcoholic liquors for consumption on the licensed
premises of a video gaming café. The class of license shall not permit
entertainment on the licensed premises. The full amount of the fee for such
class A5 licenses shall be set forth in section 3-4-7 of this chapter. The
following restrictions shall apply to class A5 licenses:
      1.   The licensed premises must serve food and beverages, which offerings
shall include a variety of non-alcoholic beverages and hot and cold or
prepackaged and/or pre-prepared food items, which shall be served during all
hours of operation.
      2.   The operation of video gaming terminals shall not be permitted
during the hours alcoholic liquor sales are prohibited as provided in section
3-4-14 of this chapter.
      3.   The licensee must comply with the provisions of Title 3, Chapter 5
of this Code applicable to video gaming.
      4.   There shall be issued in the Village no more than one (1) class A5
licenses to be in effect at any one time.
   G.   Class B - Tavern, Banquet Facilities, Permitting Bar And Live
Entertainment: Class B licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic
liquor for consumption upon the specified premises at or over a bar(s), service
bar(s) and at tables for businesses operating both as a public “tavern” and
“banquet facilities”, as herein defined, for private parties scheduled in
advance including, but not limited to, wedding receptions, political and
charitable fundraisers, club gatherings, bowling and other sport banquets,
anniversary parties, company parties and similar events. The following
restrictions apply to class B licenses:
      1.   All entertainment must be confined solely within the fully enclosed
building of the licensed premises.
      2.   Sound from the entertainment must not be audible outside the
enclosed building of the licensed premises.
      3.   Except for arrival and departure, the public is required to stay
within the enclosed building on the licensed premises.
      4.   For licensed premises with banquet facilities that exceed two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in size the following parking
regulations shall apply. Public customer parking for the licensed facility is
strictly controlled by the licensee and limited exclusively to a private
parking lot owned or operated by the licensee. No roadside, curbside or
neighborhood parking is permitted.
   H.   Class B1 - Banquet Facilities, Permitting Bar And Live Entertainment:
Class B1 licenses shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor for
consumption upon the specified premises at or over bar(s), a service bar(s)
and/or at tables for businesses operating as a banquet facility, as herein
defined, only for private parties scheduled in advance including, but not
limited to, wedding receptions, political and charity fundraisers, club
gatherings, bowling and other sport banquets, anniversary parties, company
parties and similar events. The following restrictions apply to class B1
licenses:
      1.   All entertainment must be confined solely within the fully enclosed
building of the licensed premises.
      2.   Sound from the entertainment must not be audible outside the
enclosed building of the licensed premises.
      3.   For other than operation as a banquet facility and except for
arrival and departure, the public is required to stay within the enclosed
building on the licensed premises.
      4.   Public customer parking for the licensed facility is strictly
controlled by the licensee and limited exclusively to a private parking lot
owned or operated by the licensee. No roadside, curbside or neighborhood
parking is permitted.
   I.   Class C License - Tavern, Permitting Bar And Carryouts, Live
Entertainment Prohibited: Class C licenses shall authorize the retail sale of
alcoholic liquor for consumption upon specified premises at or over bar(s),
service bar(s) and/or at tables. Including the sale, at retail, of alcoholic
beverages in their original containers, with seals unbroken, for the
consumption elsewhere than upon the premises (carryouts). Live entertainment is
expressly prohibited.
   J.   Class D License - Package Liquor Store (Carryouts): Class D licenses
shall authorize the retail sale of alcoholic liquor in their original package,
with seals unbroken, for consumption at places other than upon the licensed
premises.
   K.   Class D1 License - Beer And Wine Carryouts: Class D1 licenses shall
only authorize the retail sale of beer and wine in their original package, with
seals unbroken, for consumption at places other than upon the licensed
premises. The following restrictions apply to class D1 licenses:
      The licensed premises shall have a maximum of twenty five percent (25%)
of the total square feet of sales area devoted to the sale and display of beer
and wine.
      The licensee shall submit a floor plan indicating the total square feet
of the sales area and the total square feet of the sales area devoted to the
sale and display of beer and wine.
   L.   Class E License - Outing And Temporary Permits: Class E licenses shall
authorize the temporary sale of alcoholic liquor at the place and for the date
(s) specified in the application for public outings or gatherings. However, no
single outing or temporary permit shall exceed three (3) consecutive days.
   M.   Class F License - Outdoor Amusement Licenses: Class F licenses shall
authorize the retail sale of beer and wine only on the premises designated in
the license and at concession stands. This license shall be available only to
concessionaires at properly zoned outdoor amusement areas. This license shall
permit entertainment on the premises, but shall be restricted as follows:
      1.   There shall be no tailgating or possession of any kind of alcoholic
liquor in the parking lots or any location other than as expressly approved
herein.
      “Tailgating” shall mean persons driving to the facility and commencing to
consume food and/or beverages brought with them.
      2.   There shall be no dispensing of alcohol in their original
containers, nor in bottles or cans of any kind whatsoever. All drink containers
must be either plastic or paper and must be made of either recyclable and/or
biodegradable products.
      3.   The maximum size drink to be dispensed for beer shall be twenty four
(24) ounces, for wine shall be eight (8) ounces.
      4.   The Minooka police department as agents for the local liquor
commissioner reserve the right to prohibit the sale of or to stop all sales of
alcohol or to restrict the number of drinks sold to any one individual, when
the public health, welfare and safety so require.
      5.   All the concession stands, including portable stands, shall be
subject to review and approval by the building inspector and the village police
department, and no liquor license shall be issued without such approval. Also,
such concession stands shall be subject to continuing inspection and if such
structures are not in compliance with all village codes, the liquor license
shall be suspended by appropriate proceedings until such time as such
structures are brought into conformance.
   N.   Class G License - Outdoor Food And Liquor Consumption: Class G licenses
shall authorize the holder of a class A, A1, A2, A3, A4, B, B1, or C liquor
license pursuant to this chapter to apply for a license for the purpose of
outdoor food and liquor consumption. “Outdoor food and liquor consumption”
shall mean an open outdoor area with or without a roof where food and/or
alcoholic beverages are served and/or consumed. It shall be unlawful for any
person to keep, maintain, conduct, operate, or allow outdoor food and liquor
consumption without first obtaining a license in compliance with this chapter.
The following restrictions shall apply to class G licenses:
      1.   The licensed outdoor area floor space shall be no greater than two
thousand (2,000) square feet and shall not be expanded beyond the area approved
in the class G license.
      2.   There shall be no dispensing of alcohol in glass bottles or glass
containers of any kind whatsoever. All drink containers must be either plastic
or paper and must be made of either recyclable and/or biodegradable products.
      3.   Floors shall be of a hard surface; i.e., concrete, asphalt or brick
material.
      4.   No live entertainment permitted outside the enclosed building of the
licensed premises.
      5.   While emergency exits are required, any part of the licensed outdoor
area not abutted by a building shall be enclosed by a fence, with an enclosed
area that prohibits unrestricted access from a public way.
      6.   The entrance to the licensed outdoor area shall be through the
indoor licensed premises.
      7.   Noise emitting from the licensed outdoor area shall not unreasonably
disturb the area in which it is located.
      8.   The licensed outdoor area shall be particularly described and
approved as to location and construction and adjacent to and operated as part
of the premises licensed to sell such alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the adjoining premises.
      9.   Food must be available from the kitchen facility of the indoor
licensed facility during the hours of operation of the licensed outdoor area.
   O.   Class G1 License - Outdoor Food And Liquor Consumption, Outdoor Live
Entertainment Permitted: Class G1 licenses shall authorize the holder of a
class A, A1, A2, A3, A4, B, B1, or C liquor license pursuant to this chapter to
apply for a license for the purpose of outdoor food and liquor consumption.
“Outdoor food and liquor consumption” shall mean an open outdoor area with or
without a roof where food and/or alcoholic beverages are served and/or
consumed. It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain, conduct,
operate, or allow outdoor food and liquor consumption without first obtaining a
license in compliance with this chapter. The following restrictions shall apply
to class G1 licenses:
      1.   The licensed outdoor area floor space shall be no greater than two
thousand (2,000) square feet and shall not be expanded beyond the area approved
in the class G1 license.
      2.   There shall be no dispensing of alcohol in glass bottles or glass
containers of any kind whatsoever. All drink containers must be either plastic
or paper and must be made of either recyclable and/or biodegradable products.
      3.   Floors shall be of a hard surface; i.e., concrete, asphalt or brick
material.
      4.   Live entertainment is permitted outside the enclosed building of the
licensed premises, subject to the following:
         a.   There shall be a minimum of two hundred fifty feet (250') between
the licensed establishment and R (residential) districts. For the purpose of
this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without regard
to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion where live
entertainment is conducted to the nearest property line of a lot in an R
(residential) district occupied by a dwelling unit.
         b.   The maximum noise levels are as follows:
   MAXIMUM PERMISSIBLE EFFECTIVE SOURCE NOISE LEVELS1
 
                    Commercial         Residential
                    Receiving Property Receiving Property
Source Property     Daytime/Nighttime  Daytime Nighttime
Business/commercial 65                 60      50
 
      Note:
         1.    When measured in dBA at or within the real property line of the
receiving property. For purposes of this subsection, “decibel (dB)” means a
unit which describes the sound pressure level or intensity of sound, “A-
weighting” means the electronic filtering in sound level meters that models
human hearing frequency sensitivity, and “daytime” means between the hours of
7:00 A.M. and 9:00 P.M. Monday through Friday, and between 8:00 A.M. and 9:00
P.M. Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. When the measurement is A-
weighted, the designation is “dBA”. Measurements shall be taken within the
property line of the affected person as close as practicable to the sound
source to obtain a representative measurement. For the purpose of measuring the
intensity and frequency of sound, the sound level meter calibrated in decibels
shall be employed. Sounds which cannot be measured accurately with the sound
level meter shall be measured with the octave band analyzer and the impact
noise analyzer.
         c.   The hours for live entertainment shall be not later than ten
o’clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Wednesday and not later than eleven o’clock
(11:00) P.M. Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
      5.   While emergency exits are required, any part of the licensed outdoor
area not abutted by a building shall be enclosed by a fence, with an enclosed
area that prohibits unrestricted access from a public way.
      6.   The entrance to the licensed outdoor area shall be through the
indoor licensed premises.
      7.   Noise emitting from the licensed outdoor area shall not unreasonably
disturb the area in which it is located.
      8.   The licensed outdoor area shall be particularly described and
approved as to location and construction and adjacent to and operated as part
of the premises licensed to sell such alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the adjoining premises.
      9.   Food must be available from the kitchen facility of the indoor
licensed facility during the hours of operation of the licensed outdoor area.
      10.   Smoking shall be prohibited in the licensed outdoor area.
   P.   Class H License - Historic Sidewalk Dining License: Class H licenses
shall authorize the holder of a class A, A1, A2, A3, A4, B, B1, or C liquor
license pursuant to this chapter to apply for a license for the purpose of
outdoor food and liquor consumption in a sidewalk dining area permitted under
Title 3, Chapter 19 (Sidewalk Dining Permits) of the Village Code. Class H
licenses shall also be restricted for existing commercial buildings in the
historic downtown district along both sides of Mondamin Street, ranging from
West Street to Wabasso Street. This restricted designation is to address the
deficiencies and shortfalls associated with the existing commercial buildings
in the historic area, yet enabled to assist promote business downtown area. It
shall be unlawful for any person to allow the service and consumption of
alcoholic liquors in a sidewalk dining area without first obtaining a license
in compliance with this chapter. The following restrictions shall apply to
class H licenses:
      1.   The licensed sidewalk dining area shall be established, operated,
and maintained in full compliance with all requirements listed in Title 3,
Chapter 19 (Sidewalk Dining Permits) of the Village Code, as amended from time
to time. (Including submittal of a concept plan)
      2.   No live entertainment is permitted outside the enclosed building of
the licensed premises that is the subject of the licensee’s class A, A1, A2,
A3, A4, B, B1, or C liquor license.
      3.   The licensed sidewalk dining area shall be particularly described
and approved as to location and construction and adjacent to and operated as
part of the premises licensed to sell such alcoholic beverages for consumption
on the adjoining premises.
      4.   As a condition of outdoor alcohol service, food must be (i)
available from the indoor kitchen of the licensed facility and (ii) actually
served to the patrons utilizing the licensed outdoor area.
      5.   Every outdoor dining area permitted pursuant to this Chapter shall
be enclosed by an outdoor fence, barrier, partition, and/or dividers designed
to clearly show separation between the outdoor dining area and the remainder of
the sidewalk. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004; Ord.
2005-37, 8-9-2005; Ord. 2006-33, 8-22-2006; Ord. 2007-16, 4-10-2007; Ord. 2008-
22, 6-24-2008; Ord. 2009-20, 5-12-2009; Ord. 2010-13, 3-23-2010; Ord. 2014-18,
5-27-2014; Ord. 2023-22, 5-23-2023)
3-4-7: NUMBER OF LICENSES; FEES:
   A.   There shall be issued, in the Village, not more than the following
number of licenses:
Class Number Fees
Class Number                                                     Fees
A     2                                                          $1,200.00
A1    2                                                          1,000.00
A2    2                                                          900.00
A3    4                                                          1,000.00
A4    0                                                          1,000.00
A5                                                               900.00
B     1                                                          1,200.00
B1    0                                                          800.00
C     1                                                          900.00
D     2                                                          750.00
D1    6                                                          750.00
      No limitation, but its issuance is entirely within the
E     reasonable discretion of the Village President and consent $25.00 per day
      of the Board
F     1                                                          $1,000.00
G     2                                                          500.00
G1    3                                                          500.00
H     1                                                          500.00
 
   B.   In the event that the number of outstanding licenses is not at the
maximum allowable for Classes A through D, such request will be acted upon by
the Liquor Commission pursuant to the provisions in sections
3-4-4 and
3-4-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001; amd. Ord. 2002-07, 3-12-2002;
Ord. 2004-06, 1-27-2004; Ord. 2005-02, 1-25-2005; Ord. 2005-09, 3-8-2005; Ord.
2005-37, 8-9-2005; Ord. 2005-38, 8-23-2005; Ord. 2005-42, 9-27-2005; Ord. 2005-
51, 10-25-2005; Ord. 2005-52, 10-25-2005; Ord. 2006-31, 7-25-2006; Ord. 2006-
33, 8-22-2006; Ord. 2006-51, 12-19-2006; Ord. 2007-15, 3-13-2007; Ord. 2007-17,
4-10-2007; Ord. 2007-23, 5-8-2007; Ord. 2007-33, 6-26-2007; Ord. 2007-59, 12-
19-2007; Ord. 2008-09, 3-11-2008; Ord. 2008-22, 6-24-2008; Ord. 2008-30, 11-12-
2008; Ord. 2009-14, 3-24-2009; Ord. 2009-32, 10-27-2009; Ord. 2010-11, 2-23-
2010; Ord. 2010-12, 2-23-2010; Ord. 2010-16, 4-27-2010; Ord. 2010-24, 9-21-
2010; Ord. 2010-25, 9-21-2010; Ord. 2011-13, 6-21-2011; Ord. 2012-05, 2-24-
2012; Ord. 2012-26, 10-23-2012; Ord. 2013-06, 3-26-2013; Ord. 2013-07, 3-26-
2013; Ord. 2013-12, 4-23-2013; Ord. 2013-17, 5-28-2013; Ord. 2013-19, 5-28-
2013; Ord. 2014-18, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2015-20, 6-23-2015; Ord. 2015-21, 6-23-
2015; Ord. 2015-33, 12-15-2015; Ord. 2016-05, 1-26-2016; Ord. 2016-06, 1-26-
2016; Ord. 2016-18, 5-24-2016; Ord. 2016-30, 8-23-2016; Ord. 2017-19, 9-26-
2017; Ord. 2017-20, 9-26-2017; Ord. 2017-34, 12-19-2017; Ord. 2018-14, 5-22-
2018; Ord. 2018-18, 6-26-2018; Ord. 2018-27, 10-23-2018; Ord. 2018-28, 10-23-
2018; Ord. 2018-29, 10-23-2018; Ord. 2019-09, 2-26-2019; Ord. 2019-10, 2-26-
2019; Ord. 2019-12, 4-23-2019; Ord. 2019-22, - - ; Ord. 2020-9, 2-25-2020; Ord.
2020-10, 2-25-2020; Ord. 2021-7, 1-26-2021; Ord. 2021-16, 8-31-2021; Ord. 2022-
49, 12-20-2022; Ord. 2023-22, 5-23-2023; Ord. 2024-28, 6-25-2024)
3-4-8: TERM OF LICENSE, FEE ADJUSTMENTS, REBATES AND DISPOSITION:
   A.   Term Of License: No license, except class E, shall be issued under this
chapter for a period of less than one calendar year unless the same is issued
pursuant to application made subsequent to the first day of any fiscal year, in
which event, the license shall be issued for the remaining period of the year,
and no license shall be issued for a period of more than one year. Except for
class G licenses, all licenses issued hereunder shall be valid from May 1 to
April 30 of each year. (Ord. 2006-51, 12-19-2006)
   B.   Fee Adjustments, Credits And Rebates: The fee for all licenses other
than class E, outing permits, shall be the full annual fee set forth herein in
the case of all renewals of existing licenses and in the case of all new
licenses applied for during the first quarter of any fiscal year, three-fourths
(3/4) of the annual fee set forth for new licenses applied for during the
second quarter of any fiscal year, one-half (1/2) of the annual fee set forth
for new licenses applied for during the third quarter of any fiscal year and
one-fourth (1/4) of the annual fee set forth for new licenses applied for
during the last quarter of any fiscal year. In the event any licensee shall
voluntarily surrender a liquor license prior to the expiration of its term, and
a subsequent liquor license of any class shall be issued to any other person
for the same premises during the same fiscal year, the village shall give a
credit upon the required second license fee in the amount of one-fourth (1/4)
of the annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is
surrendered in the third quarter of such fiscal year, one-half (1/2) of the
annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is surrendered in
the second quarter of the fiscal year and three-fourths (3/4) of the annual fee
paid by the former licensee if the first license is surrendered in the first
quarter of the fiscal year. There shall be no rebate of any license fees, and
no credit shall be given in the event a first license for any given premises is
revoked during any portion of any fiscal year.
   C.   Payment Of Fees; Disposition: All license fees shall be paid to the
local liquor control commissioner at the time the application is made and shall
be forthwith turned over to the village treasurer. In the event the license
applied for is denied, the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the
license is granted, then the fee shall be deposited in a general corporate fund
or in such other fund as shall have been designated by the village board by
proper action. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-9: BOND; INSURANCE:
   A.   Bond: Each applicant desiring a license under this chapter, except
those applying for a class E license, shall execute a penal bond payable to the
village in the penal sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). This bond shall
be conditioned upon the faithful compliance with and performance of all of the
provisions of the laws of the state relating to the sale of alcoholic liquor
and with all of the provisions of the ordinances of the village regulating the
sale of alcoholic liquor, and shall be subject to the approval of the president
of the board. Upon approval thereof, the bond shall be filed with the village
clerk. A breach of any of the conditions of the bond shall work a forfeiture of
the penalty thereof, which amount shall be recoverable in an action of debt.
Said bond shall further be conditioned for the payment of all fines, costs,
penalties and forfeitures assessed against said licensee during the continuance
of the license under the terms of this chapter and any and all other ordinances
pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor now in force or hereafter adopted,
on account of any act done in violation thereof during the term for which the
license is granted. Nevertheless, any person who has become a surety upon a
bond herein required may release himself from such liability in the following
manner, such surety, at least ten (10) days before a regular meeting of the
village board, shall give notice in writing over his signature to the village
clerk of his intention to withdraw himself as a result from such bond. The
village clerk shall forthwith notify the principal on said bond who shall
thereafter file with the president of the board as hereinabove provided. If no
new bond, with sufficient sureties, approved by the president of the village
board, has been filed by the licensee within ten (10) days after notification
from the clerk of the withdrawal of the former surety, the license heretofore
granted to said licensee shall be revoked by the president of the village. No
surety shall be released from any liability on a bond arising prior to the
giving of a new bond or the revocation of any license.
   B.   Insurance: No license shall be granted to any applicant until such
applicant shall furnish evidence satisfactory to the liquor control
commissioner that such applicant is covered by a policy of dramshop insurance
issued by a responsible insurance company authorized and licensed to do
business in the state of Illinois insuring such applicant against liability
which such applicant may incur under the provision of 235 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/6-21. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-10: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the president of the village shall recommend the approval of any
application and bond as herein provided, the applicant shall be issued a
license, upon the payment in advance of the required fee, which license shall
be in writing over the name and under the seal of the village, and executed by
the president of the village and attested by the village clerk. (Ord. 2001-18,
9-25-2001)
3-4-11: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued by him and shall furnish the clerk of the village, the
treasurer of the village, and the chief of police each with a copy thereof upon
the issuance of any new license, and shall notify each of the said officers, in
writing, upon the issuance of any new licenses or revocation of any old
licenses. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-12: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and provided further that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right
which shall in any case prevent the president from decreasing the number of
licenses to be issued within the village. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-13: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
The village president may suspend for not more than thirty (30) days 1. 235
ILCS 5/4-4.1 or revoke for cause 2. 235 ILCS 5/7-5.2 any license for any
violation of any provision pertaining to the sale of alcoholic liquor, as
provided and in the manner provided in the state statutes, as heretofore or
hereafter amended. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
Whenever any license has been revoked for any cause, no license shall be
granted to any person for the same premises for which the license was revoked
for a period of one year.
An established place of business is a prerequisite to the issuance of a
license. Revocation of a license when a licensee ceases to operate the business
before the license expires is within the authority of the commissioner on the
grounds of nonuse. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-8-2002)
3-4-14: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No person shall sell alcoholic liquors in the village unless he holds a valid
license, and such licensees shall sell alcoholic liquors only during the
following hours:
   Class A, B, C: From ten o’clock (10:00) A.M. to twelve o’clock (12:00)
midnight on Sundays and from six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to one o’clock (1:00) A.M.
on all other days of the week.
   Class D: From seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. on
Sundays and from six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to one o’clock (1:00) A.M. on all
other days of the week.
   Class D1: From seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. to ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. on
Sundays and from six o’clock (6:00) A.M. to one o’clock (1:00) A.M. on all
other days of the week.
   Class E: Requested at time license is applied for, but not outside the hours
of operations for classes A through D.
   Class F: To be determined by the liquor commission with the consent of the
village board. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
   Class G: The same hours which the kitchen of the indoor licensed premises is
open, but not later than ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and
not later than eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. Friday and Saturday. (Ord. 2005-37,
8-9-2005)
   Class G1: The same hours which the kitchen of the indoor licensed premises
is open, but not later than ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday
and not later than eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. Friday and Saturday.
   Class H: The same hours which the kitchen of the indoor licensed premises is
open, but not later than ten o’clock (10:00) P.M. Sunday through Thursday and
not later than eleven o’clock (11:00) P.M. Friday and Saturday. (Ord. 2008-22,
6-24-2008; amd. Ord. 2024-28, 6-25-2024)
3-4-15: LICENSED PREMISES, TRANSFER:
Licenses issued under this chapter shall apply only to the premises described
in the application and in the license issued thereon, and only one location
shall be described in each license. After a license has been granted for a
particular premises, the local liquor control commission, upon proper showing,
may endorse upon said license permission to abandon the premises therein
described and remove therefrom to other premises approved by it. But in order
to obtain such approval, the licensee shall file with the local liquor control
commission a request in writing and a statement under oath which shall show
that the premises to which removal is to be made comply in all respects with
the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-16: POSTING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license to be hung in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-17: SALES TO CERTAIN PERSONS PROHIBITED; MINORS:
   A.   Sales Prohibited, Identification:
      1.   No licensee nor any officer, associate, member, representative,
agent or employee of such licensee shall sell, give or deliver alcoholic liquor
to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years or to any intoxicated
person or to any person known by him to be a habitual drunkard, spendthrift,
insane, mentally ill, mentally deficient or in need of mental treatment. No
person, after purchasing or otherwise obtaining alcoholic liquor, shall sell,
give or deliver such alcoholic liquor to another person under the age of twenty
one (21) years, except in the performance of a religious ceremony or service.
For the purpose of preventing violation of this subsection, any licensee or his
agent or employees may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any
person who is unable to produce adequate written evidence of identity and of
the fact that he is over the age of twenty one (21) years.
      2.   Adequate written evidence of age and identity of the person is a
document issued by a federal, state, county or municipal government or
subdivision or agency thereof including, but not limited to, a motor vehicle
operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the federal
selective service act or an identification card issued to a member of the armed
forces. Proof that the defendant, licensee or his employees or agent demanded,
was shown and reasonably relied upon such written evidence in any transaction
provided by this subsection is competent evidence and may be considered in any
criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based thereon.
      3.   Any person who sells, gives or furnishes to any person under the age
of twenty one (21) years any false or fraudulent written, printed or
photostatic evidence of the age and identity of such person or who sells, gives
or furnishes to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years evidence of
age and identification of any other person is guilty of a violation of this
chapter. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years who presents or
offers to any licensee, his agent or employee any written, printed or
photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false, fraudulent or not
actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to
purchase or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the sale of any
alcoholic beverage or who has in his possession any false or fraudulent
written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity is guilty of a
violation of this chapter. Any person under the age of twenty one (21) years
who has any alcoholic beverage in his possession on any street or highway or in
any public place open to the public is guilty of a violation of this chapter.
Whoever violates provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a violation
of this chapter.
   B.   Purchase And Consumption By Minors:
      1.   Any person to whom the sale, gift or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of age shall not purchase or accept a gift of such
alcoholic liquor in his possession. If a licensee or his agents or employees
believes or has reason to believe that the sale or delivery of any alcoholic
liquor is prohibited because of the nonage of the prospective recipient, he
shall, before making such sale or delivery, demand presentation of some form of
positive identification containing proof of age issued by a public officer in
the performance of his duties. No person shall transfer, alter or deface such
an identification card, use the identification card of another, carry or use a
false identification card or obtain an identification card by means of false
information. It shall be unlawful for a person under the age of twenty one (21)
years to purchase, offer to purchase, possess, consume, solicit, or in any
manner obtain or attempt to obtain, unlawfully, any alcoholic or intoxicating
liquor. Whoever violates provisions of this subsection shall be guilty of a
violation of this chapter.
      2.   Possession and dispensing or consumption by a minor of alcoholic
liquor in a performance of religious service or ceremony or the consumption by
a minor under the direct supervision and approval of the parent or parents of
such minor in the privacy of a home, is not prohibited by this subsection B.
(Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-18: PROHIBITIONS APPLYING TO PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE:
No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall wait on, trade, or act
as agent or employee to sell any alcoholic liquor at retail for consumption off
of the premises. No person under the age of twenty one (21) years shall attend
any bar or draw, pour, or mix any alcoholic liquor in any retail premises
licensed under this Act. (Ord. 2002-01, 1-8-2002)
3-4-19: VIEW OF PREMISES:
In the premises upon which the sale of alcoholic liquor for consumption upon
the premises is licensed, no screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or
thing shall be permitted in the windows or upon the doors of such licensed
premises, nor inside such premises which shall prevent a clear view into the
interior of such licensed premises from the street, road or sidewalks at all
times. No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction, nor any arrangement of
lights or lighting shall be permitted in or about the interior of such licensed
premises which shall prevent the full view of the entire interior of the
premises from the street, road or sidewalk. Said premises must be so located
that there shall be a full view of the interior of such premises from the
street, road or sidewalk. All rooms where liquor is sold for consumption upon
the premises shall be continuously lighted during business hours, by natural
light or artificial white light, so that all parts of the interior of the
premises shall be clearly visible. In case the view into any such licensed
premises required by this section shall be wilfully obscured or by him wilfully
suffered to be obscured or in any manner obstructed, then such license shall be
subject to revocation in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-
2001)
3-4-20: LIQUOR PROHIBITION:
   A.   Drinking Alcoholic Liquor In Public Place: It shall be unlawful for any
person to drink alcoholic liquor in or on any street, alley or other public
place in the Village or to drink alcoholic liquor in or about any motor vehicle
in or on any street, alley or other public place in the Village, except as so
licensed by the Village.
   B.   Transporting Alcoholic Liquor: It shall be unlawful for any person to
transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor upon his person on any
street, alley or other public place within the Village except in an unopened
original package or container.
   C.   Possession Of Alcoholic Liquor In Motor Vehicle: No person shall
transport, carry, possess or have any alcoholic liquor within the passenger
area of any motor vehicle, except in the original package and with the seal
unbroken.
   D.   Intoxication: It shall be unlawful for any person to be in an
intoxicated condition in or on any street, alley or other public place in the
Village. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
   E.   BYOA Prohibited: No business establishment within the Village shall
allow patrons to bring their own alcoholic beverages onto the business's
premises for the purpose of consumption. Further, no person or entity that
holds any liquor license issued pursuant to this chapter shall allow any patron
to bring their own alcoholic beverages onto the licensed premises for the
purpose of consumption thereon. (Ord. 2018-09, 4-24-2018)
3-4-21: DISORDERLY CONDUCT ON PREMISES:
No person licensed under this chapter shall permit any disorderly conduct or
disturbance of the peace on the premises. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-22: RESPONSIBILITY OF LICENSEE:
Licensee, and his or its agents, officers and employees, shall at all times be
personally responsible for the proper operation of the business, including
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and the observation of all laws
and regulations applicable thereto. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-23: SANITARY CONDITIONS:
   A.   Premises:
      1.   All premises used for the retail sale of alcoholic liquor or for the
storage of such liquor for such sale shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition and shall be kept in full compliance with the ordinances regulating
the condition of premises used for the storage or sale of food for human
consumption.
      2.   Every person licensed to sell alcoholic beverages, at retail, who
shall sell any alcoholic liquor for consumption on the premises of such
licensee shall keep and maintain the licensed premises equipped with running
hot and cold water and adequate sanitary washing facilities for the cleansing
of glasses and service utensils and shall provide adequate toilet facilities.
      3.   The Local Liquor Control Commissioner can require, at the time the
application is made, a statement from the Will or Grundy County Health
Department on the adequacy of the sanitation facilities.
   B.   Employees: It shall be unlawful to employ in any premises used for the
sale of alcoholic liquor any person who is afflicted with, or who is a carrier
of any contagious, infectious or venereal disease, and it shall be unlawful for
any person who is afflicted with or a carrier of any such diseases to work in
or about any premises or to engage in any way in the handling, preparation or
distribution of such liquor. (Ord. 2001-18, 9-25-2001)
3-4-24: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
in addition to revocation of his license as above provided, if applicable, be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 5
AUTOMATIC FOOD, BEVERAGE AND AMUSEMENT DEVICES 1. 65 ILCS 5/11-20-2, 11-20-3,
11-55-1.1
SECTION:
3-5-1 Definitions
3-5-2 Licenses Required
3-5-3 License Application
3-5-4 License Fees And Term
3-5-5 Conditions Of License
3-5-6 Persons Under The Age Of Twenty One Prohibited From Using Video Gaming
Terminals
3-5-7 Compliance Checks Authorized
3-5-8 Penalty
3-5-9 Suspension/Revocation Of Liquor License
3-5-10 Nonretaliation
3-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE: Any mechanical device accepting coin or coins
permitting the player/players to make use of and enjoy the effects of such
machine as a result of the deposit of coins or other action therein.
AUTOMATIC FOOD AND BEVERAGE DEVICE: Any device which dispenses food, beverages
or food products as a result of the deposit of a coin or token.
AUTOMATIC MUSICAL DEVICE: Any phonograph, piano player, music box, jukebox or
other instrument or device capable of producing or reproducing any vocal or
instrumental sounds, other than a motion picture sound machine, which is
governed or controlled by the deposit of a coin or token.
COMPLIANCE CHECK: An inspection conducted with the intention of enforcing age
of use laws and otherwise testing compliance with all requirements of the
Illinois Video Gaming Act 2. 230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.2 and this Code. Compliance
checks shall be conducted by having designated persons under the age of twenty
one (21) years of age attempt to use video gaming terminals within the Village.
TERMINAL OPERATOR: An individual, partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company that is licensed under the Video Gaming Act and that owns,
services, and maintains video gaming terminals for placement in licensed
establishments, licensed truck stop establishments, licensed fraternal
establishments, or licensed veterans establishments.
VIDEO GAMING TERMINAL: Any electronic video game machine that, upon insertion
of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of a video game, including,
but not limited to, video poker, line up, and blackjack, as authorized by the
Illinois Gaming Board, utilizing a video display and microprocessors in which
the player may receive free games or credits that can be redeemed for cash. The
term does not include a machine that directly dispenses coins, cash, or tokens
or is for amusement purposes only. (Ord. 1978-11, 1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13,
1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978; Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012; Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-2: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall keep or permit to be kept for gain or profit from
operation within the Village any automatic food or beverage device, any
automatic amusement device or automatic musical instrument without first having
obtained a license as provided in section
3-5-3 of this chapter, except a charitable, religious or other nonprofit
organization sponsored by or participated in by a local chapter of such
organization, as approved by the Village Board of Trustees. (Ord. 1978-11,
1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13, 1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978; Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012)
   B.   No person shall keep or permit to be kept for gain or profit from
operation within the Village any video gaming terminal without first having
obtained a license as provided in section
3-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012)
3-5-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
An application shall be made to the Village Clerk. The applicant shall set
forth a description of the device to be kept, installed or used on the licensed
premises. (Ord. 1978-11, 1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13, 1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978)
3-5-4: LICENSE FEES AND TERM:
   A.   Fees: The annual fees for each device or instrument kept, installed or
used on the licensed premises each year are as follows:
 
Automatic amusement device        $ 25.00
Automatic food or beverage device 12.50
Automatic musical device          50.00
Video gaming terminal             250.001
Note:
1.   Fee shall be shared equally between the terminal operator and the
applicable licensed establishment, licensed veterans establishment, licensed
truck stop establishment, licensed large truck stop establishment, or licensed
fraternal establishment.
 
   B.   Term: The license term shall be May 1 through April 30 of each year.
All persons applying for a license at any time except on May 1 in each year
shall pay the pro rata amount each month, or fraction thereof, as the unexpired
fiscal year bears to twelve (12) months. (Ord. 2012-31, 10-23-2012; amd. Ord.
2022-2, 1-25-2022; Ord. 2023-4, 1-24-2023)
3-5-5: CONDITIONS OF LICENSE:
   A.   Display: Every licensee shall cause his license to be displayed in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises.
   B.   Transfer Of License: No license issued to any person shall be
transferable. (Ord. 1978-11, 1978; amd. Ord. 1978-13, 1978; Ord. 1978-14, 1978)
   C.   Automatic Musical Devices Special Regulations:
      1.   No license issued under this chapter shall permit the operation of
any automatic musical device at any place or in any manner which will disturb
the peace and quiet of persons outside the licensed premises.
      2.   No immoral or indecent selections shall be played on any such
instrument.
      3.   It is unlawful to operate or permit the operation of any coin
operated musical device, licensed under this chapter, between the hours of one
o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) A.M., ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and
twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sundays, nor shall remain in operation
between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of any
other day. (Ord. 1978-14, 1978)
3-5-6: PERSONS UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE PROHIBITED FROM USING VIDEO GAMING
TERMINALS:
   A.   No person under twenty one (21) years of age shall use or attempt to
use any video gaming terminal licensed under this chapter, except that a person
under the age of twenty one (21) who is designated by a peace officer to assist
said officer in conducting a compliance check shall not be guilty of violating
this section if said person uses or attempts to use a video gaming terminal
while actively participating in such compliance check.
   B.   No licensee shall knowingly cause or permit any person under twenty one
(21) years of age to use any video gaming terminal. In the event that any
licensee, or agent thereof, has reason to believe that a person using or
attempting to use any video gaming terminal licensed under this chapter is
under twenty one (21) years of age, said licensee or agent thereof shall demand
presentation of some form of positive identification containing proof of age
issued by a public officer in the performance of his official duties. Any
failure on the part of any licensee, or agent thereof, to inquire as to the age
of any person suspected to be under the age of twenty one (21) shall be deemed
to be a knowing violation of this section. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-7: COMPLIANCE CHECKS AUTHORIZED:
The Chief of Police or his designee shall have the power, authority, and duty
to conduct random and unannounced compliance checks of all places wherein video
gaming terminals licensed under this chapter are located for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the laws of the State of Illinois and of the Village of
Minooka regarding the same are being complied with in such place. The scope of
such compliance checks shall include, but shall not be limited to, testing
compliance with the State and Village's respective prohibitions against persons
under the age of twenty one (21) using video gaming terminals. (Ord. 2017-11,
5-2-2017)
3-5-8: PENALTY:
   A.   Any minor that violates, disobeys, neglects or refuses to comply with
subsection
3-5-6A of this chapter shall be sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense.
   B.   Any licensee who knowingly permits a person under the age of twenty one
(21) years to use a video gaming terminal, or who fails to demand proof of age
from a person suspected of being under the age of twenty one (21) in violation
of subsection
3-5-6B of this chapter shall, in addition to the suspension or revocation of
their liquor license and all other available remedies, be sentenced as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. For the purposes of this section, every
act or omission of any nature constituting a violation of this section by any
officer, director, manager, or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be
deemed and held to be the act of such licensee, and such licensee shall be
punishable in the same manner as if such act or omission had been done or
omitted by the licensee personally.
   C.   Any person who is found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter or of the Illinois Video Gaming Act 1. 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq.1 related
to the licensure and/or operation of video gaming terminals, other than those
associated with the use of video gaming terminals by minors (<21), shall be
sentenced and fined as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Such violations include, but are not
limited to, violations of the Act's requirements regarding: 1) maintenance of a
valid liquor license, 2) hours of operation, and 3) the location of each video
gaming terminal.
   D.   The Village shall report any and all violations of any provision of
this chapter regarding the licensure and operation of video gaming terminals to
the Illinois Gaming Board. As part of such report the Village may, depending
upon the gravity and/or recurrence of such violation recommend to said board
that the licensee's video gaming license be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2017-
11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-9: SUSPENSION/REVOCATION OF LIQUOR LICENSE:
In the event that any person is found guilty of violating any provision of this
chapter related to the licensure and/or operation of video gaming terminals or
of any provision of the Illinois Video Gaming Act2. 230 ILCS 40/1, et seq.2,
such violation shall be deemed to be grounds for the suspension or revocation
of said person's liquor license as set out in section
3-4-13 of this title. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
3-5-10: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because
such employee, applicant, or customer reported violations of any provisions of
this chapter. (Ord. 2017-11, 5-2-2017)
CHAPTER 6
BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS1. 65 ILCS 5/11-42-2.1
SECTION:
3-6-1 License Required
3-6-2 License Fee And Term
3-6-3 Hours Of Operation
3-6-1: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall operate, maintain or conduct a billiard, pool, bagatelle or
pigeonhole table open to the public without having first obtained a license
therefor as is provided in this Section. All applications for such license
shall be made, in writing, to the Village Clerk and shall state thereon the
intended location of the place of business and the number of tables to be used
therein. (Ord. 1978-12, 1978)
3-6-2: LICENSE FEE AND TERM:
The annual fee for any such license shall be seventy five dollars ($75.00) for
each table. The license term shall be May 1 through April 30 of each year. All
persons applying for a license at any time except on May 1 in each year shall
pay the prorata amount each month, or fraction thereof, as the unexpired fiscal
year bears to twelve (12) months. Every licensee shall cause his license to be
displayed in plain view in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord.
1978-12, 1978)
3-6-3: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No pool room, billiard hall, bagatelle or pigeonhole table shall remain in
operation between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00)
A.M., ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight on Sundays,
nor shall remain in operation between the hours of one o'clock (1:00) A.M. and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on any other day. (Ord. 1978-12, 1978)
CHAPTER 7
CONTRACTORS
SECTION:
3-7-1 Definitions
3-7-2 License Required
3-7-3 License Application
3-7-4 License Fees And Bonds
3-7-5 Insurance Required
3-7-6 License Issuance
3-7-7 Scope Of General Contractor's License
3-7-8 General Duties Of Licensees
3-7-9 License Revocation; Reinstatement
3-7-10 Penalty
3-7-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this Chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:
CONTRACTOR: Any person engaged in the business of constructing, altering or
repairing buildings or other structures or sidewalk or street pavements
including, but not limited to, general building contractors; cement or concrete
contractors; masonry contractors; carpentry contractors; acoustical
contractors; electrical contractors; dry wall contractors; excavating
contractors; fencing contractors; flooring contractors; garage contractors;
glazing contractors; heating, air conditioning and refrigeration contractors;
painting contractors; plastering contractors; plumbing contractors; porch, deck
contractors; roofing contractors; sewer and drain layers; sheet metal
contractors; tuckpointing and cleaning contractors; window contractors;
wrecking contractors; blacktop sealer contractors; landscape contractors;
swimming pool contractors; insulation contractors; waterproofing contractors;
siding contractors; soffit and fascia contractors; gutter contractors; sign
contractors; and all other contractors.
   A.   Any person who engages in the construction, repair or alteration of any
building or structure within the Village of Minooka, for which a building
permit is required, is presumed to be a contractor and must be licensed
hereunder unless such presumption is rebutted.
   B.   A homeowner engaged in constructing, altering or repairing his personal
residence or lot shall not be considered a contractor for purposes of this
Chapter, but must provide proof of homeowners liability insurance prior to
receiving a building permit.
GENERAL CONTRACTOR: A contractor who uses one or more trades or subcontractors
to perform the required construction to complete any project for which a
building permit is required.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation, trust or
other legal entity.
SUBCONTRACTOR: A contractor who performs only that type of work that is
classified as a trade (e.g., plumbing, electrical, etc.). (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-
1996)
3-7-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
No person shall act or perform any services as a contractor or subcontractor
within the Village without first having obtained a contractor's license
therefor as herein provided. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-3: LICENSE APPLICATION:
All applications for contractor's license required in Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter shall be made, in writing, to the Village Building
Department, upon forms furnished by the Village. Each application shall state
the name and business address of the applicant, whether it is a contractor's or
subcontractor's license application and if the latter, the trade or trades
involved, the number of the applicant's employees who would be operating under
such license and a statement that the applicant is familiar with all pertinent
Village ordinances, codes and regulations including building codes and agrees
to fully comply with same. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-4: LICENSE FEES AND BONDS:
   A.   License Fees: The fees for a contractor's license, as required in
Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter, are as follows:
      1.   General contractor license fee: one hundred dollars ($100.00) per
year; and
      2.   Subcontractor and all other contractor's license fees: fifty dollars
($50.00) per year.
   B.   Bonds: Each applicant for a license, as required in Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter, shall, before receiving such a license, deposit with the
Village Building Department a license and permit bond issued by a company
approved and authorized to issue bonds by the State in a form suitable to the
Village in the following penal sums:
      1.   Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for a general contractor; or
      2.   Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) for a subcontractor. (Ord. 1996-
19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-5: INSURANCE REQUIRED:
No person shall act as a contractor or subcontractor within the Village, nor
shall be licensed, unless said contractor or subcontractor deposits with the
Village Building Department, a certificate(s) of insurance issued to said
contractor or subcontractor by a company approved and authorized to issue such
insurance by the State for the full period of the license period in the
following types and amounts:
   A.   General Contractor:
 
General liability     $ 500,000.00
Auto liability        500,000.00
Excess liability      1,000,000.00
Employers liability   500,000.00
Workers' compensation
 
   B.   Subcontractor:
 
General liability     $ 500,000.00
Auto liability        500,000.00
Employers liability   500,000.00
Workers' compensation
 
The certificate(s) of insurance shall provide that the insurance is not
cancelable during the policy period without ninety (90) days' prior written
notice to the Village. (Ord. 1997-10, 7-8-1997)
3-7-6: LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The Village Clerk shall issue licenses upon proper application and compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter, and payment of the fees set forth in
Section
3-7-4 of this Chapter. All licenses shall be valid through the current fiscal
year of issue (i.e., May 1 through April 30), however, a license issued to a
first-time licensee after January 1 shall be valid through April 30 of the
following fiscal year, unless said license is otherwise revoked as prescribed
in this Chapter. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-7: SCOPE OF GENERAL CONTRACTOR'S LICENSE:
Any person licensed as a general contractor shall not be required to secure an
additional license for the performance of carpentry, masonry, cement or
concrete contracting. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-8: GENERAL DUTIES OF LICENSEES:
   A.   All contractors licensed under Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter shall comply with the provisions of all applicable
Village codes and ordinances and, in addition thereto, at least once each week
or more often as directed by the Village Building Inspector shall remove or
cause to be removed from the site of contractor's activities all trash, refuse
and waste materials. Contractors shall at all times keep the site of activities
in an orderly condition, free from standing water, unguarded dangerous
implements or conditions and health and safety hazards, and contractors shall
not obstruct traffic on streets or sidewalks or permit dirt or waste materials
to fall or be carried onto such public ways. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
   B.   All contractors licensed under Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter shall pay within thirty (30) days from receipt of an
invoice from the Village all fees, expenses and costs incurred by the Village,
including fees, expenses and costs incurred for the Village's professional
staff as a result of or in conjunction with the contractor's projects in the
Village. The Village's professional staff includes, but is not limited to, its
attorneys, engineers, land planners, traffic and transportation consultants,
building commissioner, etc. All fees, costs and expenses owed by the respective
contractor licensed under Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter, and unpaid after thirty (30) days from the date of
invoice are subject to the accrual of interest in an amount of 1.5% per month.
All contractors licensed under Section
3-7-2 of this Chapter who are in arrears to the Village beyond thirty (30) days
for the payment of fees, expenses and costs for any pending matter within the
Village are also subject to revocation of their license pursuant to Section
3-7-9 of this Chapter. (Ord. 1999-02, 2-23-1999)
3-7-9: LICENSE REVOCATION; REINSTATEMENT:
Any license issued under the provisions of this Chapter may be revoked by the
Village Board for any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter; such
revocation shall be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed. No person whose
license has been revoked as herein provided shall be eligible for a new license
for a period of one year from the date of such revocation. All appeals from the
action of the Village Board to revoke a contractor's license shall be filed
within ten (10) days of such action with the Board of Trustees of the Village
who shall conduct a hearing on such revocation.
The Village Clerk may refuse to issue a license in the event that any of the
provisions of this Chapter which are condition precedent to the issuance of the
license have not been met. Any appeals from an action of the Village Clerk to
refuse to issue a contractor's license should be filed within ten (10) days of
such refusal with the Board of Trustees of the Village who shall conduct a
hearing on such refusal to issue a license. (Ord. 1996-19, 7-9-1996)
3-7-10: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies available to the Village at law or equity,
any contractor/subcontractor who violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be fined as set out in Section
1-4-1 of this Code. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day
during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues. (Ord.
1996-19, 7-9-1996; amd. 1997 Code)
CHAPTER 8
SIMPLIFIED MUNICIPAL TELECOMMUNICATIONS TAX
SECTION:
3-8-1 Tax Imposed
3-8-2 Remittance Of Tax
3-8-3 Tax Exemption
3-8-1: TAX IMPOSED:
The rate of the simplified municipal telecommunications tax imposed under the
provisions of sections 5-25 and 5-30 of the simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act, PA 92-0526 is hereby increased from five percent
(5%) to six percent (6%), for all gross charges billed by telecommunications
retailers, effective July 1, 2003. (Ord. 2003-11, 3-11-2003)
3-8-2: REMITTANCE OF TAX:
On or before July 31, 2003, and on or before the last day of every month
thereafter, the tax imposed under this chapter on telecommunication retailers
shall be returned with appropriate forms and information as required to the
Illinois department of revenue pursuant to the Illinois simplified municipal
telecommunications tax act (public act 92-526, section 5-50) and any
accompanying rules and regulations created by the department to implement the
act. (Ord. 2003-11, 3-11-2003)
3-8-3: TAX EXEMPTION:
To the extent that the municipality's territory includes part of another unit
of local government or school district, the village of Minooka may, by separate
ordinance, exempt all of the amount of the tax authorized by this chapter paid
by the other unit of local government or school district. Any such exemption
shall be paid by the municipality directly to the other unit of local
government or school district qualifying for the rebate as determined by the
ordinance. (Ord. 2002-22, 8-13-2002, eff. 1-1-2003)
CHAPTER 9
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION:
3-9-1 Purpose
3-9-2 Definitions
3-9-3 License Required
3-9-4 License Applications
3-9-5 Issuance Or Denial Of License
3-9-6 Transfer Of License Prohibited
3-9-7 Revocation Or Suspension Of License
3-9-8 Hours Of Operation; Inspections
3-9-9 Minors, Alcoholic Beverages And Certain Acts Prohibited
3-9-10 Eligibility For License Following Revocation
3-9-11 Responsibilities Of The Operator
3-9-12 Other License Provisions
3-9-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to regulate sexually oriented businesses to
protect the community from the many types of criminal activity frequently
associated with such uses. The Village recognizes that such regulation cannot
in effect prohibit such uses. This Chapter has balanced the competing interests
of the community in reducing criminal activity and protecting property values
versus the protective rights of the owners, operators, employees and patrons of
sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Section, the definitions set forth in Title 5 of this
Code are made a part hereof. Additionally, the following words and terms as
used in this Chapter shall have the meaning ascribed thereto:
APPLICANT: The applicant for a license shall be the intended operator of the
business.
CONDUCT ANY BUSINESS: Any person who does any one or more of the following
shall be deemed to be conducting business in a sexually oriented business:
   A.   Operates a cash register, cash drawer, or other depository on the
enterprise premises where cash funds or records or credit card or other credit
transactions generated in any manner by the operation of the establishment or
the activities conducted therein are kept;
   B.   Displays or takes orders from any customer for any merchandise, goods,
entertainment or other services offered on the premises;
   C.   Delivers or provides to any customer any merchandise, goods,
entertainment, or other services offered on the premises;
   D.   Acts as door attendant to regulate entry of customers or other persons
into the premises; or
   E.   Supervises or manages other persons in the performance of any of the
foregoing activities on the enterprise premises.
CUSTOMER: Any person who:
   A.   Is allowed to enter a licensed business in return for the payment of an
admission fee or any other form of consideration or gratuity; or
   B.   Enters a licensed business and purchases, rents, or otherwise partakes
of any merchandise, goods, entertainment, or other services offered therein; or
   C.   Is a member of and on the premises of a licensed business operating as
a private club.
EMPLOYEE: Any person who renders any service whatsoever to the customers of a
licensed business or who works in or about a licensed business and who receives
compensation for such service or work from the operator or owner of the
licensed business or from the customers therein.
LICENSED BUSINESS: Any sexually oriented business licensed under this Chapter.
OPERATOR: The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a
licensed business.
OWNER: The proprietor if a sole proprietorship, all partners (general and
limited) if a partnership, or all officers, directors, and persons holding ten
percent (10%) or more of the outstanding shares if a corporation. (Ord. 1999-
04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall own, operate or conduct any business in a sexually
oriented business located within the City unless there is a license for the
business.
   B.   A license may be issued only for one "sexually oriented business"
located at a fixed and certain place. Any person who desires to operate more
than one sexually oriented business must have a license for each.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any entertainer, employee or operator to
knowingly work in or about, or to knowingly perform any service directly
related to the operation of any unlicensed sexually oriented business.
   D.   No person shall own, operate or conduct any sexually oriented business
unless the license is posted at or near the principal public entrance to the
business in such a manner that it will be conspicuous to patrons who enter the
premises.
   E.   Every license issued pursuant to this Chapter will terminate on the
last day of December following its issuance, unless sooner revoked, and must be
renewed before operation is allowed in the following year. Any operator
desiring to renew a license shall make application to the Village President or
the Village President's designee. The application for renewal must be filed not
later than thirty (30) days before the license expires. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-
1999)
3-9-4: LICENSE APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Applications for a license, whether original or renewal, must be made
to the Village President or the Village President's designee by the intended
operator of the sexually oriented business. Applications must be submitted
during regular working hours. Application forms shall be supplied by the
Village. The intended operator shall be required to give the following
information on the application form:
      1.   a.   The name, street address (and mailing address if different),
age, driver's license number of the intended operator, and any and all aliases;
         b.   The name and street address (and mailing address if different) of
the owner(s);
      2.   The name under which the business is to be operated and a general
description of the services to be provided;
      3.   The telephone number of the business;
      4.   The address and legal description of the parcel of land on which the
business is to be located;
      5.   The date on which the owner(s) acquired the business for which the
license is sought, and the date on which the business began or is to begin
operations as an enterprise at the location for which the license is sought;
and
      6.   A list of all employees or contractors involved in providing the
services to be provided by the business;
      7.   Whether the applicant previously operated in this or any other
county, city or state under a sexually oriented business license or similar
business license; whether the applicant has ever had such a license revoked or
suspended, the reason therefor, and the business entity or trade name under
which the applicant operated that was subject to the suspension or revocation;
      8.   Whether the applicant has been convicted of any felony within the
last ten (10) years or any criminal offense involving controlled substances,
moral turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crime of a sexual nature.
   B.   The application shall be accompanied by the following:
      1.   Payment in full of a fee of:
         a.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00) for an original application; or
         b.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a renewal application, as
applicable, which fee shall not be refundable under any circumstances;
      2.   A certified copy of the assumed name certificate if the business is
to be operated under an assumed name;
      3.   If the business is an Illinois corporation, a certified copy of the
articles of incorporation, together with all amendments thereto;
      4.   If the business is a foreign corporation, a certified copy of the
certificate of authority to transact business in this State, together with all
amendments thereto;
      5.   If the business is a limited partnership formed under the laws of
Illinois, a certified copy of the certificate of limited partnership, together
with all amendments thereto;
      6.   If the business is a foreign limited partnership, a certified copy
of the certificate of limited partnership and the qualification documents,
together with all amendments thereto;
      7.   Any subsections B2 through B6 of this Section shall not be required
for a renewal application if the applicant states that the documents previously
furnished with the original application or previous renewals thereof remain
correct and current;
      8.   If the premises are leased or being purchased under contract, a copy
of such lease or contract shall accompany the application.
   C.   The application shall contain a statement under oath that:
      1.   The applicant has a personal knowledge of the information contained
in the application and that the information contained therein is true and
correct; and
      2.   The applicant has read the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 1999-
04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-5: ISSUANCE OR DENIAL OF LICENSE:
   A.   Within twenty (20) days of receipt of any application, either original
or renewal, the Village President or the Village President's designee shall
grant or deny the requested license and give written notice to the applicant as
to the decision.
   B.   The Village President or the Village President's designee shall issue
the license to the applicant unless one or more of the following conditions
exist:
      1.   The applicant failed to supply all of the information requested on
the application;
      2.   The applicant gave materially false, fraudulent or untruthful
information on the application;
      3.   The applicant's business is not in compliance with Title 5 of this
Code;
      4.   The application or the business does not meet any other requirement
of this Chapter;
      5.   The applicant has not fully complied with all State, Federal and
local laws or regulations affecting the conduct of its business; or
      6.   The applicant or owner has had a license revoked for the same
business or same type of business;
      7.   The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age;
      8.   The applicant has been convicted of a felony within the last ten
(10) years or any criminal offense involving controlled substances, moral
turpitude, prostitution, obscenity, or other crimes of a sexual nature. In the
case of a corporation, partnership, or joint venture, any officer, director,
stockholder controlling more than twenty five percent (25%) of the corporate
stock, partner or joint venturer shall be deemed to be an applicant;
      9.   The applicant is delinquent on any debt owed to the Village;
      10.   The applicant has permitted criminal activity to occur on the
premises without taking corrective action or contacting law enforcement
officials.
   C.   In the event that the Village President or the Village President's
designee determines that an applicant is not eligible for a license, the
applicant shall be given notice in writing of the reasons for the denial within
twenty (20) days of the receipt of its application. An applicant may appeal
such denial by filing a written request for a hearing with the Village
President within five (5) days after the applicant is given notice of such
denial. The decision on the application shall be final unless an appeal is
timely filed. An appeal shall not stay the decision on the issuance of a
license. The applicant's written request for a hearing shall set forth the
grounds on which the denial is challenged. The hearing shall be conducted by
the Village President. At the hearing the Village President shall receive oral
and written testimony regarding the application. Hearings shall be conducted
under applicable rules of evidence as set forth in Illinois State statutes and
Supreme Court Rules.
   D.   The Village President shall conduct the hearing within fifteen (15)
days after receipt of the applicant's written request for a hearing unless the
applicant requests an extension in writing. The Village President shall render
a written decision and issue notice thereof to the applicant within five (5)
business days after the conclusion of the hearing. The written decision of the
Village President shall be final.
   E.   Failure of the Village President to give timely notice of action on an
application, or failure of the Village President to timely conduct or give
notice of the Village President's decision on an appeal within the limitations
of time specified above shall entitle the applicant to the issuance of
temporary license upon written demand therefor filed by the applicant with the
Village President. Such a temporary license shall only be valid until the third
day after the Village President gives notice of action on the application or
gives notice of this decision on the appeal. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-6: TRANSFER OF LICENSE PROHIBITED:
A license issued under this Chapter is personal to the owner and operator of a
sexually oriented business and may not be transferred or otherwise conveyed to
a third party. Any transfer or conveyance of the business shall require the
transferee to apply and otherwise qualify for the issuance of a new license.
The transfer of a license or any interest in a license shall automatically and
immediately revoke the license. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-7: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF LICENSE:
   A.   The Village President or the Village President's designee shall have
the authority to revoke or suspend a license for any one or more of the
following reasons:
      1.   The owner, operator or employee of the licensed business knowingly
allowed a person under eighteen (18) years of age to enter the business;
      2.   The owner or operator of the licensed business does not comply with
the provisions of this Chapter or is in violation of any other applicable
Federal, State or local laws or regulations;
      3.   The owner or operator of the licensed business gave materially
false, fraudulent or untruthful information on the original or renewal
application form;
      4.   The business has been closed for business for a period of thirty
(30) consecutive days, unless such closure is due to circumstances beyond the
control of the owner, and the owner is proceeding with due diligence, given all
attendant circumstances, to reopen the business;
      5.   The operator or owner becomes ineligible to obtain or hold a
license;
      6.   Any cost, bill or fee required to be paid by this Chapter or any
other Village ordinance is not paid;
      7.   Any alcoholic beverage is served or consumed on the premises of the
sexually oriented business;
      8.   The owner or operator has permitted criminal activity to occur on
the premises without taking corrective action or contacting law enforcement
officials;
      9.   The owner or operator has engaged in any other act or omission which
demonstrates the owner or operator's inability to operate the sexually oriented
business in accordance with applicable law.
   B.   Prior to revocation or suspension of a license, the Village President
or the Village President's designee shall investigate whether probable cause
for revocation or suspension may exist and if so, shall notify the licensee in
writing of reasons for the proposed revocation or suspension and grant such
licensee the opportunity to appear before the Village President or the Village
President's designee at a time and place specified within such notice. Such
hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days after the notice is
received by the licensee. Hearings shall be conducted under applicable rules of
evidence as set forth in Illinois State statutes and Supreme Court Rules. Such
rules shall be consistent with the nature of the proceedings and shall ensure
that each party may present evidence, cross-examine witnesses and be
represented by legal counsel. If, after the hearing, the Village President or
the Village President's designee finds that the license should be revoked or
suspended, the Village President or the Village President's designee shall
issue a written order revoking or suspending such license which shall be
effective on the third day after notice thereof is given to the owner or
operator. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-8: HOURS OF OPERATION; INSPECTIONS:
   A.   No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturdays
or between the hours of two o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon
on Sundays.
   B.   All sexually oriented businesses shall be open to inspection at all
reasonable times by the Village or such other persons as the Village President
may designate. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-9: MINORS, ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AND CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED:
   A.   No Minors Allowed On Premises: No person under the age of eighteen (18)
years shall be allowed on or enter the premises of a sexually oriented
business. A sign indicating the prohibition against the entry of minors shall
be posted in a conspicuous place at all public entrances to the sexually
oriented business.
   B.   No Alcoholic Beverages: The consumption or sale of alcoholic beverages
on the premises of the licensed business is prohibited. No sexually oriented
business shall be located on the premises for which a license to sell alcoholic
beverages has been issued.
   C.   Certain Conduct Prohibited: No owner, operator, employee of an operator
or customer shall on the premises, engage in or permit the occurrence of acts
of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, sodomy, or other contact stimulation
of the genitalia, or engage in or permit the occurrence of any act constituting
the offense of obscenity under the Illinois Criminal Code. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-
1999)
3-9-10: ELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE FOLLOWING REVOCATION:
Any owner or operator whose license is revoked shall not be eligible to receive
a license for five (5) years from the date of revocation. No location or
premises for which a license has been issued shall be issued as a sexually
oriented business for two (2) years from the date of revocation of the license.
(Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-11: RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OPERATOR:
   A.   The operator shall maintain a register of all employees, showing the
name, and aliases used by the employee, home address, age, birthdate, sex,
height, weight, color of hair and eyes, phone numbers, social security number,
date of employment and termination and duties of each employee and such other
information as may be required by the Village President. The above information
on each employee shall be maintained in the register on the premises for a
period of three (3) years following termination.
   B.   The operator shall make the register of employees available immediately
for inspection by police upon demand of the Village at all reasonable times.
   C.   Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator
if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or
approval of the operator, or as a result of the operator's negligent failure to
supervise the employee's conduct, and the operator shall be punishable for such
act or omission in the same manner as if the operator committed the act or
caused the omission.
   D.   An operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while
on the licensed premises and any act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission
of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's license
shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. (Ord. 1999-04, 3-9-1999)
3-9-12: OTHER LICENSE PROVISIONS:
   A.   A license is valid only at the location for which it is issued.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to counterfeit, forge, change,
deface or alter a license.
   C.   A license may be cancelled upon written request of the owner or
operator and surrender of the license itself to the Village President. (Ord.
1999-04, 3-9-1999)
CHAPTER 10
MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC USE TAX
SECTION:
3-10-1 Short Title
3-10-2 Definitions
3-10-3 Tax Imposed
3-10-4 Exceptions
3-10-5 Additional Taxes
3-10-6 Collection
3-10-7 Reporting
3-10-8 Mistake Or Error; Credit
3-10-9 Recovery Limit
3-10-10 Violation Or Fraud
3-10-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be known as the MUNICIPAL ELECTRIC USE
TAX and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the village of
Minooka, the state of Illinois, or any other municipal corporation or political
subdivision thereof. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-2: DEFINITIONS:
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership, association,
joint stock company, joint venture, corporation, limited liability company,
municipal corporation, or any of its political subdivisions, any state
university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee, conservator or other
representative appointed by order of the court.
PERSON MAINTAINING A PLACE OF BUSINESS IN THIS STATE: Any person having or
maintaining within this state, directly or by a subsidiary or other affiliate,
an office, generation facility, distribution facility, transmission facility,
sales office or other place of business, or any employee, agent or other
representative, operating within the state under the authority of the person or
its subsidiary or other affiliate, irrespective of whether such place of
business or agent or other representative is located in this state permanently
or temporarily, or whether such person, subsidiary or other affiliate is
licensed or qualified to do business in the state.
PURCHASE AT RETAIL: Any acquisition of electricity by a purchaser for purposes
of use or consumption, and not for resale, but shall not include the use of
electricity by a public utility, as defined in section 8-11-2 of the Illinois
municipal code 1. 65 ILCS 5/8-11-2.1, directly in generation, production,
transmission, delivery or sale of electricity.
PURCHASER: Any person who uses or consumes within the corporate limits of the
village of Minooka, electricity acquired in purchase at retail.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Illinois. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-3: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
      1.   The privilege of using or consuming electricity acquired in a
purchase at retail and used or consumed within the corporate limits of the
municipality at the following rates, calculated on a monthly basis for each
purchaser:
         a.   For the first 2,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.553 cents per kilowatt hour;
         b.   For the next 48,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.363 cents per kilowatt hour;
         c.   For the next 50,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.327 cents per kilowatt hour;
         d.   For the next 400,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.318 cents per kilowatt hour;
         e.   For the next 500,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a month;
0.308 cents per kilowatt hour;
         f.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.290 cents per kilowatt hour;
         g.   For the next 2,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.286 cents per kilowatt hour;
         h.   For the next 5,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.281 cents per kilowatt hour;
         i.   For the next 10,000,000 kilowatt hours used or consumed in a
month; 0.277 cents per kilowatt hour;
         j.   For all electricity used or consumed in excess of 20,000,000
kilowatt hours in a month; 0.272 cents per kilowatt hour.
      2.   The tax is in addition to all taxes, fees and other revenue measures
imposed by the village in the state of Illinois or any other political
subdivision of the state. (Ord. 2002-45, 11-12-2002)
   B.   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the tax shall not
be imposed if and to the extent that imposition or collection of the tax would
violate the constitution or statutes of the United States or the constitution
of the state of Illinois. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
   C.   The tax shall be imposed with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by residential customers beginning with the first bill issued on or
after December 1, 2002; and with respect to the use or consumption of
electricity by nonresidential customers beginning with the first bill issued to
such customers for delivery services in accordance with section 16-104 of the
public utilities act 1. 220 ILCS 5/16-104. 1, or the first bill issued to such
customers on or after January 1, 2001, whichever issuance occurs sooner. (Ord.
2002-20, 8-13-2002; amd. Ord. 2002-45, 11-12-2002)
3-10-4: EXCEPTIONS:
None of the taxes authorized by this chapter may be imposed with respect to any
transaction in interstate commerce or otherwise to the extent to which the
business or privilege may not, under the constitution and statutes of the
United States, be made the subject of taxation by this state or any political
subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged in the business of
distributing, supplying, furnishing, or selling or transmitting gas, water, or
electricity, or engaged in the business of transmitting messages, or using or
consuming electricity acquired in a purchase at retail, be subject to taxation
under the provisions of this chapter for those transactions that are or may
become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "municipal retailers'
occupation tax act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois municipal
code; nor shall any tax authorized by this chapter be imposed upon any person
engaged in a business or on any privilege unless the tax is imposed in like
manner and at the same rate upon all persons engaged in the business of the
same class in the municipality, whether privately or municipally owned or
operated, or exercising the same privilege within the municipality. (Ord. 2002-
20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-5: ADDITIONAL TAXES:
Such tax shall be in addition to other taxes levied upon the taxpayer or its
business. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-6: COLLECTION:
The tax authorized by this chapter shall be collected from the purchaser by the
person maintaining a place of business in this state who delivers the
electricity to the purchaser. Any tax required to be collected by this chapter,
and any tax in fact collected, shall constitute a debt owed to the village by
the person delivering the electricity, provided that the person delivering
electricity shall be allowed credit for such tax related to deliveries of
electricity the charges for which are written off as uncollectible, and
provided further that if such charges are thereafter collected, the delivering
supplier shall be obligated to remit such tax. Persons delivering electricity
shall collect the tax from the purchaser by adding such tax to the gross charge
for delivering the electricity. Persons delivering electricity shall also be
authorized to add to such gross charge an amount equal to three percent (3%) of
the tax to reimburse the person delivering electricity for the expense incurred
in keeping records, billing customers, preparing and filing returns, remitting
the tax and supplying data to the municipality upon request. If the person
delivering electricity fails to collect the tax from the purchaser, then the
purchaser shall be required to pay the tax directly to the municipality in the
manner prescribed by the municipality. Persons delivering electricity who file
returns pursuant to this chapter shall, at the time of filing such return, pay
the municipality the amount of the tax collected pursuant to this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-7: REPORTING:
   A.   On or before the last day of each month, each taxpayer shall make a
return to the village for the preceding month stating:
      1.   His name.
      2.   His principal place of business.
      3.   His gross receipts and/or kilowatt hour usage during the month upon
the basis of which the tax is imposed.
      4.   Amount of tax.
      5.   Such other reasonable and related information as the corporate
authorities may require.
   B.   The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time
of making such return, pay to the village of Minooka the amount of tax herein
imposed; provided that in connection with any return, the taxpayer may, if he
so elects, report and pay an amount based upon his total billings of business
subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made (exclusive of
any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later payments based
upon any differences between such billings, and the taxable gross receipts.
(Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-8: MISTAKE OR ERROR; CREDIT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefor shall be so credited. (Ord. 2002-20, 8-
13-2002)
3-10-9: RECOVERY LIMIT:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 2002-20, 8-13-2002)
3-10-10: VIOLATION OR FRAUD:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who wilfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and in
addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due. (Ord.
2002-20, 8-13-2002)
CHAPTER 11
COMPREHENSIVE REGULATION OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS
SECTION:
3-11-1 Definitions
3-11-2 Sales, Purchase, Possession, And Distribution Of Tobacco, Alternative
Nicotine, Or Electronic Cigarette Products
3-11-3:    License Required
3-11-4:    Application For License
3-11-5:    License Fee
3-11-6:    Issuance Of License
3-11-7:    Record Of Licenses
3-11-8:    Renewal Of License
3-11-9:    Licensed Premises, Transfer
3-11-10: Posting License
3-11-11: Warning Signs
3-11-12: Vendor Assisted Sales And Vending Machines
3-11-13: Proximity To Certain Institutions
3-11-14: Responsibility For Agents And Employees
3-11-15: Inspection
3-11-16: Administration And Enforcement
3-11-17: Penalties
3-11-18: Suspension And Revocation Of License
3-11-19: Nonretaliation
3-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
ADULT-ONLY FACILITY: A facility or restricted area (whether open-air or
enclosed) where the operator ensures or has a reasonable basis to believe (such
as by checking identification as required under State law, or by checking the
identification of any person appearing to be under the age of thirty (30) that
no person under legal age is present. A facility or restricted area need not be
permanently restricted to persons under twenty-one (21) years of age to
constitute an adult-only facility, provided that the operator ensures or has a
reasonable basis to believe that no person under twenty-one (21) years of age
is present during the event or time period in question.
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCT: A product or device not consisting of or
containing tobacco that provides for the ingestion into the body of nicotine,
whether by chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, inhaling, snorting,
sniffing, or by any other means. “Alternative nicotine product” does not
include: cigarettes as defined in Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and
tobacco products as defined in Section 10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of
1995; tobacco product and electronic cigarette as defined in this Section; or
any product approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale
as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco dependence product, or for other
medical purposes, and is being marketed and sold solely for that approved
purpose.
COMPLIANCE CHECK: An inspection conducted with the intention of assessing
retail sales of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products
to person under twenty-one (21) years of age and enforcing age-of-sales laws.
Compliance checks are conducted by having designated persons under the age of
twenty-one (21) years of age attempt to purchase tobacco, alternative nicotine,
or electronic cigarette products from vendors.
ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE:
   A.   A.   Any device that employs a battery or other mechanism to heat a
solution or substance to produce a vapor or aerosol intended for inhalation;
   B.   Any cartridge or container of a solution or substance intended to be
used with or in the device or to refill the device; or
   C.   Any solution or substance, whether or not it contains nicotine intended
for use in the device. “Electronic cigarette” includes, but is not limited to,
any electronic nicotine delivery system, electronic cigar, electronic
cigarillo, electronic pipe, electronic hookah, vape pen, or similar product or
device, and any components or parts that can be used to build the product or
device. “Electronic cigarette” does not include: cigarettes as defined in
Section 1 of the Cigarette Tax Act and tobacco products as defined in Section
10-5 of the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995; tobacco product and alternative
nicotine product as defined in this Section; any product approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as
a tobacco dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being
marketed and sold solely for that approved purpose; any asthma inhaler
prescribed by a physician for that condition and is being marketed and sold
solely for that approved purpose; or any therapeutic product approved for use
under the Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act.
LICENSE: A license issued by the village of Minooka for the retail sale of
tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products.
LICENSEE: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or club holding a license
for the retail sale of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette
products under the provisions of this chapter.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association,
joint venture or any employee or agent thereof.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted, including, but not limited to, any right of way, mall or shopping
center, park, playground, and any other property owned by the village, any
school district, or any park district.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAYS: Open displays of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or
electronic cigarette products, and point of sale tobacco, alternative nicotine,
or electronic cigarette promotional products that the public has access to
without intervention of a store employee.
TOBACCO PRODUCTS: Any product containing or made from tobacco that is intended
for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved,
inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not
limited to, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco,
snuff, snus, and any other smokeless tobacco product which contains tobacco
that is finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf and intended to be placed in the
oral cavity. “Tobacco product” includes any component, part, or accessory of a
tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not
include: an electronic cigarette and alternative nicotine product as defined in
this Section; or any product that has been approved by the United States Food
and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product, as a tobacco
dependence product, or for other medical purposes, and is being marketed and
sold solely for that approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINES: Any mechanical, electric or electronic, self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any form of payment, dispenses
tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products. (Ord. 2016-15,
3-22-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-2: SALES, PURCHASE, POSSESSION, AND DISTRIBUTION OF TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE
NICOTINE, OR ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE PRODUCTS:
   A.   Minimum Age To Sell Tobacco, Alternative Nicotine, Or Electronic
Cigarette Products: No person under sixteen (16) years of age may sell any
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product at a
retail establishment selling tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or
alternative nicotine products. This subsection does not apply to a sales clerk
in a family-owned business which can prove that the sales clerk is in fact a
son or daughter of the owner;
   B.   Distribution Of Tobacco: It shall be unlawful for any licensee or any
person, business, or retailer to sell, buy for, distribute samples of or
furnish any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or any alternative nicotine
product to a person under twenty-one (21) years of age;
   C.   Purchase Of Tobacco: No person under twenty-one (21) years of age shall
buy any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or any alternative nicotine
product; and
   D.   Before selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing a tobacco
product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product to another
person, the person selling, offering for sale, giving, or furnishing the
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product shall
verify that the person is at least twenty-one (21) years of age by:
      1.   Examining from any person that appears to be under thirty (30) years
of age a government-issued photographic identification that establishes the
person to be twenty-one (21) years of age or older; or
      2.   For sales of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products made through the internet or other remote sales methods,
performing an age verification through an independent, third-party age
verification service that compares information available from public records to
the personal information entered by the person during the ordering process that
establishes the person is twenty-one (21) years of age or older.
   E.   A person shall not distribute without charge samples of any tobacco
product to any other person, regardless of age, except for smokeless tobacco in
an adult-only facility. This paragraph does not apply to the distribution of a
tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative nicotine product sample
in any adult-only facility.
   F.   The sale or distribution by any person of a tobacco product as defined
in Section
3-11-1 , including but not limited to a single or loose cigarette, that is not
contained within a sealed container, pack, or package as provided by the
manufacturer, which container, pack, or package bears the health warning
required by federal law, is prohibited.
   G.   It is not a violation of this chapter for a person under twenty-one
(21) years of age to purchase a tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or
alternative nicotine product if the person under the age of twenty-one (21)
purchases or is given the tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or alternative
nicotine product in any of its forms from a retail seller of tobacco products,
electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products or an employee of the
retail seller pursuant to a plan or action to investigate, patrol, or otherwise
conduct a “sting operation” or enforcement action against a retail seller of
tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products or a
person employed by the retail seller of tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products or on any premises authorized to
sell tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products
to determine if tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products are being sold or given to persons under twenty-one (21)
years of age if the “sting operation” or enforcement action is approved by,
conducted by, or conducted on behalf of the Department of State Police, the
county sheriff, the Village of Minooka police department, the Department of
Revenue, the Department of Public Health, or a local health department. The
results of any sting operation or enforcement action, including the name of the
clerk, shall be provided to the retail seller within seven (7) business days.
   H.   No person under twenty-one (21) years of age in the furtherance or
facilitation of obtaining any tobacco product, electronic cigarette, or
alternative nicotine product shall display or use a false or forged
identification card or transfer, alter, or deface an identification card.
   I.   It is hereby declared that possession or use of any tobacco product by
a person under the age of twenty-one (21) is a nuisance, it shall be unlawful
for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to possess or use any tobacco
product. (Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall be engaged in the business of selling or offer for sale
at retail, give away, deliver or to keep with the intention of selling at
retail, tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products within
the limits of the village without having first procured a valid tobacco
retailer’s license from the village for each location in which tobacco,
alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products are sold. All such
licenses must be renewed annually. Such license shall be in addition to any
other license required by this code.
   B.   A license shall be a purely personal privilege, good for not to exceed
one year after issuance, unless formally revoked as herein provided, and shall
not be transferable, except a new license will be issued to a tobacco retailer
who changes location. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019;
Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
   A.   An applicant for license shall submit to the village president an
application in writing under oath stating:
      1.   The name, age and address of the applicant in the case of an
individual; in the case of a copartnership, the persons entitled to share in
the profits thereof; and in the case of a corporation, the date of
incorporation, the purpose for which it was organized, the names and addresses
of the officers and directors and if a majority in interest of the stock of
such corporations owned by one person or his nominees, the name and address of
such person.
      2.   The citizenship of the applicant, and if a naturalized citizen, the
time and place of his naturalization.
      3.   The location and description of the premises which is to be operated
under such license.
      4.   The character of business of the applicant and, in case of a
corporation, the object for which it was formed.
      5.   The length of time that said applicant has been in business of that
character or, in case of a corporation, the date on which it was chartered.
      6.   The applicant will not violate any of the laws of the state of
Illinois, of the United States or the provisions of this code in the conduct of
his place of business.
      7.   Whether a previous tobacco license by any state or subdivision
thereof has been suspended or revoked.
      8.   The applicant understands that every act or omission of any nature
constituting a violation of any provisions of this chapter by any officer,
director, manager or other agent or employee of any licensee shall be deemed
and held to be the act of such licensee with respect to acts constituting
grounds for suspension or revocation of the licensee’s license.
   B.   All applications for license shall be accompanied by a certified check,
cashier’s check, United States postal money order or cash in the full amount of
the license fee required to be paid. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004;
amd. Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-5: LICENSE FEE:
   A.   The fee for a one-year tobacco retailer’s license is seventy-five
dollars ($75.00) for each tobacco retail location.
   B.   Term Of License: No license shall be issued under this chapter for a
period of less than one calendar year unless the same is issued pursuant to
application made subsequent to the first day of any fiscal year, in which
event, the license shall be issued for the remaining period of the year, and no
license shall be issued for a period of more than one year. All licenses issued
hereunder shall be valid from May 1 to April 30 of each year.
   C.   Fee Adjustments, Credits And Rebates: The fee for all licenses for all
renewals of existing licenses and for all new licenses applied for during the
first quarter of any fiscal year shall be the full annual fee as set forth
herein, the fee for all licenses applied for during the second quarter of any
fiscal year shall be three-quarters (3/4) of the annual fee as set forth
herein, the fee for all licenses applied for during the third quarter of any
fiscal year shall be one-half (1/2) of the annual fee as set forth herein, and
the fee for all licenses applied for during the last quarter of any fiscal year
shall be one-quarter (1/4) of the annual fee as set forth herein. In the event
any licensee shall voluntarily surrender a license prior to the expiration of
its term, and a subsequent license shall be issued to any other person for the
same premises during the same fiscal year, the village shall give a credit upon
the required second license fee in the amount of one-quarter (1/4) of the
annual fee paid by the former licensee if the first license is surrendered in
the third quarter of such fiscal year, one-half (1/2) of the annual fee paid by
the former licensee if the first license is surrendered in the second quarter
of the fiscal year and three-quarters (3/4) of the annual fee paid by the
former licensee if the first license is surrendered in the first quarter of the
fiscal year. There shall be no other rebate of any license fees, and no credit
shall be given in the event a license for any given premises is suspended or
revoked during any portion of any fiscal year.
   D.   Payment Of Fees; Disposition: All license fees shall be paid to the
village clerk at the time the application is made and shall be forthwith turned
over to the village treasurer. In the event the license applied for is denied,
the fee shall be returned to the applicant. If the license is granted, then the
fee shall be deposited in a general corporate fund or in such other fund as
shall have been designated by the village board by proper action.
   E.   Failure To Obtain License, Suspended Or Revoked License: In addition to
all other remedies, any person engaged in the business of selling or offering
for sale at retail, giving away, delivering to or keeping with the intention of
selling at retail, tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette
products within the limits of the village with a suspended or revoked license
or without having first procured a valid tobacco retailer’s license from the
village for each location in which tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic
cigarette products are sold shall be sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1  of this code for each offense. Said violator shall pay the fine amount
in full before the village president will consider the approval of any
application for a tobacco retailer’s license. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-
1-2004; amd. Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016; Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18,
4-25-2023)
3-11-6: ISSUANCE OF LICENSE:
When the president of the village shall recommend the approval of any
application as herein provided, the applicant shall be issued a license, upon
the payment in advance of the required fee, which license shall be in writing
over the name and under the seal of the village, and executed by the president
of the village and attested by the village clerk. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004,
eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-7: RECORD OF LICENSES:
The president shall keep or cause to be kept a complete record of all such
licenses issued by him and shall furnish the clerk of the village, the
treasurer of the village, and the chief of police each with a copy thereof upon
the issuance of any new license, and shall notify each of the said officers, in
writing, upon the issuance of any new licenses or suspension or revocation of
any old licenses. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18,
4-25-2023)
3-11-8: RENEWAL OF LICENSE:
Any licensee may renew his license at the expiration thereof, provided he is
then qualified to receive a license and the premises for which such renewal
license is sought are suitable for such purpose, and provided further that the
renewal privilege herein provided for shall not be construed as a vested right.
(Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-9: LICENSED PREMISES, TRANSFER:
Licenses issued under this chapter shall apply only to the premises described
in the application and in the license issued thereon, and only one location
shall be described in each license. After a license has been granted for a
particular premises, the village president, upon proper showing, may endorse
upon said license permission to abandon the premises therein described and
remove therefrom to other premises approved by it. However, in order to obtain
such approval, the licensee shall file with the village president a request in
writing and a statement under oath which shall show that the premises to which
removal is to be made comply in all respects with the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-10: POSTING LICENSE:
Every licensee shall cause his license to be hung in plain view in a
conspicuous place on the licensed premises. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-
2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-11: WARNING SIGNS:
Signs informing the public of the age of sale restrictions shall be posted by
every licensee at or near every display of tobacco, alternative nicotine, or
electronic cigarette products which offers said products for sale. Each sign
shall be plainly visible and shall state:
      THE SALE OF TOBACCO, ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE, OR ELECTRONIC CIGARETTE
PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER TWENTY-ONE YEARS OF AGE IS PROHIBITED BY LAW
The text of such signs must be in red letters on a white background, and said
letters must be at least one inch (1") high. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016; amd.
Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-12: VENDOR ASSISTED SALES AND VENDING MACHINES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any licensee, person, business, or retailer to
sell, permit to be sold, or offer for sale any tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products by means of self-service displays
or any other means other than vendor assisted sales.
   B.   Tobacco vending machines or any other devices for the sale or
distribution of tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or alternative
nicotine products are prohibited. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016; amd. Ord. 2019-24,
11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-13: PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
It is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or
alternative nicotine products within one hundred feet (100') of any school,
childcare facility or other building used for educational or recreational
purposes by persons under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016;
amd. Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-14: PROXIMITY TO CERTAIN INSTITUTIONS:
It is hereby declared a nuisance and unlawful for any person to sell, offer for
sale, give away or deliver tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or
alternative nicotine products within one hundred feet (100') of any school,
childcare facility or other building used for educational or recreational
purposes by persons under eighteen (18) years of age. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016;
amd. Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-15: INSPECTION:
It shall be the duty of the chief of police or his designee and they are hereby
authorized and empowered to conduct annual, random, unannounced inspections and
compliance checks of all places wherein such tobacco products, electronic
cigarettes, or alternative nicotine products are sold, for the purpose of
ascertaining whether the laws of the state and of the village in relation to
the same, are being complied with at such place. (Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016; amd.
Ord. 2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-16: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
The village president shall be charged with the administration of this chapter.
The village president, village attorney and the police department shall have
the authority to enforce this chapter. Each day any violation of any provision
of this chapter or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-17: PENALTIES:
   A.   Any person who violates Paragraphs A-F of Section
3-11-2  of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense. For the first offense in
a 24-month period, the person shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) if
his or her employer has a training program that facilitates compliance with
minimum-age tobacco laws. For the second offense in a 24-month period, the
person shall be fined four hundred dollars ($400.00) if his or her employer has
a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws.
For the third offense in a 24-month period, the person shall be fined six
hundred dollars ($600.00) if his or her employer has a training program that
facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the fourth or
subsequent offense in a 24-month period, the person shall be fined eight
hundred dollars ($800.00) if his or her employer has a training program that
facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the purposes of this
subsection, the 24-month period shall begin with the person’s first violation
of this chapter. The penalties in this Section are in addition to any other
penalties prescribed under this chapter, the Cigarette Tax Act [35 ILCS 130/
1 et seq.] and the Tobacco Products Tax Act of 1995 [5 ILCS 143/3-5 et seq.].
   B.   Any retailer who violates Paragraphs A-F of Section
3-11-2  of this chapter is guilty of a petty offense. For the first offense in
a 24-month period, the retailer shall be fined two hundred dollars ($200.00) if
it does not have a training program that facilitates compliance with minimum-
age tobacco laws. For the second offense in a 24-month period, the retailer
shall be fined four hundred dollars ($400.00) if it does not have a training
program that facilitates compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the
third offense within a 24-month period, the retailer shall be fined six hundred
dollars ($600.00) if it does not have a training program that facilitates
compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the fourth or subsequent offense
in a 24-month period, the retailer shall be fined eight hundred dollars
($800.00) if it does not have a training program that facilitates compliance
with minimum-age tobacco laws. For the purposes of this subsection, the 24-
month period shall begin with the person’s first violation of the Act. The
penalties in this subsection are in addition to any other penalties prescribed
under this chapter, the Cigarette Tax Act and the Tobacco Products Tax Act of
1995.
   C.   For the purpose of this chapter, a training program that facilitates
compliance with minimum-age tobacco laws must include at least the following
elements: (i) it must explain that only individuals displaying valid
identification demonstrating that they are twenty-one (21) years of age or
older shall be eligible to purchase tobacco products, electronic cigarettes, or
alternative nicotine products and (ii) it must explain where a clerk can check
identification for a date of birth. The training may be conducted
electronically. Each retailer that has a training program shall require each
employee who completes the training program to sign a form attesting that the
employee has received and completed tobacco training. The form shall be kept in
the employee’s file and may be used to provide proof of training.
   D.   If a person under twenty-one (21) years of age violates Paragraph H of
Section
3-11-2  of this chapter, he or she is guilty of a Class A misdemeanor.
   E.   A person violating of Paragraph I of Section
3-11-2  of this chapter shall be fined fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2011-29,
12-20-2011; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-18: SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Procedure: A second or subsequent violation of the provisions of this
chapter within a one-year period by a licensee shall result in a hearing as to
whether the licensee’s license should be suspended or revoked.
   B.   Notice Of Hearing: No such license shall be suspended or revoked except
after a public hearing by the village president with a seven (7) day written
notice to the licensee affording the licensee an opportunity to appear and
defend against the charges contained in such notice. The seven (7) day notice
provisions shall begin the day following delivery by certified mail or by
personal service.
   C.   Decision: The village president shall, within seven (7) days after such
hearing, if he determines after such hearing that the license should be revoked
or suspended, state the reason for such determination in a written order and
the period of suspension or that the license has been revoked and serve a copy
of such order within the seven (7) days upon the licensee.
      1.   In the case of a second violation within a one-year period, the
licensee’s tobacco license may be suspended for not more than ninety (90)
consecutive days. The retailer must then remove all tobacco, alternative
nicotine, and electronic cigarette merchandise from all areas accessible to the
public while the license is suspended and shall not sell any tobacco,
alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products.
      2.   In the case of a third violation within a one-year period, the
licensee’s tobacco license may be suspended for not more than twelve (12)
months. The retailer must then remove all tobacco, alternative nicotine, and
electronic cigarette merchandise from all areas accessible to the public while
the license is suspended and shall not sell any tobacco, alternative nicotine,
or electronic cigarette products.
      3.   In the case of a fourth or subsequent violation within a one-year
period, the licensee’s tobacco license may be revoked. Upon the revocation of a
tobacco license, all tobacco, alternative nicotine, and electronic cigarette
merchandise must be removed from all areas accessible to the public and the
tobacco retailer shall not sell any tobacco, alternative nicotine, or
electronic cigarette products.
   D.   Costs: Any licensee determined by the village president to have
violated any of the provisions of this chapter shall pay to the village the
costs of the hearing before the village president on such violation. The
village president shall determine the costs incurred by the village for said
hearing, including, but not limited to, court reporter fees, the costs of
transcripts or records, attorney fees, the cost of preparing and mailing
notices and orders and all other miscellaneous expenses incurred by the village
or such lesser sum as the village president may allow. The licensee shall pay
said costs to the village within thirty (30) days of notification of the costs
by the village president. Failure to pay said costs within thirty (30) days of
notification is a violation of this chapter and may be cause for license
suspension or revocation or the levy of additional fines.
   E.   Use Of Premises After License Revocation: When any license shall have
been revoked for any cause, no license shall be granted to said licensee for
the period of six (6) months thereafter for the conduct of the business of
selling tobacco, alternative nicotine, or electronic cigarette products, as
defined in section
3-11-1  of this chapter, in the premises described in such revoked license.
(Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2016-15, 3-22-2016; Ord.
2019-24, 11-26-2019; Ord. 2023-18, 4-25-2023)
3-11-19: NONRETALIATION:
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner
retaliate against any employee, applicant for employment, or customer because
such employee, applicant or customer reported violations of any provisions of
this ordinance. (Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004; amd. Ord. 2023-18, 4-
25-2023)
CHAPTER 12
RAFFLES
SECTION:
3-12-1 Definitions
3-12-2 License
3-12-3 Application
3-12-4 Validity Of License
3-12-5 Ineligibility For License
3-12-6 Not For Profit Organizations
3-12-7 Limitations
3-12-8 Fees
3-12-9 Approval
3-12-10 Conduct Of Raffles
3-12-11 Records
3-12-12 Manager's Bond
3-12-13 Suspension; Revocation
3-12-14 Punishment
3-12-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
BUSINESS: A voluntary organization composed of individuals and businesses who
have joined together to advance the commercial, financial, industrial and civic
interests of a community.
CHARITABLE: An organization or institution organized and operated to benefit an
indefinite number of the public. The service rendered to those eligible for
benefits must also confer some benefit on the public.
EDUCATIONAL: An organization or institution organized and operated to provide
systematic instruction in useful branches of learning by methods common to
schools and institutions of learning which compare favorably in their scope and
intensity with the course of study presented in tax supported schools.
FRATERNAL: An organization of persons having a common interest, the primary
interest of which is to both promote the welfare of its members and to provide
assistance to the general public in such a way as to lessen the burdens of
government by caring for those that otherwise would be cared for by the
government.
LABOR: An organization composed of workers organized with the objective of
betterment of the conditions of those engaged in such pursuit and the
development of a higher degree of efficiency in their respective occupations.
NET PROCEEDS: The gross receipts from the conduct of raffles, less reasonable
sums expended for prizes, local license fees and other operating expenses
incurred as a result of operating a raffle or poker run.
NONPROFIT: An organization or institution organized and conducted on a not for
profit basis with no personal profit inuring to anyone as a result of the
operation.
ONLINE: Connected to, served by, or available through an electronic information
service or the internet, through a computer or telecommunications system; or
done while connected to such a system, e.g., online shopping.
RAFFLE: A form of lottery, as defined in subsection (b) of Section 28-2 of the
Criminal Code of 2012 [720 ILCS 5/28-2], conducted by an organization licensed
under this Act, in which:
   A.   The player pays or agrees to pay something of value for a chance,
represented and differentiated by a number or by a combination of numbers or by
some other medium, one or more of which chances is to be designated the winning
chance; and
   B.   The winning chance is to be determined through a drawing or by some
other method based on an element of chance by an act or set of acts on the part
of persons conducting or connected with the lottery, except that the winning
chance shall not be determined by the outcome of a publicly exhibited sporting
contest.
"Raffle" does not include any game designed to simulate:
   A.   Gambling games as defined in the Riverboat Gambling Act;
   B.   Any casino game approved for play by the Illinois Gaming Board;
   C.   Any games provided by a video gaming terminal, as defined in the Video
Gaming Act (230 ILCS 40/1 et seq.); or
   D.   A savings promotion raffle authorized under Section 5g of the Illinois
Banking Act, Section 7008 of the Savings Bank Act, Section 42.7 of the Illinois
Credit Union Act (205 ILCS 5/5g, 205 ILCS 205/7008, 205 ILCS 305/42.7), Section
5136B of the National Bank Act, or Section 4 of the Home Owners' Loan Act.
RELIGIOUS: Any church, congregation, society, or organization founded for the
purposes of religious worship.
VETERANS: An organization or association comprised of members of which
substantially all are individuals who are veterans or spouses, widows, or
widowers of veterans, the primary purpose of which is to promote the welfare of
its members and to provide assistance to the general public in such a way as to
confer a public benefit. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-
2020)
3-12-2: LICENSE:
No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall conduct raffles or chances
without having first procured a valid raffle license issued by the village
president. The license shall be issued to the operator of said raffle. (Ord.
2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-3: APPLICATION:
   A.   An applicant for a raffle license shall submit to the village president
an application in writing under oath at least thirty (30) days prior to the
first day intended for sale of the raffle chances.
   B.   Applications for licenses under this chapter must contain, but are not
limited to, the following information:
      1.   Name of the not-for-profit organization to which the license would
be issued; the name, age, address, date of birth, social security number, and
contact number of the person making application for the licensee.
      3.   The maximum number of days during which raffle chances will be
issued or sold.
      4.   Time period during which raffle chances will be issued or sold.
      5.   Sworn statement attesting to the not for profit character of the
prospective licensee organization, signed by the presiding officer and
secretary of the organization.
      6.   Date, time and locations at which winning chances will be
determined.
      7.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise to be
awarded by a licensee in a single raffle.
      8.   The maximum retail value of each prize to be awarded by a licensee
in a single raffle.
      9.   The maximum price to be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold and the number of chances to be issued or sold for each raffle.
      10.   The name(s), address(es), date(s) of birth, social security number
(s) and contact number(s) of the operator(s) of the raffle and raffle manager
(s).
      11.   The last date and location on which the applicant has applied for a
raffle license.
      12.   Whether or not the person making the application has ever been
convicted of a felony.
      13.   Whether or not the applicant will sell raffle chances online, and,
if so, the name(s) and address(es) of the individual, partnership, or
corporation licensing the software.
      14.   Background checks on the operator(s) of the raffle and raffle
manager(s). (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-4: VALIDITY OF LICENSE:
Each such license shall be valid for one raffle or a specified number of
raffles to be conducted during a specified period not to exceed one year and
may be suspended or revoked by the corporate authorities in the event of
violation of the terms of this chapter or any applicable state or Federal law.
(Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-5: INELIGIBILITY FOR LICENSE:
   A.   The following are ineligible for any license under this chapter:
      1.   Any person whose felony conviction will impair the person's ability
to engage in the licensed position.
      2.   Any person who is or has been a professional gambler or professional
gambling promoter;
      3.   Any person who is not of good moral character;
      4.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A1, A2, or
A3 of this section has a proprietary, equitable or credit interest, or in which
such a person is active or employed;
      5.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A1, A2, or
A3 of this section is an officer, director or employee, whether compensated or
not; or
      6.   Any organization in which a person defined in subsection A1, A2, or
A3 of this section is to participate in the management or operation of a raffle
as defined in 230 Illinois Compiled Statutes 15/0.01 et seq. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-
26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-6: NOT FOR PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS:
Licenses shall be issued only to bona fide nonprofit religious, charitable,
labor, business, fraternal, educational, veterans or other bona fide not for
profit organizations which operate without profit to their members and which
have been in existence continuously for a period of five (5) years immediately
before making application for a license and which have during that entire five
(5) year period been engaged in carrying out their objectives, or to a
nonprofit fundraising organization that the village president determines is
organized for the sole purpose of providing financial assistance to an
identified individual or group of individuals suffering extreme financial
hardships as the result of an illness, disability, accident or disaster.
The Village President may waive the five (5)-year requirement under this
Section for a bona fide religious, charitable, labor, business, fraternal,
educational, or veterans' organization that applies for a license to conduct a
raffle if the organization is a local organization that is affiliated with and
chartered by a national or State organization that meets the 5-year
requirement. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-7: LIMITATIONS:
   A.   The aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise awarded by a
licensee in a single raffle shall not exceed one million dollars
($1,000,000.00).
   B.   The maximum retail value of each prize awarded by a licensee in a
single raffle shall not exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00).
   C.   The maximum price which may be charged for each raffle chance issued or
sold shall not exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   D.   The maximum number of days during which chances may be issued or sold
is limited to three hundred sixty five (365) days.
   E.   Any raffle where the winning number is drawn or generated in the
village of Minooka will be deemed to be conducted in the village thereby
requiring a license to be issued by the village.
   F.   Any license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be
nontransferable.
   G.   Credit cards, cash, or checks may be used to purchase raffle chances.
   H.   Tickets may be purchased online.
   I.   Credit cards, cash, or checks may be used to purchase raffle chances.
   J.   Tickets may be purchased online.
   K.   Credit cards, cash, or checks may be used to purchase raffle chances.
(Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-8: FEES:
The fee for such a license to conduct a raffle shall be as follows:
   For raffles in which the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
is less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00): fifty dollars ($50.00).
   For raffles in which the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
is less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00): one hundred dollars
($100.00).
   For raffles in which the aggregate retail value of all prizes or merchandise
is less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00): two hundred and fifty dollars
($250.00). (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-9: APPROVAL:
The village president shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt of an
application for a raffle license, evaluate and either approve or disapprove of
said application. The village president may appoint persons to assist in the
exercise of the powers and the performance of the duties herein provided,
including, but not limited to, village staff and the chief of police. The
approval of a raffle license shall be in writing, signed by the village
president. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-10: CONDUCT OF RAFFLES:
   A.   The conducting of raffles is subject to the following restrictions:
      1.   Proceeds: The entire net proceeds of any raffle must be exclusively
devoted to the lawful purpose of the organization permitted to conduct that
game.
      2.   Participation In Management: No person except a bona fide director,
officer, employee or member of the sponsoring organization may manage or
participate in the management of the raffle. The designated raffle manager
shall be a bona fide officer of the sponsoring organization.
      3.   Remuneration: No person may receive any remuneration or profit for
managing or participating in the management of the raffle.
      4.   Third Parties: Sponsoring organizations may contract with third
parties who, acting at the direction of and under the supervision of the
sponsoring organization, provide bona fide services to the sponsoring
organization in connection with the operation of a raffle and may pay
reasonable compensation for such services. Such services include the following:
(a) advertising, marketing and promotion, (b) legal, (c) procurement of goods,
prizes, wares and merchandise for the purpose of operating the raffle, (d)
rent, if the premises upon which the raffle will be held is rented, (e)
accounting, auditing and bookkeeping, (f) website hosting, (g) mailing and
delivery, (h) banking and payment processing, and (i) other services relating
to the operation of the raffle.
      5.   Premises: A licensee may rent a premises on which to determine the
winning chance or chances in a raffle provided that the rent is not determined
as a percentage of receipts or profits from the raffle.
      6.   Locations: Raffle chances may be sold throughout the state,
including beyond the borders of the village. Winning chances may be determined
only at those locations specified on the license for a raffle.
      7.   Age Of Participants: No person under the age of eighteen (18) years
may participate in the operation or conduct of raffles or chances. A person
under the age of eighteen (18) years may be within the area where winning
chances are being determined only when accompanied by his/her parent or
guardian.
   B.   If a lessor rents a premises where a winning chance or chances on a
raffle are determined, the lessor shall not be criminally liable if the person
who uses the premises for the determining of winning chances does not hold a
license issued by the village under the provisions of this chapter or
applicable state law. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-11: RECORDS:
   A.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles and chances shall keep
records of its gross receipts, expenses and net proceeds for each single
gathering or occasion at which winning chances in a raffle are determined. All
deductions from gross receipts for each single gathering or occasion shall be
documented with receipts or other records indicating the amount, a description
of the purchased item or service or other reason for the deduction, and the
recipient. The distribution of net proceeds shall be itemized as to payee,
purpose, amount and date of payment.
   B.   Gross receipts from the operation of raffles shall be segregated from
other revenues of the organization, including bingo gross receipts, if bingo
games are also conducted by the same nonprofit organization pursuant to license
therefor issued by the Department of Revenue of the State of Illinois, and
placed in a separate account. Each organization shall have separate records of
its raffles. The person who accounts for gross receipts, expenses and net
proceeds from the operation of raffles shall not be the same person who
accounts for other revenues of the organization.
   C.   Each organization licensed to conduct raffles shall report promptly
after the conclusion of each raffle to its membership or, if the organization
does not have members, to its governing board. Each organization licensed to
conduct raffles shall report promptly to the village its gross receipts,
expenses and net proceeds from the raffle, and the distribution of net proceeds
itemized as required in this Section.
   D.   Records required by this Section shall be preserved for three (3)
years, and organizations shall make available their records relating to
operation of raffles for public inspection at reasonable times and places.
(Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-12: MANAGER'S BOND:
All management, operations and conduct of raffles shall be under the
supervision of a single manager designated by the organization. The manager
shall give a fidelity bond in a sum equal to the greater of one hundred ten
percent (110%) of: a) the anticipated gross receipts to be received by the
organization or b) the estimate aggregate value of all prizes for the raffle,
in favor of the organization conditioned upon his/her honesty in the
performance of his/her duties. Terms of the bond shall provide that notice
shall be given in writing to the village not less than thirty (30) days prior
to its cancellation. The village president may waive this bond requirement by
including a waiver provision in the license issued to an organization under
this chapter, provided that a license containing such waiver provision shall be
granted only by affirmative vote of the requisite number of members of the
licensed organization or, if the licensed organization does not have members,
of members of the governing board of the organization, to constitute an
affirmative action of the organization. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007; amd. Ord.
2020-18, 6-23-2020)
3-12-13: SUSPENSION; REVOCATION:
Any license granted under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the
village at any time it appears that the proposed or actual operation of the
raffle will be or is such as to constitute a public nuisance or to endanger the
public peace, health, safety or welfare. Any license granted under this chapter
may be suspended or revoked in whole or in part at any time that the raffle is
conducted contrary to the license or to any state law or village ordinance, or
when such raffle or portion thereof is conducted so as to constitute a public
nuisance or to disturb the peace, health, safety or welfare. Suspension or
revocation shall become effective immediately. It shall be a violation for any
person to operate, engage or participate in, except as a patron, any raffle in
which a license has been suspended or revoked. (Ord. 2007-32, 6-26-2007)
3-12-14: PUNISHMENT:
Any license issued under this chapter shall be revoked or suspended if the
licensee violates any terms of the license or any other provisions of this
chapter or applicable state law. Any person who violates any provision of this
chapter shall be prosecuted in Will/Kendall/Grundy Counties and shall be guilty
of a class C misdemeanor, punished by a fine of not more than the amount as set
forth in section
1-4-1 of this code, and/or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days. Each day
that a violation hereof exists shall be considered a separate offense. Each
raffle held in violation hereof shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord.
2007-32, 6-26-2007)
CHAPTER 13
CABLE AND VIDEO CUSTOMER PROTECTION
SECTION:
3-13-1 Customer Service And Privacy Protection Law
3-13-2 Enforcement
3-13-3 Penalties
3-13-4 Customer Credits
3-13-1: CUSTOMER SERVICE AND PRIVACY PROTECTION LAW:
   A.   Adoption: The regulations of 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501
are hereby adopted by reference and made applicable to the cable or video
providers offering services within the village's boundaries.
   B.   Amendments: Any amendment to the cable and video customer protection
law that becomes effective after the effective date of this chapter shall be
incorporated into this chapter by reference and shall be applicable to cable or
video providers offering services within the municipality's boundaries.
However, any amendment that makes its provisions optional for adoption by
municipalities shall not be incorporated into this chapter by reference without
formal action by the corporate authorities of the village. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-
19-2007)
3-13-2: ENFORCEMENT:
The village does hereby pursuant to law declare its intent to enforce all of
the customer service and privacy protection standards of the cable and video
customer protection law with respect to complaints received from residents
within the village. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-2007)
3-13-3: PENALTIES:
Cable or video providers, in addition to the penalties provided in the law,
shall be subject to fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not
more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for any material breach of the cable and video customer
protection law. The monetary penalties shall apply on a competitively neutral
basis and shall not exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for each day
of the material breach, and shall not exceed twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) for each occurrence of a material breach per customer.
   A.   "Material breach" means any substantial failure of a cable or video
provider to comply with service quality and other standards specified in any
provision of the law.
   B.   The village shall give the cable or video provider written notice of
any alleged material breaches of the law and allow such provider at least
thirty (30) days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified
material breach.
   C.   A material breach, for the purposes of assuming penalties, shall be
deemed to occur for each day that a material breach has not been remedied by
the cable or video service provider after the notice in subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-2007)
3-13-4: CUSTOMER CREDITS:
The village hereby sets forth the following schedule of customer credits for
violations:
   A.   Failure to provide notice of customer service standards upon initiation
of service: Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   B.   Failure to install service within seven (7) days: Waiver of fifty
percent (50%) of the installation fee or the monthly fee for the lowest cost
basic service, whichever is greater. Failure to install service within fourteen
(14) days: Waiver of one hundred percent (100%) of the installation fee or the
monthly fee for the lowest cost basic service, whichever is greater.
   C.   Failure to remedy service interruptions or poor video or audio service
quality within forty eight (48) hours: Pro rata credit of total regular monthly
charges equal to the number of days of the service interruption.
   D.   Failure to keep an appointment or to notify the customer prior to the
close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled appointment:
Twenty five dollars ($25.00).
   E.   Violation of privacy protections: One hundred fifty dollars ($150.00).
   F.   Failure to comply with scrambling requirements: Fifty dollars ($50.00)
per month.
   G.   Violation of customer service and billing standards: Twenty five
dollars ($25.00) per occurrence.
   H.   Violation of the bundling rules: Twenty five dollars ($25.00) per
month.
The credits shall be applied on the statement issued to the customer for the
next billing cycle following the violation or following the discovery of the
violation, as set forth in 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/70-501(s). The
cable or video provider is responsible for providing the credits and the
customer is under no obligation to request the credit. (Ord. 2007-57, 12-19-
2007)
CHAPTER 14
CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE AND PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE
SECTION:
3-14-1 Definitions
3-14-2 Cable/Video Service Provider Fee Imposed
3-14-3 PEG Access Support Fee Imposed
3-14-4 Applicable Principles
3-14-5 No Impact On Other Taxes Due From Holder
3-14-6 Audits Of Cable/Video Service Provider
3-14-7 Late Fees/Payments
3-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC section 522(6).
COMMISSION: The Illinois commerce commission.
GROSS REVENUES: All consideration of any kind or nature, including, without
limitation, cash, credits, property, and in-kind contributions received by the
holder for the operation of a cable or video system to provide cable service or
video service within the holder's cable service or video service area within
the village.
   A.   Gross revenues shall include the following:
      1.   Recurring charges for cable or video service.
      2.   Event based charges for cable service or video service, including,
but not limited to, pay per view and video on demand charges.
      3.   Rental of set top boxes and other cable service or video service
equipment.
      4.   Service charges related to the provision of cable service or video
service, including, but not limited to, activation, installation, and repair
charges.
      5.   Administrative charges related to the provision of cable service or
video service, including, but not limited to, service order and service
termination charges.
      6.   Late payment fees or charges, insufficient funds check charges, and
other charges assessed to recover the costs of collecting delinquent payments.
      7.   A pro rata portion of all revenue derived by the holder or its
affiliates pursuant to compensation arrangements for advertising or for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services derived from the operation
of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the
village. The allocation shall be based on the number of subscribers in the
village divided by the total number of subscribers in relation to the relevant
regional or national compensation arrangement.
      8.   Compensation received by the holder that is derived from the
operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service
with respect to commissions that are received by the holder as compensation for
promotion or exhibition of any products or services on the holder's network,
such as a "home shopping" or similar channel, subject to subsection A9 of this
definition.
      9.   In the case of a cable service or video service that is bundled or
integrated functionally with other services, capabilities, or applications, the
portion of the holder's revenue attributable to the other services,
capabilities, or applications shall be included in the gross revenue unless the
holder can reasonably identify the division or exclusion of the revenue from
its books and records that are kept in the regular course of business.
      10.   The service provider fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-801(b).
   B.   Gross revenues do not include any of the following:
      1.   Revenues not actually received, even if billed, such as bad debt,
subject to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(c)(1)(vi).
      2.   Refunds, discounts, or other price adjustments that reduce the
amount of gross revenues received by the holder of the state issued
authorization to the extent the refund, rebate, credit, or discount is
attributable to cable service or video service.
      3.   Regardless of whether the services are bundled, packaged, or
functionally integrated with cable service or video service, any revenues
received from services not classified as cable service or video service,
including, without limitation, revenue received from telecommunication
services, information services, or the provision of directory or internet
advertising, including yellow pages, white pages, banner advertisement, and
electronic publishing or any other revenues attributed by the holder to
noncable service or nonvideo service in accordance with the holder's books and
records and records kept in the regular course of business and any applicable
laws, rules, regulations, standards, or orders.
      4.   The sale of cable services or video services for resale in which the
purchaser is required to collect the service provider fee from the purchaser's
subscribers to the extent the purchaser certifies in writing that it will
resell the service within the village and pay the fee permitted by 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b) with respect to the service.
      5.   Any tax or fee of general applicability imposed upon the subscribers
or the transaction by a city, state, federal, or any other governmental entity
and collected by the holder of the state issued authorization and required to
be remitted to the taxing entity, including sales and use taxes.
      6.   Security deposits collected from subscribers.
      7.   Amounts paid by subscribers to "home shopping" or similar vendors
for merchandise sold through any home shopping channel offered as part of the
cable service or video service.
   C.   Revenue of an affiliate of a holder shall be included in the
calculation of gross revenues to the extent the treatment of the revenue as
revenue of the affiliate rather than the holder has the effect of evading the
payment of the fee permitted by 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(b)
which would otherwise be paid by the cable service or video service.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the commission pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/21-401.
PEG: Public, education and governmental.
PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801(d) by the holder to the village for the service
areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
SERVICE: The provision of cable service or video service to subscribers and the
interaction of subscribers with the person or entity that has received
authorization to offer or provide cable or video service from the commission
pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
SERVICE PROVIDER FEE: The amount paid under this chapter and 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/21-801 by the holder to a village for the service areas
within its territorial jurisdiction.
VIDEO SERVICE: Video programming and subscriber interaction, if any, that is
required for the selection or use of such video programming services, and which
is provided through wireline facilities located at least in part in the public
right of way without regard to delivery technology, including internet protocol
technology. This definition does not include any video programming provided by
a commercial mobile service provider defined in 47 USC section 332(d) or any
video programming provided solely as part of, and via, service that enables
users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services
offered over the public internet. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-2: CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   Fee Imposed: A fee is hereby imposed on any holder providing cable
service or video service in the village.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the fee imposed hereby shall be five
percent (5%) of the holder's gross revenues, or the fee paid to the village by
an incumbent cable operator providing cable service, whichever is less.
   C.   Notice To The Village: The holder shall notify the village at least ten
(10) days prior to the date on which the holder begins to offer cable service
or video service in the village.
   D.   Holder's Liability: The holder shall be liable for and pay the service
provider fee to the village. The holder's liability for the fee shall commence
on the first day of the calendar month following thirty (30) days after receipt
of the ordinance adopting this chapter by the holder. The ordinance adopting
this chapter shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to the address listed on
the holder's application notice sent pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/21-401(b)(6) to the village.
   E.   Payment Date: The payment of the service provider fee shall be due on a
quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar quarter.
If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked. Each
payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation of
the fee.
   F.   Exemption: The fee hereby imposed does not apply to existing cable
service or video service providers that have an existing franchise agreement
with the village in which a fee is paid.
   G.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) with credit for prepaid franchise fees under that agreement may
deduct the amount of such credit from the fees that operator owes under
subsection B of this section. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-3: PEG ACCESS SUPPORT FEE IMPOSED:
   A.   PEG Fee Imposed: A PEG access support fee is hereby imposed on any
holder providing cable service or video service in the village in addition to
the fee imposed pursuant to section
3-14-2 of this chapter.
   B.   Amount Of Fee: The amount of the PEG access support fee imposed hereby
shall be one percent (1%) of the holder's gross revenues or, if greater, the
percentage of gross revenues that incumbent cable operators pay to the village
or its designee for PEG access support in the village. For purposes of this
subsection, the percentage of gross revenues that all incumbent cable operators
pay shall be equal to the annual sum of the payments that incumbent cable
operators in the service area are obligated to pay by franchises and agreements
or by contracts with the village or designee for public, education and
government access, including the total of any lump sum payments required to be
made over the term of each franchise or agreement divided by the number of
years of the applicable term, divided by the annual sum of such incumbent cable
operator(s)'s gross revenues during the immediately prior calendar year. The
sum of payments includes any payments that an incumbent cable operator is
required to pay pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-301(c)(3).
   C.   Payment: The holder shall pay the PEG access support fee to the village
or to the entity designated by the village to manage PEG access. The holder's
liability for the PEG access support fee shall commence on the date set forth
in subsection
3-14-2D of this chapter.
   D.   Payment Due: The payment of the PEG access support fee shall be due on
a quarterly basis, forty five (45) days after the close of the calendar
quarter. If mailed, the fee is considered paid on the date it is postmarked.
Each payment shall include a statement explaining the basis for the calculation
of the fee.
   E.   Credit For Other Payments: An incumbent cable operator that elects to
terminate an existing agreement pursuant to 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
21-301(c) shall pay, at the time they would have been due, all monetary
payments for PEG access that would have been due during the remaining term of
the agreement had it not been terminated pursuant to that section. All payments
made by an incumbent cable operator pursuant to the previous sentence may be
credited against the fees that that operator owes under subsection B of this
section. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-4: APPLICABLE PRINCIPLES:
All determinations and calculations under this chapter shall be made pursuant
to generally accepted accounting principles. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-5: NO IMPACT ON OTHER TAXES DUE FROM HOLDER:
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a holder from
any tax that is or may later be imposed by the Village, including any tax that
is or may later be required to be paid by or through the holder with respect to
cable service or video service. A state issued authorization shall not affect
any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the village's
simplified municipal telecommunications tax or any other tax as it applies to
any telephone service provided by the holder. A state issued authorization
shall not affect any requirement of the holder with respect to payment of the
local unit of government's 911 or E911 fees, taxes or charges. (Ord. 2007-58,
12-19-2007)
3-14-6: AUDITS OF CABLE/VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER:
   A.   Audit Requirement: The village will notify the holder of the
requirements it imposes on other cable service or video service providers to
submit to an audit of its books and records. The holder shall comply with the
same requirements the village imposes on other cable service or video service
providers in its jurisdiction to audit the holder's books and records and to
recompute any amounts determined to be payable under the requirements of the
village. If all local franchises between the village and cable operator
terminate, the audit requirements shall be those adopted by the village
pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of rights act, 50 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. No acceptance of amounts remitted should be
construed as an accord that the amounts are correct.
   B.   Additional Payments: Any additional amount due after an audit shall be
paid within thirty (30) days after the village's submission of an invoice for
the sum. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-2007)
3-14-7: LATE FEES/PAYMENTS:
All fees due and payments which are past due shall be governed by ordinances
adopted by this village pursuant to the local government taxpayers' bill of
rights act, 50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 45/1 et seq. (Ord. 2007-58, 12-19-
2007)
CHAPTER 15
CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION
SECTION:
3-15-1 Definitions
3-15-2 Registration Required
3-15-3 Application For Certificate Of Registration
3-15-4 Fee
3-15-5 Application Submission
3-15-6 Inspection
3-15-7 Nontransferability Of Registration
3-15-8 Certificate Of Registration To Be Posted
3-15-9 Violation And Penalty
3-15-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words as used herein shall be
construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or
where services are offered.
   Whenever the regulations of this chapter require a person to register with
the village and obtain a certificate of registration as a prerequisite to
"doing", "conducting", "engaging in", "maintaining", "operating", "carrying on"
or "managing" a business, such terms, or one or more of such terms, shall
include any person who holds himself forth as being engaged in the business, or
who solicits patronage therefor, either actively or passively, or who performs
or attempts to perform any part of such business in the village, and the
omission of one or more of these terms shall not be deemed to exclude the
activities described by the other terms where such activities are in fact
carried on by such person. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-2: REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every person, public or private corporation, limited liability company, firm,
partnership, sole proprietorship, association, organization, or any other group
acting as a unit "doing", "conducting", "engaging in", "maintaining",
"operating", "carrying on" or "managing" a business, whether a license is
required or not, must register the business with the village and obtain a
certificate of registration. Any new business shall, within thirty (30) days
prior to conducting business, register with the village and obtain a
certificate of registration.
The following persons are exempt from the registration requirements of this
chapter:
   A.   Activities typically conducted by youth under eighteen (18) years of
age and/or youth organizations, including, but not limited to, fundraising for
nonprofit organizations (e.g., schools and youth clubs), lawn mowing, snow
shoveling, and babysitting; and
   B.   Registered not for profit organizations engaged in fundraising
activities. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-3: APPLICATION FOR CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION:
Each registration application shall be made, in writing, to the village clerk
on a form provided for that purpose, accompanied by the applicable registration
fee, and shall contain:
   A.   The name, residence address, and telephone number of the business
owner, manager, and/or operator.
   B.   The name of the owner of the property, and if the owner is a different
person than the registrant, then state the residence address and telephone
number of the property owner.
   C.   The location or proposed location of the business.
   D.   A description of the type of business and business hours.
   E.   Key holder name and telephone number.
   F.   The name, address and telephone number of a person or persons who can
be contacted during a response from police, paramedics, the Fire Department, or
other emergency responders.
   G.   An after hours (emergency) contact name and telephone number.
   H.   Alarm type, alarm company name and alarm company telephone number.
   I.   Type and location of any toxic, flammable or hazardous materials stored
or used at said location.
   J.   Location of Knox box.
   K.   Fire protection district that covers business.
   L.   Any other relevant information about the registrant or the business for
police, paramedics, the Fire Department or other emergency responders.
   M.   The fee to be paid. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-4: FEE:
   A.   All registrations required by this chapter shall be for a full year,
and the term of each shall commence on May 1, or thereafter if it is first
granted on a date thereafter, whichever may be the case, and shall expire the
following April 30, unless otherwise specified or previously revoked, and the
full fee shall be paid at the time of application in the case of all renewals.
   B.   In the case of first registrations for which application is made in the
first quarter of the term, the full fee shall be paid; for those made in the
second quarter of the term, three- fourths (3/4) of the fee shall be paid; for
those made in the third quarter of the term, one- half (1/2) of the fee shall
be paid; and for those made in the last quarter of the term, one- fourth (1/4)
of the fee shall be paid.
   C.   The fee shall be paid to the Village within thirty (30) days from May
1, or thirty (30) days prior to conducting business. The fees are
nonrefundable. Upon registration, the certificate of registration shall be
valid until April 30.
   D.   The annual renewal registration fee shall be twenty four dollars
($24.00). An annual reminder letter shall be sent by the Village Clerk prior to
the April 30 expiration date regarding the requirement to renew the
registration and of the fee. However, it is the obligation of each business to
renew its registration and failure to receive an expiration notification is not
a defense for operating without a certificate of registration. (Ord. 2018-21,
7-24-2018)
3-15-5: APPLICATION SUBMISSION:
The Village Clerk shall maintain a list of all registered businesses. Upon
receipt of a completed registration form, the Village Clerk shall provide one
copy to the applicable fire protection district and one copy to the Police
Department. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-6: INSPECTION:
As part of the registration process, including any renewal thereof, the Village
may conduct an inspection of the business premises and make a determination as
to whether the business premises complies with the provisions of all applicable
Building Codes, zoning ordinances and other regulations in force from time to
time in the Village. Following the inspection, the Village shall provide the
registrant with a written report listing any Code violations and establishing a
timetable for compliance and correction of each violation. If the timetable
established for correction of Code violations has expired without the
corrections as determined by the Village during a follow up inspection, fines
may be imposed or other action taken as set forth in the applicable Building
Code, zoning ordinance or other provisions of this Code. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-
2009)
3-15-7: NONTRANSFERABILITY OF REGISTRATION:
No registrant may assign, sell or transfer the certificate of registration to
any other person, even if such other person intends to conduct the same
business as the registrant at the location used by the registrant. Such other
person must apply and pay the fee for a new certificate of registration in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Each certificate of
registration is valid only for the person and business location in the
registration application. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-8: CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION TO BE POSTED:
Every certificate of registration issued hereunder shall be posted in a
conspicuous place, and no certificate of registration shall be permitted to
remain posted after the period of such certificate of registration has expired.
(Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
3-15-9: VIOLATION AND PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be subject to a fine as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate violation. For failure to register and/or pay the registration fee,
the Village shall send notice of the violation by certified mail, return
receipt requested, or hand delivery and shall inform the person in violation
that they have fourteen (14) days in which to come into compliance; if the
violation is not cured within fourteen (14) days after such notice is sent,
then the fine shall be the amount of the fee due and owing plus one hundred
dollars ($100.00), and each day after that in which the violation continues
there shall be a fine of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per day; these fines are
in addition to any other penalty allowed by Federal, State, County or local
law, or otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2009-31, 10-27-2009)
CHAPTER 16
HOTEL OPERATORS' OCCUPATION TAX
SECTION:
3-16-1 Definitions
3-16-2 Tax Imposed; Exemption
3-16-3 Liability For Payment Of Tax
3-16-4 Collection Of Tax
3-16-5 Filing Of Return
3-16-6 Failure To Pay Tax
3-16-7 Records Kept
3-16-8 Disposition Of Proceeds Of Tax
3-16-9 Penalties
3-16-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires, the terms
specified have the meanings ascribed to them:
HOTEL: Any building or buildings in which the public may, for a consideration,
obtain living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations. The term
includes inns, motels, tourist homes or courts, lodging houses, rooming houses
and apartment houses.
OCCUPANCY: The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any
room or rooms in a hotel for any purpose, or the right to the use or possession
of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use
and possession of the room or rooms.
OPERATOR: Any person operating a hotel.
PERMANENT RESIDENT: Any person who occupied or has the right to occupy any room
or rooms, regardless of whether or not it is the same room or rooms, in a hotel
for at least thirty (30) consecutive days.
PERSON: Any natural individual, firm, partnership, association, joint stock
company, joint adventure, public or private corporation, limited liability
company, or a receiver, executor, trustee, guardian or other representative
appointed by order of any court. Whenever the term "person" is used in any
clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term as applied to associations
shall mean the owners or part owners thereof, and as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.
RENT OR RENTAL: The consideration received for occupancy, valued in money,
whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits
and property or services of any kind or nature.
ROOM OR ROOMS: Any living quarters, sleeping or housekeeping accommodations.
(Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-2: TAX IMPOSED; EXEMPTION:
   A.   There is hereby imposed and shall immediately accrue and be collected a
tax upon all persons engaged in the rental or leasing of any rooms in a hotel
in the village at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross rental or leasing
charge.
   B.   The tax imposed under this chapter shall not apply to the renting or
leasing of any hotel rooms to permanent residents. If hotel rooms are provided
for both permanent residents and other guests, the rent obtained from the
permanent residents shall not be included in the computation of the tax due.
(Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-3: LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT OF TAX:
The ultimate incidence of and liability for payment of said tax shall be borne
by the lessee or tenant of any such hotel room. The tax herein levied shall be
in addition to any and all other taxes, and it shall be the duty of every
owner, manager or operator of hotels to secure said tax from the lessee or
tenant of said hotel and pay over to the village said tax as otherwise provided
by this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-4: COLLECTION OF TAX:
The tax herein shall be secured by the hotel owner, manager or operator from
the lessee or tenant when collecting the price, charge or rent to which it
applies. Every lessee or tenant shall be given a bill, invoice, receipt or
other statement or memorandum of the price, charge or rent payable upon which
the hotel tax shall be stated, charged and shown separately. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-
26-2010)
3-16-5: FILING OF RETURN:
Every owner, manager or operator of a hotel shall file a sworn tax return on a
quarterly basis with the village on forms prescribed by the village showing tax
receipts received with respect to hotel rooms rented or leased during the
preceding quarterly period. At the time of filing of said tax return, the
owner, manager or operator of a hotel shall remit to the village all taxes due
for the period to which the tax return applies. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-6: FAILURE TO PAY TAX:
   A.   If for any reason any tax is not paid when due, a penalty at the rate
of two percent (2%) per month on the amount of tax which remains unpaid shall
be added and collected. Whenever any person shall fail to pay, collect, or
remit any tax as provided in this chapter, upon the request of the village, the
village counsel shall bring or cause to be brought an action to enforce the
payment of said tax on behalf of the village in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   If the village administrator shall find that any person has wilfully
avoided payment of the tax imposed by this chapter, said administrator shall
cause a written notice to be sent to the last known place of business of such
licensee informing him that his village license will be suspended or revoked
within ten (10) days of the date of the notice unless the tax is paid in full.
If the taxpayer feels he has reason to protest such action, he shall be given
an opportunity to be heard before the president and board of trustees, such
hearing to be applied for, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the
notice of such license revocation or suspension. The village board shall set a
hearing date and time within thirty (30) days from the date of receiving the
request for hearing, and notify said aggrieved licensee of such hearing time
and date. The suspension or revocation of any license shall not release or
discharge the owner, manager or operator of a hotel from his civil liability
for the payment of the tax nor for prosecution of such offense. (Ord. 2010-01,
1-26-2010)
3-16-7: RECORDS KEPT:
Every owner, manager or operator of hotels in the village shall keep books and
records showing the prices, rents or charges made or charged and occupancies
taxable under this chapter. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-8: DISPOSITION OF PROCEEDS OF TAX:
The proceeds resulting from the imposition of the tax under this chapter shall
be paid into the treasury of the village and shall be credited to and deposited
in the corporate fund of the village to be used for the purpose of promoting
tourism and conventions within the village or to otherwise attract nonresident
overnight visitors to the village or for any other lawful purpose. (Ord. 2010-
01, 1-26-2010)
3-16-9: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any of the terms or provisions of this chapter shall be
fined no more than as set forth in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Every day upon which such violation shall
occur and upon which such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 2010-01, 1-26-2010)
CHAPTER 17
MUNICIPAL UTILITY TAX
SECTION:
3-17-1 Short Title
3-17-2 Definitions
3-17-3 Tax
3-17-4 Transactions In Interstate Commerce
3-17-5 Tax Not Limited By Other Payments
3-17-6 Effective Date
3-17-7 Date Of Return
3-17-8 Erroneous Payment
3-17-9 Limitations On Recovery
3-17-10 Penalty
3-17-1: SHORT TITLE:
The tax imposed by this chapter shall be known as the "Municipal Utility Tax"
and is imposed in addition to all other taxes imposed by the Village, the State
of Illinois, or any other Municipal corporation or political subdivision
thereof. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
GROSS RECEIPTS: Means the consideration received for distributing, supplying,
furnishing or selling gas for use or consumption and not for resale, as the
case may be; and for all services rendered in connection therewith valued in
money, whether received in money or otherwise, including cash, credit, services
and property of every kind and material and for all services rendered
therewith; and shall be determined without any deduction on account of the cost
of the service, product or commodity supplied, the cost of materials used,
labor or service cost, or any other expenses whatsoever; provided, however that
"gross receipts" shall not include any amounts specifically excluded from the
definition of gross receipts in section 8-11-2(d) of the Illinois Municipal
Code.
PERSONS: Means any natural individual, firm, trust, estate, partnership,
association, joint stock company, joint adventure, corporation, limited
liability company, Municipal corporation, the State or any of its political
subdivisions, any State university created by statute, or a receiver, trustee,
guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court. (Ord. 2018-
12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-3: TAX:
A tax is imposed on all persons engaged in the following occupations or
privileges:
   A.   Persons engaged in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing,
or selling gas for use or consumption within the corporate limits of the
Village, and not for resale, at the rate of five percent (5%) of the gross
receipts therefrom. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-4: TRANSACTIONS IN INTERSTATE COMMERCE:
No tax is imposed by this chapter with respect to any transaction in interstate
commerce or otherwise to the extent to which such business may not, under the
Constitution and Statutes of the United States, be made subject to taxation by
this State or any political subdivision thereof; nor shall any persons engaged
in the business of distributing, supplying, furnishing or selling gas be
subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter for such transactions
as are or may become subject to taxation under the provisions of the "Municipal
Retailers' Occupation Tax Act" authorized by section 8-11-1 of the Illinois
Municipal Code. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-5: TAX NOT LIMITED BY OTHER PAYMENTS:
Such tax shall be in addition to the payment of money, or value of products or
services furnished to this Municipality by the taxpayer as compensation for the
use of its streets, alleys, or other public places, or installation and
maintenance therein, thereon or thereunder of poles, wires, pipes or other
equipment used in the operation of the taxpayer's business. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-
22-2018)
3-17-6: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall take effect after publication and the tax provided for
herein shall be based on the gross receipts, as herein defined, actually paid
to the taxpayer for services billed on or after the 1st day of July, 2018.
(Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-7: DATE OF RETURN:
On or before the last day of August, 2018, each taxpayer shall make a return to
the Village Treasurer for the month of July, 2018, stating:
   A.   His/her name;
   B.   His/her principal place of business;
   C.   His/her gross receipts during those months upon the basis of which the
tax is imposed;
   D.   Amount of tax;
   E.   Such other reasonable and related information as the Corporate
Authorities may require.
On or before the last day of every month thereafter, each taxpayer shall make a
like return to the Village Treasurer for a corresponding one-month period.
The taxpayer making the return herein provided for shall, at the time of making
such return, pay to the Village Treasurer, the amount of tax herein imposed;
provided that in connection with any return the taxpayer may, if he or she so
elects, report and pay an amount based upon his or her total billings of
business subject to the tax during the period for which the return is made
(exclusive of any amounts previously billed) with prompt adjustments of later
payments based upon any differences between such billings and the taxable gross
receipts. (Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-8: ERRONEOUS PAYMENT:
If it shall appear that an amount of tax has been paid which was not due under
the provisions of this chapter, whether as the result of a mistake of fact or
an error of law, then such amount shall be credited against any tax due, or to
become due, under this chapter from the taxpayer who made the erroneous
payment; provided that no amounts erroneously paid more than three (3) years
prior to the filing of a claim therefore shall be so credited. (Ord. 2018-12,
5-22-2018)
3-17-9: LIMITATIONS ON RECOVERY:
No action to recover any amount of tax due under the provisions of this chapter
shall be commenced more than three (3) years after the due date of such amount.
(Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
3-17-10: PENALTY:
Any taxpayer who fails to make a return, or who makes a fraudulent return, or
who willfully violates any other provision of this chapter is guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not less than one
hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00)
and in addition shall be liable in a civil action for the amount of tax due.
(Ord. 2018-12, 5-22-2018)
CHAPTER 18:
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS
SECTION:
3-18-1: Definitions
3-18-2: Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments Prohibited
3-18-3: Public Nuisance Declared
3-18-4: Violations
3-18-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:
                                        Any adult-use cannabis cultivation
ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS             center, craft grower, processing
ESTABLISHMENT:                          organization, infuser organization,
                                        dispensing organization, or
                                        transporting organization.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, dry, cure and package
                                        cannabis and perform other necessary
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CRAFT GROWER:        activities to make cannabis available
                                        for sale at a dispensing organization
                                        or use at a processing organization,
                                        per the Cannabis Regulation and Tax
                                        Act, (P.A. 101-0027), as it may be
                                        amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        cultivate, process, transport and
                                        perform necessary activities to provide
ADULT-USE CANNABIS CULTIVATION CENTER:  cannabis and cannabis-infused products
                                        to licensed cannabis business
                                        establishments, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (PA. 101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Financial and
                                        Professional Regulation to acquire
                                        cannabis from licensed cannabis
                                        business establishments for the purpose
ADULT-USE CANNABIS DISPENSING           of selling or dispensing cannabis,
ORGANIZATION:                           cannabis-infused products, cannabis
                                        seeds, paraphernalia or related
                                        supplies to purchasers or to qualified
                                        registered medical cannabis patients
                                        and caregivers, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (PA. 101-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        directly incorporate cannabis or
ADULT-USE CANNABIS INFUSER ORGANIZATION cannabis concentrate into a product
OR INFUSER:                             formulation to produce a cannabis-
                                        infused product, per the Cannabis
                                        Regulation and Tax Act, (P.A.I01-0027),
                                        as it may be amended from time-to-time,
                                        and regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        A facility operated by an organization
                                        or business that is licensed by the
                                        Illinois Department of Agriculture to
                                        either extract constituent chemicals or
                                        compounds to produce cannabis
ADULT-USE CANNABIS PROCESSING           concentrate or incorporate cannabis or
ORGANIZATION OR PROCESSOR:              cannabis concentrate into a product
                                        formulation to produce a cannabis
                                        product, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.I01-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        An organization or business that is
                                        licensed by the Illinois Department of
                                        Agriculture to transport cannabis on
                                        behalf of a cannabis business
ADULT-USE CANNABIS TRANSPORTING         establishment or a community college
ORGANIZATION OR TRANSPORTER:            licensed under the Community College
                                        Cannabis Vocational Training Pilot
                                        Program, per the Cannabis Regulation
                                        and Tax Act, (P.A.101-0027), as it may
                                        be amended from time-to-time, and
                                        regulations promulgated thereunder.
                                        Any person, firm, corporation,
                                        association, club, society or other
PERSON:                                 organization, including any owner,
                                        manager, proprietor, employee,
                                        volunteer or agent. (Ord. 2019-23, 11-
                                        26-2019)
 
3-18-2: ADULT-USE CANNABIS BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENTS PROHIBITED:
The following Adult-Use Cannabis Business Establishments are prohibited within
the corporate boundaries of the Village of Minooka. It shall be unlawful for
any person to locate, operate, own, suffer, allow to be operated, or aid, abet,
or assist in the operation, within the Village of Minooka, of any of the
following:
   1.   Adult-Use Cannabis Craft Grower;
   2.   Adult-Use Cannabis Cultivation Center;
   3.   Adult-Use Cannabis Dispensing Organization;
   4.   Adult-Use Cannabis Infuser Organization or Infuser;
   5.   Adult-Use Cannabis Processing Organization or Processor;
   6.   Adult-Use Cannabis Transporting Organization or Transporter. (Ord.
2019-23, 11-26-2019)
3-18-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE DECLARED:
Operation of any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment within the Village
in violation of the provisions of this Chapter is hereby declared a public
nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to all available remedies. (Ord. 2019-23,
11-26-2019)
3-18-4: VIOLATIONS:
Violations of this Chapter may be enforced in any manner available to the
Village at law, in equity, or otherwise pursuant to this Code, without
limitation. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this Chapter
shall, in addition to any other relief sought, be assessed a fine of no less
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each individual offense. Every day that
any person operates any prohibited Cannabis Business Establishment is and shall
be deemed to be a separate and distinct violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 2019-
23, 11-26-2019)
CHAPTER 19
SIDEWALK DINING PERMITS
SECTION:
3-19-1: Nuisance Declared
3-19-2: Sidewalk Dining; Permits
3-19-3: Violations and Penalties
3-19-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
The Corporate Authorities of the Village have determined that it is a public
nuisance for any person or entity to set up an outdoor dining area on any
sidewalk, alley, road, street, or other public right of way owned by the
Village or otherwise under the Village’s jurisdiction, except only when such
outdoor dining area is authorized by a sidewalk dining permit issued pursuant
to this Chapter and operated in full conformance with all requirements hereof.
(Ord. 2024-21, 5-28-2024)
3-19-2: SIDEWALK DINING; PERMITS:
   A.   Business establishments that serve food may use Village sidewalks for
outdoor dining so long as the business establishment fully complies with all
requirements of this Chapter.
   B.   Outdoor dining pursuant to this section shall be conducted in
accordance with the following restrictions, in addition to all other applicable
provisions of this Code:
      1.   Outdoor sidewalk dining shall be allowed only on Village sidewalks
located:
         a.   In front of the business establishment, which includes all
adjacent sidewalks for a corner property; and
         b.   In front of immediate adjacent properties, provided the business
establishment secures the written consent of the owner and all tenant(s) of
such property.
      2.   Outdoor sidewalk dining shall be located entirely on hard,
impermeable surfaces (i.e. concrete, asphalt, or brick materials). No part of
the outdoor dining area, nor any equipment or furniture used in conjunction
therewith, shall be located or stored on any grassy or other soft or permeable
surface.
      3.   Any business establishment engaged in outdoor dining shall
coordinate with neighboring properties as it relates to business deliveries,
garbage collection, and other similar activities.
      4.   Service and consumption of alcoholic liquors in an outdoor dining
area is prohibited unless the business establishment applies for and secures a
Class H (Sidewalk Dining) liquor license from the Village. For the avoidance of
doubt: the fact that a business establishment might possess another Village
liquor license, other than a Class H license, that permits the service and
consumption of alcoholic liquors elsewhere on the business establishment’s
licensed premises does not authorize the service and consumption of alcohol in
any sidewalk dining area.
      5.   No business establishment may operate a sidewalk dining area after
10:00 p.m. on any given night.
      6.   Business establishments shall provide sufficient trash receptacles
for refuse and shall be responsible for removing and disposing of any trash in
the sidewalk dining area. The sidewalk and all public rights-of-way shall be
kept free from refuse at all times.
      7.   No food preparation shall be allowed outside at any time.
      8.   No Live Entertainment, shall be allowed outside in/on/near sidewalk
dining areas.
      9.   Sidewalk dining shall be conducted in a way that does not interfere
with pedestrian use of Village sidewalks, which shall be kept Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) and Illinois Accessibility Code (IAC) compliant at all
times. All items placed on the sidewalk for the operation of an sidewalk dining
area shall be located to maintain a continuous clear path for passage of
pedestrians and so as not to obstruct ingress and egress from the licensed
establishment or any other establishment.
      10.   The maximum occupancy of a sidewalk dining area shall be determined
in cooperation with local fire and health officials and shall fully address
safety concerns related both to social distancing and to the possibility of
fire.
      11.   Business establishments shall comply with the provisions of the
Smoke Free Illinois Act, 40 ILCS 82/1, et seq.
      12.   Business establishments shall provide the Village with a
certificate of insurance naming the Village as an additional insured prior to
serving engaging in outdoor dining on Village property. Policy limits of
liability insurance shall be not less than $1,000,000.00 per occurrence.
      13.   Every outdoor dining area permitted pursuant to this Chapter shall
be enclosed by an outdoor fence, barrier, partition, and/or dividers designed
to clearly show separation between the outdoor dining area and the remainder of
the sidewalk.
      14.   The business establishment operating the outdoor dining area is and
shall be responsible for any and all damage caused to any Village property or
right of way in connection with the establishment, maintenance, and use of the
Village’s sidewalk. This remains true even regardless of whether the damage is
directly caused by the business establishment, one of its employees or agents,
one of its customers or guests, or another member of the public traversing the
sidewalk within or immediately adjacent to the sidewalk dining area. In the
event of any such damage, the Village will repair/replace the damaged property
and bill the business establishment for all associated costs.
   C.   Any applicant that wishes to operate an outdoor dining area shall
submit an application for an Outdoor Dining Permit to the Village Clerk. The
application shall include the following information:
      1.   The legal name of the business entity filing the application (i.e.
the Applicant); and
      2.   All business addresses of the applicant located within the corporate
boundaries of the Village; and
      3.   Proof of ownership, leasehold, and/or owner’s approval for each
property in front of which an outdoor dining area is proposed; and
      4.   A concept plan, as required by subpart (D) of this Section, below;
and
      5.   Proof of adequate liability insurance that includes coverage for the
proposed location of the outdoor dining area; and
      6.   Any other information that the Village deems necessary.
   D.   The concept plan required by this Section shall show with
particularity:
      1.   All existing lot lines for the property(ies) on and in front of
which the outdoor dining area is proposed; and
      2.   All permanent improvements on and around the property on which the
outdoor dining area is proposed; and
      3.   The particular location in which the Applicant proposes to operate
its outdoor dining area; and
      4.   Any and all temporary improvements that will be made in connection
with the outdoor dining area. (lighting, seating, tables, fences, etc.)
      5.   Location, specifications, and elevations of the proposed dining
perimeter. (Ord. 2024-21, 5-28-2024)
3-19-3: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
Any person that violates any of the provisions of this Chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more
than $750.00 for each offense, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed
on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2024-21,
5-28-2024)
CHAPTER 20
NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
SECTION:
3-20-1: Non-Home Rule Municipal Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed
3-20-2: Non-Home Rule Municipal Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-20-3: Enforcement
3-20-4: Certified Copy; Filing
3-20-5: Proceeds
3-20-6: Aviation Fuel Prohibition
3-20-7: Enforceability
3-20-1: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
tangible personal property, other than on an item of tangible personal property
which is titled and registered by an agency of this State's Government, at
retail within the Village of Minooka at the rate of one percent (1%) of the
gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while this
chapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-1.3 of the Illinois Municipal Code
(65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.3). (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
3-20-2: NON-HOME RULE MUNICIPAL SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged within the Village of Minooka
in the business of making sales of service based on the selling price of all
tangible personal property transferred by such servicemen either in the form of
tangible personal property or in the form of real estate as an incident to a
sale of service. The rate of this tax shall be the same rate identified in
Section
3-20-1, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-1.4 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-1.4). (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
3-20-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
3-20-4: CERTIFIED COPY; FILING:
   A.   As required under Section 8-11-1.1 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-1.1), the Village Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to file a
certified copy of this chapter with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or
before October 1, 2024.
   B.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on the later of:
      1.   January 1, 2025;
      2.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of Ord.
2024-31 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1; or
      3.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of
Ord. 2024-31 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the
preceding October 1. (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
3-20-5: PROCEEDS:
The Village of Minooka shall only expend the proceeds generated from any tax
imposed by virtue of this chapter on:
   A.   Expenditures related to "municipal roads and streets, access roads,
bridges, and sidewalks; waste disposal systems; and water and sewer line
extensions, water distribution and purification facilities, storm water
drainage and retention facilities, and sewage treatment facilities;"
   B.   Efforts to "reduce the levy for real estate taxes or avoid an increase
in the levy for real estate taxes that would otherwise have been required" by
the Village of Minooka; or
   C.   Any other or further permitted uses under Section 8-11-1, et seq., of
the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-11-1.1, et seq.) as may now or
hereafter be authorized therein.
Further, the Corporate Authorities of the Village hereby declare and affirm
that, so long as the Village bears any financial obligation or indebtedness
related to the construction of the initial lake Michigan water delivery system
of the Grand Prairie Water Commission, of which the Village is a member, all
tax revenues derived from the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be utilized,
to the fullest extent permitted by law, solely for expenditures related to the
construction of said system and/or improvements to the Village's municipal
water system that are necessary for the receipt and use of lake Michigan water,
including without limitation debt service payments made in connection with the
same. (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
3-20-6: AVIATION FUEL PROHIBITION:
No provision of this chapter shall be interpreted to impose any tax on aviation
fuel, as defined in Section
3-20-2 of the Retailers' Occupation Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/3), unless the
proceeds of said tax are expended for airport-related purposes, as that term is
defined in Section 6z-20.2 of the State Finance Act (30 ILCS 105/6z-20.2), and
said expenditures are made in compliance with the certification requirements
for airport-related purposes under Section 2-22 of the Retailers' Occupation
Tax Act (35 ILCS 120/2-22). (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
3-20-7: ENFORCEABILITY:
In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions, or clause
or clauses of this chapter shall be declared to be invalid or unenforceable by
a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no way affect or
impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining provisions,
portions, or clauses of this chapter that may be given effect without such
invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or portions, or
clause or clauses. (Ord. 2024-31, 8-8-2024)
CHAPTER 21
MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATIONAL TAXES
SECTION:
3-21-1: Municipal Grocery Retailers' Occupation Tax Imposed
3-21-2: Municipal Grocery Service Occupation Tax Imposed
3-21-3: Enforcement
3-21-4: Certified Copy; Filing
3-21-5: Enforceability
3-21-1: MUNICIPAL GROCERY RETAILERS' OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged in the business of selling
groceries at retail within the Village of Minooka at a rate of one percent (1%)
of the gross receipts from such sales made in the course of such business while
this chapter is in effect. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and
subject to the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65
ILCS 5/8-11-24). (Ord. 2024-32, 8-8-2024)
3-21-2: MUNICIPAL GROCERY SERVICE OCCUPATION TAX IMPOSED:
A tax is hereby imposed upon all persons engaged, within the Village of
Minooka, in the business of making sales of service, who, as an incident to
making those sales of service, transfer groceries. The rate of this tax shall
be the same rate identified in Section
3-21-1, above. The imposition of this tax is in accordance with and subject to
the provisions of Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS 5/8-
11-24). (Ord. 2024-32, 8-8-2024)
3-21-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The taxes hereby imposed, and all civil penalties that may be assessed as an
incident thereto, shall be collected and enforced by the Department of Revenue
of the State of Illinois. The Department of Revenue shall have full power to
administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2024-32, 8-8-2024)
3-21-4: CERTIFIED COPY; FILING:
A.   As required under Section 8-11-24 of the Illinois Municipal Code (65 ILCS
5/8-11-1.3), the Clerk is hereby directed to file a certified copy of this
chapter with the Illinois Department of Revenue on or before October 1, 2024.
B.   The taxes imposed by this chapter shall take effect on the later of:
   1.   January 1, 2026;
   2.   The first day of July next following the adoption and filing of Ord.
2024-32 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
April 1; or
   3.   The first day of January next following the adoption and filing of Ord.
2024-32 with the Department of Revenue, if filed on or before the preceding
October 1. (Ord. 2024-32, 8-8-2024)
3-21-5: ENFORCEABILITY:
In the event that any provision or provisions, portion or portions, or clause
or clauses of this chapter shall be declared to be invalid or unenforceable by
a Court of competent jurisdiction, such adjudication shall in no way affect or
impair the validity or enforceability of any of the remaining provisions,
portions, or clauses of this chapter that may be given effect without such
invalid or unenforceable provision or provisions, portion or portions, or
clause or clauses. (Ord. 2024-32, 8-8-2024)
TITLE 4
BUILDING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
ADMINISTRATION
SECTION:
4-1-1 Building Inspector
4-1-2 Applicant Agreement
4-1-3 Building Permits, Fees
4-1-4 Construction Hours
4-1-1: BUILDING INSPECTOR:
   A.   Position Created: The position of the building inspector for the
village is hereby created. The building inspector shall be a full-time employee
of the Village.
   B.   Hiring and Oversight: The building inspector shall be hired by and
report to the Village Administrator.
   C.   Duties: Duties of the building inspector shall include administration
and enforcement of the building code for the village. The building inspector
shall have the authority to issue building permits, certificates of occupancy
and stop work orders. The building inspector shall further have the authority
to inspect and examine structures and properties within the Village to
determine if zoning or other code violations exist.
   D.   Action on Applications: The building inspector shall not issue any
permits or certificates of occupancy provided for in this chapter without first
having received the applicable fees for that permit or certificate. In the
event an applicant for a permit or certificate, as provided for in this
chapter, is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, including
the provisions regarding the payment of fees, with regard to any property in
the village, then the building inspector may withhold issuance of that permit
or certificate until the applicant complies with the applicable provisions of
this chapter. The violations of this chapter, as described above, may relate to
the property for which the permit or certificate is being requested, or may
relate to any other property located in the village. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010;
amd. Ord. 2023-8, 2-28-2023)
4-1-2: APPLICANT AGREEMENT:
   A.   If in the event the village board of trustees have approved part or all
of the improvements required of the developer of a subdivision, and the
improvement bond has been released on those approved improvements, a building
permit may be issued only if the following requirements are met:
      1.   The building permit applicant shall sign an agreement, that if
during construction on that specified lot, the improvements to the subdivision
are damaged by construction on that lot, no building occupancy permit will be
issued by the building officer and inspector until all damaged improvements are
repaired by the owner of the lot or building permit, to the satisfaction of the
building officer and inspector.
   B.   In the event unseasonable weather prohibits the installation of
sidewalks or other public improvements as may be required by title 5 of this
code for the premises immediately adjacent to any premises for which an
occupancy permit has been requested, such occupancy permit will not be issued
unless the provisions of this subsection have been complied with. The owners of
such premises requesting the issuance of an occupancy permit shall execute and
deliver to the village the following:
      1.   An agreement executed by all of the owners of the premises for which
the occupancy permit is to be issued. The agreement shall be in such form as
may be approved by the village attorney, and shall set forth the agreement of
the owners to complete the installation of the sidewalks or other public
improvements by a date certain following the issuance of the occupancy permit.
The agreement shall authorize the village to inspect the sidewalks or public
improvements upon completion. In the event of deficiencies, or in the event
such sidewalks or public improvements are not completed by the date certain,
the village shall be authorized to expend the funds held as bond, described
hereafter, to correct any deficiencies or complete the sidewalks and public
improvements. The agreement shall further specify that the village officers,
employees and its agents shall be authorized to come upon the premises of the
owners as may be reasonably necessary to perform any work under the agreement.
      2.   Cash bond in an amount equal to one and one-half (11/2) times the
cost of completion of the sidewalks or public improvements to be completed by
owner shall be acquired by said owner. The cost shall be as estimated by the
village superintendent of public works, or by the village engineer. Such bond
shall be held without interest, and shall be returned to the owners upon
satisfactory completion of the sidewalks and public improvements as described
above. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
Plumbing, per inspection4-1-3: BUILDING PERMITS, FEES:
The building officer and inspector of the village, in administering the
building regulations of the village, shall charge and collect the fees with
respect to applications for, the issuance of permits for, and the inspection
and supervision of, the construction, alteration, and repair of buildings and
other structures, in enforcing the building regulations, as follows:
The following fees pertain to Residential Construction including Single-Family
Dwellings; Two-Family Detached, Single-Family Semidetached, Single-Family
Attached (dwellings commonly known as condominiums, duplexes, and townhomes);
Multiple-Family Dwellings (dwellings commonly known as apartments):
Type Of Construction Fee
Type Of Construction                                    Fee
Additions, Repairs, Remodeling, Attached Garages, Detached Garages
   Valuation to $2,500.00                            $35.00
   Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00                  $50.00
   Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00                  $75.00
   Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00                 $125.00
                                                        $125.00 base fee, plus
   Valuation over $10,000.00                         $1.00 per $100.00 over
                                                        $10,000.00
   Plumbing-up to 3 fixtures                         $40.00
                                                        $40.00 base fee plus
   Plumbing-more than 3 fixtures                     $10.00 per each
                                                        additional fixture over
                                                        3
Swimming Pools
   Aboveground pools                                 $100.00
   Inground pools                                    $150.00
Alterations Or Remodeling Which Do Not Alter Building Structure Or Add
Additional Area To The Building, Based On Cost
   Cost less than $2,000.00                          $35.00
                                                        $35.00 base fee plus
   Cost over $2,000.00                               $5.00 per each
                                                        additional $1,000.00
                                                        over $2,000.00
   Plumbing-up to 3 fixtures                         $40.00
                                                        $40.00 base fee plus
   Plumbing-more than 3 fixtures                     $10.00 per each
                                                        additional fixture over
                                                        3
Sprinklers
   Inground sprinkler systems                        $50.00
   Fire sprinkler systems (Multiple-family dwellings $100.00
only)
Modifications Requiring A Permit
   Fences                                            $50.00
   Patios                                            $50.00
   Decks                                             $50.00
   Sheds                                             $50.00
   Electrical Service                                $50.00
   Concrete Flatwork                                 $50.00
   Window replacement with structural change         $50.00
Additional Fees
   Plumbing, per inspection                          $55.00
   Demolition (Single-family dwellings)              $100.00
   Demolition (Multiple-family dwellings)            $200.00 (up to 50,000
                                                        square feet)
   Re-inspections                                    $40.00 each
New Construction
   Cost per square foot of living area               $0.70 per square foot
   Plan review                                       $100.00
   Engineering                                       $150.00
   Public Works Inspection                           $220.00
 
The following fees pertain to Commercial Buildings and Structures (including
Business, Industrial, Storage, and Institutional buildings and structures):
Type Of Construction Fee
Type Of Construction                   Fee
Commercial Solar Farms
   0-500 kW                         $3,000.00
   501-1,000 kW                     $6,000.00
   1,001-2,000 kW                   $12,000.00
   Over 2,000 kW                    $12,000.00 + $200.00 for each additional
                                       0-100 kW
Fences; Alterations Or Remodeling Which Do Not Alter Building Structure Or Add
Additional Area To The Building, Based On Cost
   Valuation to $2,500.00           $35.00
   Valuation $2,501.00 to $5,000.00 $50.00
   Valuation $5,001.00 to $7,000.00 $75.00
   Valuation $7,001.00 to $10,000.00$125.00
   Valuation over $10,000.00        $125.00 base fee, plus $1.00 per $100.00
                                       over $10,000.00
   Plumbing-up to 3 fixtures        $60.00
   Plumbing-more than 3 fixtures    $60.00 base fee plus $10.00 per each
                                       additional fixture over 3
Signs
   Valuation to $100.00             $35.00
   Valuation $101.00 to $500.00     $40.00
   Valuation over $500.00           $50.00 base fee plus $2.50 per each
                                       additional $100.00 over $500.00
   Portable signs                   $25.00
   Temporary signs (not for profit  N/C
organizations)
Additional Fees
   Plumbing, per inspection         $55.00
   Demolition                       $200.00 (up to 50,000 square feet)
   Re-inspections                   $40.00 each
New Construction
   Minimum permit fee, exclusive of $300.00
plumbing
   Plan Review                      $500.00 or fees incurred if completed by
                                       third party consultant
   Cost per square foot             $0.25 per square foot
   Public Works inspection          $220.00
   Fire sprinkler system            $100.00
   Plumbing-up to 5 fixtures        $100.00
   Plumbing-more than 5 fixtures    $100.00 base fee plus $10.00 per each
                                       additional fixture over 5
 
The following fees pertain to construction, alteration, or addition that is
being made for Governmental, Religious, Educational, or Charitable Purposes:
 
Type Of Construction                 Fee
Construction, Alteration, Addition:
   Permit fee, exclusive of plumbi$25.00
   Cost per square foot           N/C
Additional Fees:
   Fire sprinkler system          $50.00
   Re-inspections                 $40.00 each
 
(Ord. 2013-21, 6-25-2013; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020; Ord. 2023-41, 10-24-
2023; Ord. 2024-25, 5-28-2024)
4-1-4:    CONSTRUCTION HOURS:
   A.   Unless otherwise permitted by a village official (Building Officer,
Village Administrator or Public Works Director), no construction or alteration
operations shall be conducted before the hour of seven o’clock (7:00) A.M. or
after the hour of eight o’clock (8:00) P.M. Monday through Friday, or before
the hour of eight o’clock (8:00) A.M. or after the hour of eight o’clock (8:00)
P.M. on Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays. Legal holidays shall consist of
New Year's Day; Martin Luther King Day; Lincoln's Birthday; Washington's
Birthday (President's Day); Memorial Day; Independence Day; Labor Day; Columbus
Day; Veterans' Day; Thanksgiving; and Christmas.
   B.   These restrictions may be waived by the superintendent of public works
when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services. (Ord. 2019-
18, 7-23-2019)
CHAPTER 2
CODES
SECTION:
4-2-1 Building Code
4-2-2 Residential Code
4-2-3 Fuel Gas Code
4-2-4 Mechanical Code
4-2-5 Energy Conservation Code
4-2-6 Property Maintenance Code
4-2-7 Existing Building Code
4-2-8 Electric Code
4-2-9 Accessibility Code
4-2-10 Plumbing Code
4-2-11 Fire Code
4-2-12 Penalties
4-2-1: BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Building Code, 2018 edition, including
Appendix Chapters C, F, G, H, I and K, as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Building Code of the Village of Minooka, in
the State of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or
structure which does not comply with said code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2018 International Building
Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2018 International
Building Code , which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Modification: The 2018 International Building Code adopted by subpart A
of this section is further revised, modified, added to, and/or supplemented by
the following, which shall supersede the relevant portions of said code to the
extent of any conflict:
      1.   Section 101.1 Title. Insert: Village of Minooka
      2.   Section 101.4.3. Plumbing. Delete everything after "101.4.3.
Plumbing." and insert the following:
         “The provisions of the Current Edition of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health shall apply to the
installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where
connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system,
the provisions of the Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to
private sewage disposal systems.”
      3.   Section 101.4.6. Energy. Delete everything after “101.4.6. Energy.”
and insert the following:
         “The provisions of the Current Edition of the Illinois Energy
Conservation Code, as adopted by the State of Illinois Capital Development
Board shall apply to all matters governing the design and construction of
buildings for energy efficiency.”
      4.   Section 105.2 Work Exempt from permit. Buildings: Delete the
following Numbers 1, 2, 3, and 6.
      5.   Add Section 105.8 as follows:
         “105.8 Condition of Permit. Upon completion of the foundation walls
and any structural elements which are a necessary part of the construction of
the foundation walls, or are necessary for the completion of the foundation
walls, and before proceeding with further construction, he or she shall file
with the department, a survey, prepared and signed by a registered Illinois
land surveyor, showing the location of the structure perpendicularly to lot
lines and the elevation of the top of the foundation walls at all four (4)
corners for which a foundation permit has been issued.”
      6.   Section 202 Definitions. Delete the words “International Plumbing
Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health”.
      7.   Section 202 Definitions. Delete the words “International Energy
Conservation Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois
Energy Conservation Code, Code, as adopted by the State of Illinois Capital
Development Board”.
      8.   Section 603.1.2 Piping. Delete the words “International Plumbing
Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health”.
      9.   Section 718.5 Combustible materials in concealed spaces in Type I or
II construction. Delete the words “International Plumbing Code” and insert the
words “the Current Edition of the Illinois State Plumbing Code, as adopted by
the Illinois Department of Public Health”.
      10.   Section 903.2 Where required. Delete the following sections:
903.2.1, 903.2.1.1, 903.2.1.3, 903.2.1.4, 903.2.1.5, 903.2.2, 903.2.3, 903.2.4,
903.2.4.1, 903.2.6, 903.2.7, 903.2.9, and 903.2.10.
      11.   Insert new section 903.2.1 as follows:
         “903.2.1 Where required. An approved automatic sprinkler system shall
be provided in new buildings and structures in accordance with NFPA 13.
         Exception: a building or structure within the M1 or M2 Manufacturing
District that does not have more than 12,000 square foot of floor area
classified as either an Accessory building or a group S1 or S2 storage
building.”
      12.   Section 903.3.5 Water Supplies. Delete the words “International
Plumbing Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois State
Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health”.
      13.   Section 1102.1 Design. Delete everything after “Section 1102.1
Design” and insert the following:
         “Buildings and Facilities shall be designed and constructed to be
accessible in accordance with this code, the ICC A117.1 and the Current edition
of the Illinois Accessibility Code adopted by the Illinois Capital Development
Board.”
      14.   Section 1202.1 General. Delete the words “International Energy
Conservation Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois
Energy Conservation Code, Code, as adopted by the State of Illinois Capital
Development Board”.
      15.   Section 1202.4.3.2 Conditioned space. Delete the words
“International Energy Conservation Code” and insert the words “the Current
Edition of the Illinois Energy Conservation Code, Code, as adopted by the State
of Illinois Capital Development Board”.
      16.   Section 1301.1.1 Criteria. Delete the words “International Energy
Conservation Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois
Energy Conservation Code, Code, as adopted by the State of Illinois Capital
Development Board”.
      17.   Chapter 29 Plumbing Systems. Delete this chapter in its entirety
and inserting as follows:
         “The provisions of the Current Edition of the Illinois State Plumbing
Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health shall apply to the
installation, alteration, repair and replacement of plumbing systems, including
equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, and where
connected to a water or sewage system and all aspects of a medical gas system,
the provisions of the Illinois Private Sewage Disposal Code shall apply to
private sewage disposal systems.”
      18.   Section 3305.1 Facilities required. Delete the words “International
Plumbing Code” and insert the words “the Current Edition of the Illinois State
Plumbing Code, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health”. (Ord.
2010-28, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2013-33, 12-17-2013; Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-2: RESIDENTIAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Residential Code, 2018 edition,
including Appendix Chapters F, H, J, M, O, Q, R, and S, as published by the
International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the Residential Code of the
Village of Minooka, in the State of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to erect or
improve any building or structure which does not comply with said code, except
as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2018 International Residential
Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2018 International
Residential Code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Modification: The 2018 International Residential Code adopted by
subpart A of this section is further revised, modified, added to, and/or
supplemented by the following, which shall supersede the relevant portions of
said code to the extent of any conflict:
      1.   Section R101.1 Title. Insert: Village of Minooka
      2.   Section R101.2 Scope. Add to this paragraph: Townhomes of over 4
dwelling units in a single building will be classified as an R-2 occupancy
according to the 2018 International Building Code .
      3.   Section R105.2 Work Exempt from permit. Buildings: Delete the
following Numbers 1, 2, 5, & 10.
      4.   Section R105.3 Application for Permit. Add the following to the list
of application requirements:
         “8.   Include window and sliding glass door energy conservation
information, R and U Values.
         9.   Include HVAC heating and cooling load calculations”
      5.   Add Section 105.10 as follows:
         “105.10 Condition of Permit. Upon completion of the foundation walls
and any structural elements which are a necessary part of the construction of
the foundation walls, or are necessary for the completion of the foundation
walls, and before proceeding with further construction, he or she shall file
with the department, a survey, prepared and signed by a registered Illinois
land surveyor, showing the location of the structure perpendicularly to lot
lines and the elevation of the top of the foundation walls at all four (4)
corners for which a foundation permit has been issued.”
      6.   Section R301.2 Climatic and geographic design criteria. Insert the
following into Table R301.2(1):
         Ground snow load: 25 pounds per square foot (no reductions
considered);
         Wind Design: Basic wind speed: 90 M.P.H., Topographic effects: No,
Special Wind Region: No, Wind-borne Debris Zone: No;
         Seismic design category: B;
         Subject to damage from: weathering: severe, Frost line depth: 42",
Termites: Moderate;
         Winter Design Temperature: 0 degrees F;
         Ice barrier underlayment required: yes;
         Air freezing index: 2000
         Mean annual temperature: 50.1 degrees F;
         Manual J Criteria: Elevation 581, Latitude 41 degrees N, Winter
Heating 0 degree F, Summer Cooling 90 degrees F, Altitude Correction Factor N/
A, Indoor Design Temperature Heating 70 degree F, Design Temperature Cooling 72
degrees F, Heating Temperature difference 70 degrees F, Cooling Temperature
difference 18 degrees F, Wind Velocity Heating 10mph, Daily Range M.
      7.   Section R302.2.1 Double walls. Change “two 1-hour” to “two 2-hour.”
      8.   Section R302.2.2 Common walls. Under item 2 change “2-hour” to “4-
hour.”
      9.   Section R302.3 Two-family dwellings. Change “1-hour” to “4-hour.”
      10.   Section R309.1 Add the following: “Provide a 6 inch high x 6” wide
concrete curb at the wall between the Garage and the Dwelling unit. Provide a
6” high x 6” wide curb at all stairs within a garage.”
      11.   Section R313 AUTOMATIC FIRE SPRINKLER SYSTEMS shall be deleted in
its entirety.
      12.   Section 319.1 Address identification. Change “4 inch” to “5 inch.”
      13.   Section R402.1 Wood Foundations. Shall be deleted in its entirety.
      14.   Figure R403.1(2) Permanent Wood Foundation Basement Wall Section
shall be deleted.
      15.   Figure R403.1(3) Permanent Wood Foundation Crawl Space Section
shall be deleted.
      16.   Add new section as follows: R903.5 Gutters and Downspouts. “All
structures shall be provided with gutters and downspouts unless specifically
permitted by the Building Official and Inspector.”
      17.   Section R2501.1.1 Illinois State Plumbing Code: Shall be added as
follows: “All plumbing work shall conform to the 2014 Illinois State Plumbing
Code unless the provisions as set forth in this Chapter 25 are more
restrictive.”
      18.   Delete Chapters 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 31, 32 and 33 and replace them
with: “All plumbing work shall conform to the Illinois State Plumbing Code
latest edition, as adopted by the Illinois Department of Public Health.” (Ord.
2010-28, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-3: FUEL GAS CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Fuel Gas Code, 2018 edition, including
Appendix Chapters A, B, C, and D, as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Fuel Gas Code of the Village of Minooka, in
the State of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or
structure which does not comply with said code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2018 International Fuel Gas
Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2018 International
Fuel Gas Code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Modification: The 2018 International Fuel Gas Code adopted by subpart A
of this section is further revised, modified, added to, and/or supplemented by
the following, which shall supersede the relevant portions of said code to the
extent of any conflict:
      1.   Section 101.1 Title. Village of Minooka
      2.   Section 106.6.2. Fee Schedule. Delete this section in its entirety.
      3.   Section 106.6.3. Fee Refunds. Delete this section in its entirety.
      4.   Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Delete this section in its
entirety.
      5.   Section 108.5. Stop Work Orders. Delete this section in its
entirety.
      6.   Section 621 UNVENTED ROOM HEATERS. Delete this section in its
entirety. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-4: MECHANICAL CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Mechanical Code, 2018 edition,
including Appendix Chapter A, as published by the International Code Council,
is hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the Village of Minooka, in the
State of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or
structure which does not comply with said code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2018 International Mechanical
Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2018 International
Mechanical Code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Modification: The 2018 International Mechanical Code adopted by subpart
A of this section is further revised, modified, added to, and/or supplemented
by the following, which shall supersede the relevant portions of said code to
the extent of any conflict:
      1.   Section 101.1 Title. Village of Minooka
      2.   Section 106.5.2. Fee Schedule. Delete this section in its entirety.
      3.   Section 106.5.3. Fee Refunds. Delete this section in its entirety.
      4.   Section 108.4. Violation penalties. Delete this section in its
entirety.
      5.   Section 108.5. Stop Work Orders. Delete this section in its
entirety. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-5: ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The latest edition of the Illinois Energy Conservation
Code, as adopted by the State of Illinois Capital Development Board and as may
be amended from time to time, is hereby adopted as the Energy Conservation Code
of the Village of Minooka, in the State of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to
erect or improve any building or structure which does not comply with said
code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Minimum Requirements: This code shall be the minimum requirements for
commercial buildings, applying to the construction of, renovations to, and
additions to all commercial buildings, and the minimum and maximum requirements
for residential buildings, applying to the construction of all residential
buildings.
   C.   Application: This code shall apply to any new building or structure for
which a building permit application is received. In the case of any addition,
alteration, renovation, or repair to an existing commercial structure, this
code applies only to the portions of that structure that are being added,
altered, renovated, or repaired. Further, additions, alterations, renovations,
or repairs to an existing building, building system, or portion thereof shall
conform to the provisions of this code as they relate to new construction
without requiring the unaltered portion of the existing building or building
system to comply with this code.
   D.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the Illinois Energy Conservation
Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the Illinois Energy
Conservation Code, which shall be available for inspection.
   E.   Modification: Reserved. (Ord. 2013-10, 4-23-2013; amd. Ord. 2016-08, 2-
23-2016; Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-6: PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018
edition, including Appendix Chapter A, as published by the International Code
Council, is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance Code of the Village of
Minooka, in the State of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any
building or structure which does not comply with said code, except as
hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2018 International Property
Maintenance Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30)
days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2018
International Property Maintenance Code, which shall be available for
inspection.
   C.   Modification: The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code adopted
by subpart A of this section is further revised, modified, added to, and/or
supplemented by the following, which shall supersede the relevant portions of
said code to the extent of any conflict:
      1.   Section 101.1 Title. Village of Minooka
      2.   Section 103.5 Fees. Delete this section in its entirety.
      3.   Section 112.4 Failure to comply. Delete this section in its
entirety.
      4.   Section 302.4 Weeds. Insert “twelve (12) inches.”
      5.   Section 304.14 Insect screens. Insert “May 1st to October 31st.”
      6.   Section 602.3 Heat supply. Insert “October 1st to May 1st.”
      7.   Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Insert “October 1st to May
1st.” (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-7: EXISTING BUILDING CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The International Existing Building Code, 2018 edition,
as published by the International Code Council, is hereby adopted as the
Existing Building Code of the Village of Minooka, in the State of Illinois. It
shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or structure which does not
comply with said code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2018 International Existing
Building Code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30)
days prior to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and
inspector shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2018
International Existing Building Code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Modification: The 2018 International Existing Building Code adopted by
subpart A of this section is further revised, modified, added to, and/or
supplemented by the following, which shall supersede the relevant portions of
said code to the extent of any conflict:
      1.   Section 101.1 Title. Village of Minooka. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010;
amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-8: ELECTRIC CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: National Electrical Code (NFPA 70), 2017 edition, as
published by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted as the
Electric Code of the Village of Minooka, in the State of Illinois. It shall be
unlawful to erect or improve any building or structure which does not comply
with said code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the 2017 National Electric Code
has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior to
the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the 2017 National
Electric Code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Supplemental codes: The following Codes and Standard are adopted by
reference as part of the Village's adoption of the above 2017 edition National
Electric Code:
      1.   NFPA #110-2013, Emergency and Standby Power Systems 2.6.
      2.   NFPA 111-2013, Standard on Stored Electrical Energy Emergency and
Standby Power Systems.
      3.   IEEE 484-2008, Recommended Practice for Installation Design and
Installation of Vented Lead-Acid Batteries for Stationary Applications.
      4.   IEEE485-1997, Recommended Practice for Sizing Vented Lead-Acid
Storage Batteries for Stationary Applications.
      5.   IEEE 1145-2007, Recommended Practice for Installation and
Maintenance of Nickel-Cadmium Batteries for Photovoltaic (PV) Systems.
      6.   IEEE 1187-2002, Recommended Practice for Installation Design, and
Installation of Valve-Regulated Lead-Acid Batteries for Stationary
Applications.
      7.   IEEE 1578-2007, Recommended Practice for Stationary Battery
Electrolyte Spill Containment and Management.
      8.   IEEE 1635/ASHRAE 21-2012, Guide for the Ventilation and Thermal
Management of Batteries for Stationary Applications.
      9.   UL 810A, Electrochemical Capacitors.
      10.   UL 1973, Batteries for Use in Light Electric Rail (LER)
Applications and Stationary Applications.
      11.   UL 1989 Standard for Standby Batteries.
      12.   UL Subject 2436 Spill Containment for Stationary Lead Acid Battery
Systems.
      13.   UL Subject 9540, Safety of Energy Storage Systems and Equipment.
(Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010; amd. Ord. 2020-29, 10-27-2020)
4-2-9: ACCESSIBILITY CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: There is hereby adopted by reference as if fully set
forth herein, that certain building code known as the Illinois state
accessibility code/1997, and as thereafter amended and on file with the village
clerk, as the accessibility code for the village. It shall be unlawful to erect
or improve any building or structure which does not comply with the regulations
except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies On File: At least one copy of the Illinois state accessibility
code has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior
to the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the Illinois state
accessibility code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Special Provisions: Reserved. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
4-2-10: PLUMBING CODE:
   A.   Code Adopted: The Illinois State Plumbing Code, as amended and as
adopted from time to time by the State of Illinois Department of Public Health,
is hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the Village of Minooka, in the State
of Illinois. It shall be unlawful to erect or improve any building or structure
which does not comply with said code, except as hereinafter provided.
   B.   Copies on File: At least one copy of the Illinois State Plumbing Code
has been on file in the village hall for more than thirty (30) days prior to
the adoption hereof and is now on file. The building officer and inspector
shall keep on file in his office at least one copy of the Illinois state
plumbing code, which shall be available for inspection.
   C.   Modification: Reserved. (Ord. 2014-29, 10-28-2014; amd. Ord. 2020-29,
10-27-2020)
4-2-11: FIRE CODE:
   A.   The regulations of the 2021 edition of the International Fire Code,
including appendix B, C, D, F, H, I, K, L, and M as published by the
International Code Council is hereby adopted as the Fire Code for the Village
of Minooka, and the same shall regulate and govern the safeguarding of life and
property from the hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices; and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of existing or
proposed new buildings or premises. The code shall also regulate and govern the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor.
   B.   Each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and
terms of said code on file in the Village of Minooka are hereby referred to,
adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this legislation, with
the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes as are hereafter set forth.
   C.   Nothing in this code shall affect single and multifamily dwellings,
attached or detached, that do not exceed three (3) stories in height.
   D.   The following additions, insertions, deletions, and changes shall be
effective and applicable to the 2021 International Fire Code as adopted herein:
      101.1 Title.
      103.1 General.
      Delete this section
      103.2 Appointment.
      The Village of Minooka appoints the Minooka Fire Protection District Fire
Chief as its fire code official. The Village building and zoning officer shall
be the Village’s liaison with the fire code official and shall retain those
responsibilities under this Code not herein delegated to the fire code
official; however, the building and zoning officer may request the advice and
recommendation of the fire code official in the performance of his or her
duties and contract, with approval of the Village Board, with third party
consultants for plan review and recommendation in the execution of any other
duties requiring specific expertise in fire protection.
      The building and zoning officer may recommend policies and procedures to
the Village board that he or she deems appropriate to carry out the enforcement
of this Code, and may request the advice of the fire code official in
recommending any such policies or procedures.
      The fire code official shall at all times report to the Village
Administrator and the Village building and zoning officer, and all decisions of
the fire code official shall be subject to the ultimate authority of the
Village Administrator.
      103.3 Deputies
      Delete text and replace with the following:
      The fire code official may, at his or her discretion, assign duties of
the fire code official under this Code to his or her subordinates, as
appropriate.
      104.1 General
      Delete text and replace with the following:
      Except where the Village has contracted with and relied upon a third
party for services related to the interpretation and enforcement of this Code,
the fire code official shall have the authority to render interpretation of
this Code and to recommend policies, procedures, rules and regulations to the
Village in order to clarify application of its provisions. Such recommendations
shall be in compliance with the intent and purpose of this Code and shall not
have the effect of waiving requirements specifically provided for in this code.
      104.2   Application and permits.
      Replace “fire code official” with “building and zoning officer.”
      104.5 Notice and orders
            Delete text and replace with the following:
      The fire code official is authorized to issue a violation notice and
report form in the name of the Village when a violation of this Code is found
during an inspection authorized under this Code. Hearing shall be as provided
in Title I, Chapter 18 of the Village Code for the Village’s Building Code
Adjudication.
      Within 30 days of the fire code official’s issuance of the violation
notice and report, he or she shall perform a follow up inspection to determine
whether the alleged violations have been corrected. If the violations have been
corrected, the fire code official shall so inform the Code Hearing Department,
and the matter shall be dismissed by the Village.
      If upon fire code official’s reinspection the violations have not been
corrected, the fire code official shall so notify the Code Hearing Department,
and the matter may be continued at the first hearing by the hearing officer to
allow additional time for the correction of the alleged violations.
      If the matter is continued after the initial hearing date for additional
time to correct any alleged violations, the fire code official shall conduct a
final reinspection within 25 days of the original hearing date. If the
violations have been corrected, the fire code official shall notify the Code
Hearing Department, and the matter will be dismissed. If the alleged violations
have not been corrected, the matter shall go to hearing, unless good cause is
shown.
      104.7 - 104.9.2
      Replace “fire code official” with “building and zoning officer.”
      Section 105: Permits
      Replace “fire code official” with “building and zoning officer.”
      105.4.2.1 Fire Protection Shop Drawings
      Add as additional sections for local jurisdiction
      For each hydraulically calculated automatic fire sprinkler system area
identified, on submitted shop drawings, provide a copy of the hydraulic name
plate.
      105.4.2.2 Site Plan and Construction Plan Review:
      Add as additional sections for local jurisdiction
      Each applicant for a building permit involving new construction,
additions, and/or alterations, subdivision improvements, planned unit
development (PUD), fire detection/suppression systems, change of occupancy
classification, or any other item that will affect the Fire Protection
Districts operation, shall submit professional designed plans to the Fire
District for review and comment. Applicant shall provide three (3) printed sets
and an electronic copy of all required plans, documents and a complete
description of the work to be performed.
        105.4.2.3 Plan Review and Site Inspection Fee Schedule
      Add as additional sections for local jurisdiction
      Each applicant shall submit three (3) printed sets and an electronic copy
of sprinkler, fire alarm, and construction documents essential for third party
review. All fees to be directly paid to the third party review firm.
      111.1 Board of appeals established.
      Delete this section.
      112.3 Notice of violation.
      Add “or building code officer” after “fire code official.”
      112.3.1 Service.
      Delete this section and insert the following:
      Notices of violation shall be served as provide in Title I, Chapter 18 of
the Village Code for the Village’s Building Code Adjudication.
      112.3.3 Prosecution of violations.
      Delete this section.
      112.4 Violation penalties.
      Insert the following local language as required to be specified:
      Replace that part beginning with “Shall be guilty of. . . .” with the
following: shall be punished as provided in Section 4-2-12 of the Village Code.
      112.4.1 Abatement of Violation.
      Replace “fire code official” with “Village.”
      Section 113: Stop Work Order
      Replace “fire code official” with “building and zoning officer.”
      113.4 Failure to Comply   
      Replace that part beginning with “Shall be subject. . . .” with the
following: shall be punished as provided in Section 4-2-12 of the Village Code.
      Section 301.3 Protection of Occupants/Public
      Add as an additional section
      Whenever and wherever, within the jurisdiction of the Fire District a
condition is found in any building, lot or premises, that requires correction
or removal for the protection of the occupants or the public, the Fire District
fire code official, shall order such conditions corrected or removed and the
owner or occupant of such buildings, lots, or premises shall comply with such
order. The appropriate jurisdictions Building Official and Fire Inspector will
refer to the most applicable building and fire code sections of the current
code.
       315.8 Storage of lithium metal or lithium-ion Batteries.
      Add as an additional section
      Areas associated with the collection or storage of lithium metal or
lithium-ion batteries shall comply with this chapter.
         Exceptions: The following areas shall be exempt from the requirements
of this chapter:
            1.   Areas within a facility that are operated in accordance with
procedures that provide for the state of charge of the lithium metal or
lithium-ion batteries to be 30 (40) percent or less. Procedures and test
reports documenting how the 30 (40) percent or less state of charge is
established and how fire protection levels are determined shall be provided to
the fire code official for review and approval
            2.   Areas where fire and fault condition testing conducted or
witnessed and reported by an approved testing laboratory is provided showing
that a fire involving the batteries in storage will be limited to the design
area of an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with NFPA 13 and
will not adversely impact occupant egress from the building or adversely impact
adjacent stored materials or the building structure.
            3.   Batteries in original retail packaging that are rated at 300
watt-hours or less for lithium-ion batteries or contain 25 grams or less of
lithium metal for lithium metal batteries.
      315.8.1 Collection. All areas located indoors in any occupancy where used
lithium metal or lithium-ion batteries are collected from employees or the
public shall be provided with open-top noncombustible containers or containers
designed to preclude the release of contents resulting from battery thermal
runaway or containers approved for battery collection activities.
         1.   Containers shall not exceed 1 ft3 (0.03 m3) in size. (Or 55
gallons (113.6 L)
         2.   Containers shall have a minimum of 3 ft (0.9 m) of open space
from other battery collection containers and combustible materials and shall be
located a minimum of 5 ft (1.5 m) from exits from the room, space, or building.
         3.   Where combustible materials are located within the space between
collection containers, the containers shall be spaced a minimum 10 ft (3 m)
apart.
       315.8.2 Collection and Storage Locations.
      Batteries collected or stored other than those in collection containers
complying with Section 315.8.1 shall be stored in accordance with one or more
of the following methods provided for in accordance with one or more of the
following methods. Battery terminals shall be protected either through battery
design methods or a protective packaging method to prevent short circuit of the
battery.
         1.   In rooms or spaces separated from the remainder of the building
areas by fire barriers with a 3-hour fire resistance rating and with horizontal
assemblies with a 3-hour fire resistance rating constructed in accordance with
the local building code. The room or space shall be protected by a radiant
energy detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and shall be
protected by an automatic sprinkler system designed and installed in accordance
with NFPA 13.
         2.   Batteries shall be permitted to be stored in approved
prefabricated portable buildings or containers that are constructed with 3-hour
fire resistance ratings and provided with radiant-energy detection system
installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and an approved automatic fire suppression
system installed in accordance with NFPA 13.
         3.   In metal drums storage containers with batteries separated from
each other by vermiculite or other approved material packaged to prevent damage
that could lead to a thermal event or in containers approved for battery
collection and storage activities.
            3.1.   Each area containing such metal drums or approved containers
shall not exceed 900 ft2 (83.61 m2) in area and shall be separated from other
battery storage areas by a minimum of 10 ft (3 m).
            3.2.   The collection and storage area shall be protected by a
radiant-energy detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72 and an
approved automatic fire suppression system installed in accordance with NFPA
13.
         4.   In containers approved for use in transportation or approved by
the fire code official that will prevent an event from propagating beyond the
container.
            4.1.   Each area containing the approved transportation containers
shall not exceed 900 ft2 (83.61 m2) in area and shall be separated from other
battery storage areas by a minimum of 10 ft (3 m).
            4.2.   The storage area shall be protected by a radiant energy
detection system installed in accordance with NFPA 72and an approved automatic
fire suppression system installed in accordance with NFPA 13.
      315.8.3 Prevention and Mitigation A plan that provides for the prevention
of fire incidents and includes early detection mitigation measures shall be
provided to the fire code official for review and approval. The owner is
required to file the plan annually.
      315.8.4 Explosion Control.
      The potential for a deflagration involving the off gassing of flammable
gases during a thermal runaway shall be analyzed and explosion protection shall
be installed in accordance with Section 911 if the potential exists. A written
hazard analysis prepared by a fire protection engineer shall be submitted to
the fire code official for review and approval.
      315.8.5 Outdoor Storage Location.
      Outdoor storage locations for lithium metal or lithium-ion batteries
shall comply with the following:
         1.   Individual pile sizes shall be limited to 900 ft2 (83.61 m2) in
area separated from other piles by 10 ft (3 m).
         2.   Batteries shall be stored in non-combustible containers or
approved containers designed for storage of the batteries.
         3.   Piles located outdoors shall be separated by a minimum 20 ft (6.1
m) from the following exposures:
            3.1.   Lot lines
            3.2.   Public ways
            3.3.   Buildings
            3.4.   Other storage
            3.5.   Hazardous materials
            3.6.   Other exposure hazards
            Exception: Clearances shall be permitted to be reduced to 3 ft (0.9
m) when a 3-hour freestanding fire barrier, suitable for exterior use, and
extending 15 ft (4.57 m) 5 ft (1.5m) above and extending 15 ft (4.57 m) 5 ft
(1.5m) beyond the physical boundary of the pile is provided to protect the
exposure.
      315.8.5.1 Weather protection.
      Where weather protection is provided for sheltering outdoor battery
storage areas, such areas shall be considered outdoor storage where the weather
protection structure complies with 1 through 3.
         1.   Walls shall not obstruct more than one side of the structure.
               Exception: Walls shall be permitted to obstruct portions of
multiple sides of the structure, provided that the obstructed area is not
greater than 25 percent of the structure’s perimeter.
         2.   The distance from the structure to buildings, lot lines, public
ways or means of egress to a public way shall be not less than the distance
required for an outside hazardous material storage or use area without weather
protection.
         3.   The overhead structure shall be of approved noncombustible
construction with a maximum area of 1,600 square feet (148.6 m2).
      SECTION 316 HAZARDS TO FIREFIGHTERS
      316.7 Add as an additional section to the chapter
      The owner of any commercial or industrial structure, or any multiunit
residential structure of three (3) units or more, that uses light-frame truss-
type construction shall properly mark the building as required by the fire code
official with a truss construction emblem so as to provide warning to persons
conducting fire control and other emergency operations of the existence of
light-frame truss-type construction in the structure. The truss construction
emblem shall be provided by the fire code official and shall be permanently
affixed to the building as directed by the fire code official.
      503.1.4 Fire Apparatus Access and Review
      Add as additional paragraph to the section:
      All fire apparatus access road and fire lanes shall be reviewed and
recommendations made by the Fire Protection District. Any engineering review
costs shall be paid by the developer of the property.
      503.2.1 Dimensions
      Add as an additional sentence to the paragraph
      Unless otherwise increased by the fire code official due to apparatus
size and access concerns.
      503.2.3 Surfaces
      Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support
the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall be surfaced so as to provide all
weather driving capabilities.
      Add as an additional sentence to the paragraph:
      It is the responsibility of the property owner to maintain the surface of
the fire access road/lanes at all times, including the maintenance of a clear
path for fire apparatus staging and/or parking.
      503.2.9 Private Drive Identification
      Add as an additional paragraph:
      It is the responsibility of residents or in the case of Homeowners
Association to provide approved address markings at the intersection of a
private drive and the public right of way so that the fire district and police
department can identify the addresses down extended private lanes. In the event
there are multiple buildings or residences that branch from the private drive,
the address must be placed on the building or residence which is visible upon
approach.
      505.1 Address identification.
      Where access is by means of a private road and the building cannot be
viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be
used to identify the structure with address numbers not less than 6-inch
height. Address numbers shall be maintained by the property owner or authority.
      506.1 Where required.
      Where access to or within a structure or an area is restricted because of
secured openings or where immediate access is necessary for life-saving or
fire-fighting purposes, the fire code official is authorized to require a key
box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of an
approved type listed in accordance with UL 1037, and shall contain keys to gain
necessary access as required by the fire code official.
      All access roads protected by an automatic gate shall be provided with an
access system approved by the fire code official allowing the fire district
rapid access to the property in the event of a fire, alarm, or other emergency.
      Add as an additional sentence to the paragraph:
      All buildings/units with automatic fire alarm systems, automatic fire
suppression systems, and/or medical alert systems shall have installed a key
lock box in a location(s) approved by the Fire Protection District, for access
during an activation of an alarm and/or emergency. Permanently mounted key lock
box shall be equipped with a tamper switch device that indicates when access is
made and when the box is removed from its mounted location. Tamper switches
shall be wired to the burglar alarm if one is available, otherwise to the fire
alarm and provided a dedicated zone.
      507.2.3 Dimension of Water Supply Mains
      Add as an additional paragraph
      Water mains supplying water to required hydrant system shall not be less
than eight (8) inches in diameter.
      507.2.4 Dead end mains
      Add as an additional section
      One or two-family residential developments may have hydrants supplied by
a dead-end water line where there are 30 or fewer dwelling units protected by
the supply. Dead end water mains shall not exceed six hundred (600) feet of
eight (8) inch pipe. Hydrants located on dead end water mains shall have “dead
end” disk attached to the steamer outlet of the hydrant.
      507.2.5 Looped water supply line requirement
      Add as an additional section:
      Fire hydrants in areas zoned multi-family, commercial, industrial or
mixed occupancy shall be on a looped (receiving water from more than one
direction) water supply line of an approved size for the development when
determined acceptable by the Fire District engineer.
      507.5.1- Where required (Fire Hydrants).
      Where a portion of the facility or building hereafter constructed or
moved into or within the jurisdiction is more than 400 feet (122m) from a
hydrant on a fire apparatus access road, as measured by an approved route
around the exterior of the facility or building, on-site fire hydrants and
mains shall be provided where required by the fire code official.
      Insert the following to the paragraph:
      The maximum hydrant spacing shall be no more than four hundred (400) feet
apart. Hydrants in areas zoned multi-family, commercial, industrial or mixed
occupancy shall be spaced no farther than three hundred (300) feet apart except
as provided in Appendix C that may require spacing between hydrants to be less
than three hundred (300) feet based on fire flow requirement. Spacing shall be
measured as normal roadway travel between hydrants on an adjacent, all weather,
and public road as hose can be laid from a fire district apparatus and in
accordance. All hydrants shall be located within sixteen (16)feet of the paved
portion of an all-weather public roadway with a minimum setback from curbs or
edges of pavement. Variances may be required by the local authority. Hydrants
shall be marked by hydrant locators so they may be seen even when concealed
(507.5.8). No hydrant should be located closer than 50 feet from any existing
or anticipated exposing structure in commercial and manufacturing areas. Where
streets are provided with median dividers that cannot be crossed by fire
apparatus laying hose lines, hydrant spacing shall be on each side of the
street arranged on an alternating basis. All hydrants added after adoption of
this ordinance shall be provided with Stortz fitting on the 5" outlet.
      507.5.1.2 Hydrant for FDC
      Add as an additional section
      Additional fire hydrants shall be located in an approved location within
a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet of the Fire District Connection (FDC).
      507.5.7 Hydrant Street Locators
      Add as additional paragraph to this section:
      Fire hydrant locations shall be visually indicated in accordance with
Fire District direction, and may be amended from time to time. All fire
hydrants installed after the effective date of this chapter shall be required
to have fire hydrant marker(s) installed before acceptance. Hydrant markers are
to be installed by the developer, owner, or contractor as follows:
         1.   As may comply with the department of transportation regulations.
         2.   Areas such as, but not limited to parking lots, loading areas, or
storage yards shall have marker location designated by the fire code official.
         3.   Any hydrant marker damaged or removed during the course of street
construction or repair shall be immediately replaced by the contractor,
developer, or person responsible for removal or damage.
      604.8 - Elevator size specifications
      Add as additional paragraph to this section:
      Elevator cars or lifts that are designed within a building so as to
deliver people to an upper floor to conduct work under compliance with
American’s with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be of size and dimensions to
accommodate the ambulance stretcher used by the Fire Protection District. In
the buildings two stories in height or more, and required to have an elevator,
at least one elevator shall be of such size and arrangement to accommodate a
twenty-four (24) inch by eighty-four (84) inch ambulance stretcher in the
horizontal, open position. The diagonal inside measurements of the elevator car
shall not be less than ninety-six (96) inches. When two elevators are provided
in the building and only one is “stretcher” compliant the “stretcher” compliant
elevator shall be identified by the international symbol for emergency medical
services (Star of Life) that is not less than three (3) inches high and shall
be placed on the elevator door frame on each floor. The inside hand rail shall
be set at a the maximum thirty-six (36) inch height allowed under the American
with Disabilities Act (ADA) standards to better accommodate the stretcher. The
cab size is to be a minimum five (5) foot by seven (7) foot platform and
minimum two thousand five hundred (2,500) lb. capacity with a forty-two (42)
inch slide door.
      604.9 - Elevator Communications
      All required emergency elevator phones shall directly dial the Fire
Protection District’s Communications Center via the phone number designated by
the fire code official
      SECTION 901- FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS GENERAL
      Section 901.4.7- Pump and riser room size.
      Where provided, fire pump rooms and automatic sprinkler system riser
rooms shall be designed with adequate space for the equipment necessary for the
installation, as defined by the manufacturer, with sufficient working space
around the stationary equipment. Clearances around equipment to elements of
permanent construction, including other installed equipment and appliances,
shall be sufficient to allow inspection, service, repair or replacement without
removing such elements of permanent construction or disabling the function of a
required fire-resistance rated assembly. Fire pump and automatic sprinkler
system riser rooms shall be provided with a door(s) and an unobstructed
passageway large enough to allow removal of the largest piece of equipment.
      Insert the following as additional sentence:
      All fire sprinkler control rooms and fire pump rooms shall be accessible
by a direct outside access door and accessible from inside the building. The
doors shall be marked with 6-inch lettering identifying the rooms. The fire
sprinkler control room shall be provided with a one-hour separation from the
remaining building.
      901.11 Multi Tenant Occupancy
      When an automatic suppression system is installed in a multi tenant
building, each tenant shall have its own sprinkler supply line off the main or
riser with its own water flow switch and control valve. A strobe light shall be
mounted on the exterior front of that tenant. The strobe light shall activate
upon water flow and/or fire alarm activation within the individual unit.
      Section 902.1 Definitions
      The following terms are defined in Chapter 2:
      Insert the following as additional:
      Fire Area. The aggregate floor area bounded by the exterior walls of a
building; regardless of fire walls, fire barriers, or fire resistance-rated
horizontal assemblies.
      Fire Area is defined as the entire building that cannot be subdivided
into multiple fire areas to permit the omission of automatic fire sprinklers.
      Section 903.2 Where required.
      Approved automatic sprinkler systems in new buildings and structures
shall be provided in locations described in Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.12.
      Amend as follows:
      Approved automatic sprinkler systems shall be provided in all use groups,
and every fire area shall be provided with an automatic fire sprinkler system
installed in accordance with the requirements of the applicable standards; NFPA
13, NFPA 13R, NFPA 13D. The fire code official shall approve any exempt
locations for fire sprinkler coverage. Provide in all use groups S and F with a
ceiling roof height of twenty-five (25) feet or greater with an Early
Suppression Fast Response (ESFR) fire sprinkler system or a hydraulically
calculated system for Class IV commodities with rack storage calculated to the
greatest storage height. All fire sprinkler systems shall be supervised by an
approved automatic fire alarm system directly connected to the Fire Districts
dispatch center.
      The exception as specified in IFC 2021 Section 903.2 shall apply in
addition to the following:
         Exceptions:
            1.   Mobile portable storage buildings as determined by fire code
official.
            2.   Group R3 homes of less than 5,000 square feet living space.
            3.   Mobile retail estate sales and constructions trailers utilized
during the development of property when approved by the fire code official.
            4.   Occupancy Group S where fire area is less than 12,000 square
feet, and ceiling roof height is less than twenty-five (25) feet. This
exception shall not apply to Group S buildings that include bulk storage cloth,
burlap and paper, books and paper in rolls or packs; cardboard and cardboard
boxes; flammable/combustible liquids, furniture, tires, upholstery, mattresses
which for the purpose of this ordinance is classified as Group H.
               A.   Further, this exception shall not apply to Group S when
contents include the provision outlined in Chapter 12 of this Code as it
pertains to Energy Systems, components associated with or storage of batteries
as determined by the fire code official
            5.   Occupancy Group U buildings as an accessory building to other
occupancy classifications and is under 12,000 square feet.
      903.3.5.3 Age of Hydraulic Data
      Insert as additional to the section:
      Hydrant water flow data used for design of any sprinkler system shall be
no more than one (1) year old.
      903.3.8.6 Hydraulic Calculations Nameplate
      Insert as additional to the section:
      A hydraulic nameplate shall be attached to the riser for each
hydraulically calculated area.
      903.4 Sprinkler system supervision and alarms
      All valves controlling the water supply for automatic sprinkler systems,
pumps, tanks, water levels and temperatures, critical air pressures and water-
flow switches on all sprinkler systems shall be electrically supervised by a
listed fire alarm control unit.
      Delete this section and insert the following for local jurisdiction:
      Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and
shall be electrically supervised by a fire alarm system.
      903.4.1 Monitoring
      Alarm, supervisory and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and
shall be automatically transmitted to an approved supervising station or, where
approved by the fire code official, shall sound an audible signal at a
constantly attended location.
      Includes exceptions, not be amended.
      Add as additional section:
      903.4.1.1 Reporting directly to the Fire District Communication Center
      The approved method is defined as all fire alarms shall connect directly
to the Fire Protection District Dispatch Center via a radio alarm monitoring
system. The method of connection shall be of a type compatible with monitoring
system available at the Dispatch center and approved by the fire code official.
      903.4.1.2 Method
      Alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals shall be distinctly different and
shall be automatically transmitted to Central Station or Remote Supervisory
Stations by a two-way private radio alarm system complying with NFPA 72, which
automatically retransmits trouble, supervisory and full fire alarm signals to
the Fire District Dispatch center.
      Section 903.4.2 Alarms
      An approved device shall be a clear strobe located on the exterior of the
building in an approved location, shall be connected to each automatic
sprinkler system. Such sprinkler water flow alarm devices shall be activated by
water flow equivalent to the flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice
size installed in the system. When the fire alarm system is installed,
actuation of the automatic sprinkler system shall actuate the building fire
alarm system.
      Delete this section and insert the following for local jurisdiction:
      Approved audible and visible appliances shall be connected to each
automatic sprinkler system in accordance with this section. Sprinkler system
water-flow alarm devices shall be activated by water flow equivalent to the
flow of a single sprinkler of the smallest orifice size installed in the
system.
      Insert as additional section:
      903.4.2.1 Exterior appliances. Visible appliances.
      A red 75 cd, weather-proof strobe light and 10" bell shall be provided
above the fire department connection. The strobe light shall be supervised by
the fire alarm system and shall only operate upon water flow activation.
      903.4.2.1.1 Audible appliances
      An audible appliance supervised by the fire alarm system, 10 inch, 120VDC
alarm bell, horn/strobe (clear) shall be provided above the fire department
connection.
      903.4.2.1.2 Interior appliances
      Interior audible and visible alarms supervised by a fire alarm system
shall be provided in accordance with Section 907.5 and subsections.
      Insert as additional section:
      903.4.2.2 Interior appliances
      Interior and visible alarms supervised by a fire alarm system shall be
provided in accordance with Section 907.5 and subsections.
      Insert as additional section:
      903.4.2.3 Inspector test valve accessibility
      Fire sprinkler inspectors test valves shall be accessible at all times
and located no more than 6 feet above the finished floor. On multiple riser
systems test valves shall be marked as to which riser area it tests.
      903.4.3 Floor control valves.
      Approved supervised indicating control valves shall be provided at the
point of connection to the riser on each floor in high-rise buildings.
       Delete this section and insert the following for local jurisdiction:
      Indicating control valves and water flow switches shall be provided at
the point of connection to the riser on each floor in multiple story buildings.
      903.4.3.1 Sprinkler control valves
      Add as additional section:
      All new and existing sprinkler control valves shall be equipped with
electronic supervision (tamper switches) in accordance with NFPA 72. All new
tamper switches installed shall have the capability to self-restore. All
supervisory signals shall be transmitted directly to the Fire Protection
District main dispatch Communication Center.
      903.4.4 Additional Detection Features
      Add as an additional section:
      Where automatic sprinkler provide protection to an area with an approved
flow switch interconnected to the fire alarm system, and is easily identifiable
as to the location, additional automatic detectors are not required. When a
building has numerous rooms protected by the zone sprinkler system, the fire
code official may require additional smoke detectors for a more rapid means to
identify the location of smoke or fire.
      903.6.1 Interior alterations or remodeling
      Add as an additional section:
      Existing buildings or structures that are remodeled, and that meet any of
the criteria listed below, shall provide fire protection as detailed in 903.2:
         1.   If alteration costs 50% or more of the reproduction cost of the
building or structure, the entire building or structure shall comply with the
requirements of the construction as defined in this code. The reproduction cost
shall be determined by using the recognized standards of an authoritative
technical organization. For the purposes of calculating percentages of
reproduction cost, the cost of alteration shall be construed as the total
actual combined cost of all alterations within any period of 30 months. 
         2.   A 2-hour fire separation wall will be installed for a project
that results in an increase or decrease in the total number of tenant spaces
within the building or structure.
         3.   A project that entails a change in Use Group for any part of the
building.
      903.6.2 Increasing existing gross floor area by 25% or more up to 50%
      Add as an additional section
      Fire protection for additions that increase the existing gross floor area
of a building or structure by 25% shall provide fire protection for the entire
building or structure as detailed in 903.2 or provide an Underwriter Laboratory
(UL) listed two hour approved fire wall separation assembly that extends
continuously from the foundation through the roof as defined in section 202 of
the IFC, between the existing building and the new addition.
      Insert as additional section:
      903.7 Exterior Control Valve Room Access
      Provide an outside access door to the sprinkler riser valve room and fire
pump room.
      903.8 Hydraulic Nameplate
      Add as an additional section:
      By each hydraulically calculated area, on each drawing, provide a copy of
the hydraulic nameplate.
      903.9 Fire pump test header
      Add as an additional section:
      Provide an outside test header on all fire pump installations. An OS&Y
control valve shall be provided on all fire pump test headers.
      903.10 Fire hose valves - Warehouse and/or storage Fire Areas
      Add as an additional section:
      In all warehouse storage areas exceeding 50,000 square feet, and where
storage exceeds twelve (12) feet high, provide inside 2 ½” fire hose. Locate
the valves at each door entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area. Provide
additional 2 ½” fire hose valves so that no portion of the warehouse and/or
storage area is more than 120' maximum travel distance to a fire hose valve.
Show the location of all obstructions and/or racks on the drawing.
      Fire hose valves system piping shall be:
         1.   A separate riser piping system.
         2.   The 2 ½” valves shall be supplied by a minimum of 4" with 2 ½”
drops to each valve.
      903.11 Hydraulic calculations
      Add as an additional section:
      Provide a minimum 5-psi minimum safety factor in the fire protection
system hydraulic calculation. The system demand shall be 5-psi minimum below
the seasonal low water flow test supply. The safety factor will allow for low
pressures in the water supply. By each hydraulic calculated area, on each
drawing, provide a copy of the hydraulic nameplate. This will make it easier to
check the hydraulics of the sprinkler system for future building or storage
changes.
      904.13.2.1- Kitchen Exhaust Hood & Duct
      Add as additional section
      All new automatic fire extinguishing systems for commercial cooking
systems installed after the effective date of this ordinance shall
automatically transmit activation fire alarm signal to the Fire Protection
District dispatch center over an approved fire alarm system.
      904.13.2.2 - Hood and duct systems
      All hood an duct extinguishing systems for commercial kitchen areas
requiring such a system, shall be approved UL 300 system for the following:
         1.   New Construction
         2.   Remodeling rehab of existing systems
         3.   Appliance line changes including the installation of high
efficiency/high recovery fryers
      904.13.2.3 - Hood extinguishing agent
      All existing commercial kitchen systems requiring a hood and duct system
shall be required to have at least one, 1.5 gallon, type K extinguisher.
      Section 905.2.1 General
      Add as an additional section:
      Standpipes for fire hose connections shall be supplied from a separate
riser. Two and one half (2 ½) inch valves shall be supplied by a four (4) inch
riser with two and one half (2 ½) inch drops to each valve.
      Section 905.3 Required installations
      Add the following paragraph to section 905.3:
      All required standpipe systems shall be supplied by a separate riser. The
supply riser shall be hydraulically designed to supply 2 ½” hose drops. The
riser system shall be equipped with a separate control valve and flow switch.
The standpipe shall be a 2 ½” and all locations shall be approved by the Code
Official. All standpipe and sprinkler risers shall have separate control valves
and flow switches per floor.
      Section 905.3.1 Height.
      Delete this section, excluding the exceptions, and insert the following:
      Class III standpipe systems shall be installed throughout new constructed
buildings more than two (2) stories in height or more than two (2) stories
below the level of the fire district vehicle access so that all areas on those
floors are within 120 feet of a standpipe. There shall be an approved fire
district connection at grade and hose connections located at each floor level.
      Exceptions 1 through 5 shall remain
      Add as additional sections: 905.12 through 905.14
      905.3.9 Fire Hose Valve Locations - Warehouse Storage
      Add as an additional section:
      In all warehouse storage areas exceeding 50,000 square feet, and where
storage exceeds 12' high, provide inside 2½” fire hose valves. Locate the
valves at each service door entrance to the warehouse and/or storage area.
Provide additional 2½” fire hose valves so that no portion of the warehouse
and/or storage area is more than 120' maximum travel distance to a fire hose
valve. Show the location of all obstructions and/or racks on the drawing. The
fire hose valves system piping shall be:
         1.   A separate riser piping system.
         2.   The 2½ “ valves shall be supplied by a minimum of 4" with 2½ “
drops to each valve.
      905.9 Valve Supervision
      Add as an additional sentence:
      Valves controlling fire hose connections shall be the field adjustable
type approved by the authority having jurisdiction.
      905.13 Piping design
      Add as an additional section:
      The riser piping, supply piping and the water service piping shall be
sized to maintain a residual pressure of at least 65 psi (448kPa) at the
topmost outlet of each riser. The piping size shall be based on the capacity of
the automatic water supply system or, where as automatic water supply is
neither required nor provided to maintain the residual pressure of 65 psi, the
pipe size shall be on a pressure of 150 psi available at the fire district
connection.
         Exception: One - and two - family dwellings
      905.14 Riser sizing
      Add as an additional section:
      The riser size shall be based on the hydraulic calculations for a minimum
flow of 500 gallons per (gpm) (378 L/min.).
         Exceptions:
            1.   In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied
with water from a common standpipe riser, the riser shall be sized to satisfy
total demand.
            2.   For occupancies Use Group B, I, R1, or R2 in buildings that
are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with
Section 903.3, each riser shall be sized for a minimum flow of 250 gpm (945 L/
min.).
         3.   Risers that are sized in accordance with the pipe schedule
requirements of NFPA 14 listed in Chapter 35 are not subject to this
requirement.
      905.15 System pipe sizing
      Add as an additional section:
      The system piping, including the horizontal or common feeder lines, shall
be sized for a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.). Where more than one
standpipe riser is required or provided, all common system piping shall be
sized for a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.) for the first riser plus 250
gpm (945 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall not be required
to exceed 1,250 gpm (4731 L/min.).
         Exceptions:
            1.   In buildings where limited area sprinkler systems are supplied
with water from a common standpipe riser, the supply piping shall be sized for
a minimum flow of 500 gpm (1892 L/min.) plus the sprinkler demand for first
riser, plus 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for each additional riser, and the total shall
be required to exceed 1,250 gpm (4731 L/min.).
            2.   For occupancies in Use Group B, I, R-1, or R2 in buildings
that are equipped throughout with an automatic sprinkler system in accordance
with Section 903.3, all common supply piping shall be sized for a minimum flow
of 250 gpm (945 L/min.) for the first riser plus 250 gpm (945L/min.) for each
additional riser, and the total shall not be required to exceed 750 gpm (2838
L/min.).
      907.1.4 Exceptions for Small Fire Alarm Systems
      Add as an additional section:
      All fire alarm systems shall be of the addressable type.
   Section 907.2 Where required-new buildings and structures.
      An approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with the provisions
of this code and NFPA 72 shall be provided in new buildings and structures in
accordance with Sections 907.2.1 through 907.2.23 and provide occupant
notification in accordance with Section 907.5 unless other requirements are
provided by another section of this code.
      Not fewer that one manual fire alarm box shall be provided in an approved
location to initiate fire alarm signal or fire alarm system employing automatic
fire detectors or water flow detection devices. Where other sections of this
code allow elimination of fire alarm boxes due to sprinklers, a single fire
alarm box shall be installed.
      Amend as follows:
      An approved fire alarm system shall be installed in accordance with the
provisions of this code and NFPA 72 in all new occupancy classifications. The
fire alarm shall be installed in accordance with the provisions of this code
and NFPA 72 and shall be provided as follows:
         1.   A complete fire alarm system consisting of smoke detection, heat
detection, pull stations and audio/visual notification devices shall be
installed in all use groups.
         2.   All fire alarm systems shall be directly connected to the fire
district dispatch center by system that is compatible to be received in the
center in accordance with this ordinance.
         3.   Fire alarm control panels shall be located in the fire sprinkler
control room, where applicable, or where approved by the fire code official.
         4.   Fire alarm control panels shall be of the addressable type.
         5.   All new nonresidential multiple tenant buildings shall be “ring
by tenant” activated by the fire, a fire sprinkler system flow switch for the
tenant space or automatic fire detection and shall include a weatherproof clear
outside strobe over the entrance to each tenant space as approved by the fire
code official. All outside strobes shall be seventy-five (75) candela minimum.
         6.   Exception:
            a.   Group R -single and multi-family dwellings less than 5,000
square feet of living space; attached & detached, shall not be fire suppressed
if three stories or less; or structures covered under the IBC.
            b.   Occupancy Group U buildings as an accessory building to other
occupancy classifications and is under 12,000 square feet.
      907.2 Where required-new buildings and structures
      Add as an additional paragraph:
      Buildings and structures not provided throughout with an automatic
sprinkler system. A fire alarm system utilizing automatic fire detectors and
manual fire alarm devices shall be provided throughout all buildings not
provided with an automatic sprinkler system complying with NFPA 13 or NFPA 13R.
      907.2.11 Single and multiple-station smoke alarms
      Add as an additional paragraph:
      Heat detectors shall be added in attached garages and shall be
interconnected by hardwire to single and multiple-station smoke alarms.
   907.2.9 Group R-2
      Add as an additional paragraph:
      Heat detectors shall be added in attached garages and shall be
interconnected by hardwire to smoke detectors.
   907.4.2.5 Protective covers
      Revise this section as follows:
      Listed manual fire alarm box protective covers shall be provided for all
installed manual fire alarm boxes to prevent malicious false alarms or to
provide the manual fire alarm box with protection from physical damage.
      907.5 Occupant notification systems
      Revise this section as follows:
      A fire alarm system shall annunciate at the fire alarm control unit and
shall initiate occupant notification upon activation, in accordance with
Sections 907.5.1 through 907.5.2.3.4. The activation of any of the following
devices shall result in occupant notification:
         1.   Automatic fire detectors.
         2.   Automatic sprinkler system waterflow devices.
         3.   Manual fire alarm boxes.
         4.   Automatic fire-extinguishing systems when installed in buildings
or structures that are provided with occupant notification.
      907.5.2.3.4 Multi-tenant Group M.
      Add as an additional section:
      In single story, multi-tenant Group M buildings shall be “ring by tenant”
activated by a fire sprinkler system flow switch for each space, or manual and
automatic fire detection and shall include a weatherproof clear outside strobe
over the entrance to each tenant space as directed by the fire department. All
outside strobes shall be 75 candelas minimum.
      Section 912.2.1 Visible location
      Insert the following:
      An approved sign mounted in a location specified by the fire code
official shall be installed and maintained near the fire district connection.
Such sign shall have the letters “FDC” at least 6 inches high to indicate the
location. All such signs shall be subject to the approval of the fire code
official
      912.3 Fire hose threads
      Revise this section as follows:
      All fire department connections shall be as specified by the responsible
fire protection district.
      SECTION 913- FIRE PUMPS
      Section 913.4.1 Test outlet valve supervision
      Fire pump test outlet valve shall be supervised in the closed position
      Insert the following:
         1.   Provide an OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers.
         2.   Provide an outside test header on all fire pump installations.
      913.4.2 Fire pump test header
      Add as an additional section:   
         1.   Add-provide an OS&Y control valve on all fire pump test headers.
         2.   Provide an outside test header on fire pump installations.
      1008.3.3 Rooms and Spaces
      Add as a new number 6:
      All rooms containing the building fire sprinkler and standpipe riser(s)
and fire alarm control panel(s).
      Add as additional sections:
      1207.6.6 Thermal Runaway Detection System.
      1207.6.6.1 When required. A thermal runaway detection system shall be
provided for lithium-ion battery storage systems with an energy capacity
greater than 20 kWh.
      1207.6.6.2 Approvals. Devices designed to detect the thermal runaway of a
lithium-ion cell containing a flammable or combustible liquid shall be listed
in accordance with UL 2075, Gas and Vapor Detectors and Sensors.
      1207.6.6.3 Performance. The thermal runaway detector shall activate upon
detection of gas vapors produced by flammable or combustible liquid in a
lithium-ion cell at the start of a thermal runaway event. Upon detection of a
thermal runaway event the detection system shall shutdown the ESS rack
releasing flammable or combustible gas vapors and transmit a supervisory fire
alarm signal. Detection of a thermal runaway event shall activate the
mechanical ventilation when it is provided as method of explosion control.
      Thermal runaway detectors shall operate independently of the ESS Energy
Storage Management System.
      1207.6.6.4 Annunciation. The thermal runaway detector shall be capable of
identifying the ESS rack where thermal runaway occurred.
      Chapter 80
      Revise all listed NFPA standards in IBC Chapter 35 and IFC Chapter 80 to
include the latest edition available as of the effective date of the adoption
of the 2018 IBC and 2021 IFC. (Ord. 2018-06, 1-23-2018; amd. Ord. 2022-29, 8-
23-2022; Ord. 2024-24, 5-28-2024)
4-2-12: PENALTIES:
   A.   Violation Penalties Generally: Except as otherwise provided, it shall
be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to violate any provision of
this chapter, and any person, firm, or corporation guilty of violating any of
the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided under section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed a
separate offense. (Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
CHAPTER 3
PLUMBING CODE1. See section
4-2-10 of this title.1
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
CHAPTER 4
FIRE PREVENTION CODE1. See section
4-2-11 of this title.1
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-28, 10-26-2010)
CHAPTER 5
SUPPLEMENTARY BUILDING REGULATIONS
SECTION:
4-5-1 Moving Buildings
4-5-2 Building Materials
4-5-1: MOVING BUILDINGS:
   A.   Permit Required, Fee:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to move any building in the village, not
otherwise prohibited, without first obtaining a permit therefor, as provided in
this section.
      2.   The fee for a permit required by this section shall be sixty dollars
($60.00). (1977 Code)
   B.   Moving Certain Buildings Prohibited: It shall be unlawful to move any
building which has been damaged to any extent greater than fifty percent (50%)
of its value at the time of damage by fire, action of the elements or
otherwise.
   C.   Conditions Of Permit: Permits for the moving of buildings other than
those prohibited in this section may be granted upon the following imposed
conditions:
      1.   Written consent must be secured from a majority of the property
owners located within a radius of two hundred feet (200') from the center of
the lot on which the house is to be situated and such consent shall be filed
with the village clerk.
      2.   Application for a permit required by this section must be made in
writing, stating in detail the method of moving to be used, the exact route to
be followed and the clearances necessary to traverse such route.
      3.   The written application shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning
commission and forwarded to the village board of trustees for approval.
      4.   A bond shall be furnished to the village in the sum of fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000.00), conditioned to indemnify the village for any
liability which may be imposed upon it by reason of the moving of the building
and the bond shall also be conditioned upon the faithful observance of all
provisions of the building code or other ordinances of the village, and the
repair of any streets or other public property damaged in the movement of any
buildings.
      5.   In addition, the person requesting the permit shall furnish the
village with a certificate of insurance from an insurance company licensed to
do business in the state, which certificate shall name the village as
coinsured. The insurance policy shall indemnify the applicant and the village
against liability for the injury or death or damages in the following amounts:
for the injury or death of any one person, three hundred thousand dollars
($300,000.00); for the injury or death of more than one person arising from the
same accident, five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00); and for damages to
the property of another, including the village, one hundred thousand dollars
($100,000.00).
   D.   Denial Of Permit: The building officer and inspector shall have the
power to refuse to issue a permit to move any building if he shall find that
the methods or equipment to be used are improper or insufficient to properly
protect the public or public property from injury or damage or if the condition
is such as to render it not susceptible to movement. No permit will be issued
if the building is to be moved over state routes and the state has denied the
applicant similar permits.
   E.   Moving Certain Small Buildings, Fees: Permits for moving buildings or
parts of buildings not exceeding sixteen feet (16') in width and twelve feet
(12') in height may be granted by the building officer and inspector upon the
furnishing of the insurance and bond required above except that the bond shall
be in the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), and the payment of a
permit fee of twenty three dollars fifty cents ($23.50); however, the building
for which a permit is issued pursuant to this section shall be transported on a
rigid, flat bodied, pneumatic tired vehicle subject to the provisions for the
safeguarding of life and property as set out in this section.
   F.   Obstructing Streets:
      1.   Any obstruction or occupation of a public street, alley, sidewalk or
other public property by any person operating under a permit issued pursuant to
this section for a period longer than six (6) hours shall be considered an
offense and each hour after the six (6) hour period shall constitute a separate
offense.
      2.   A permittee under this section shall, at all times, when the
building or equipment incidental to moving the building, occupies or obstructs
any portion of any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public property,
provide watchmen both in front and behind the obstruction and utilize all other
devices necessary to completely protect the public from injury.
   G.   Planking Street: It shall be unlawful to move any building on any
macadam, concrete or asphalt street or alley on hard skids, wheels or rollers
unless the weight of the building and equipment combined shall be spread by the
use of plank to a sufficient area on the surface of the street which, by the
findings of the building inspector, is sufficient to protect the street surface
from injury.
   H.   Conformity To State Laws: Nothing in this section shall be construed to
alter in any way the obligation of the holder of a permit issued pursuant to
this section to comply with all the restrictions and regulations which are or
may be imposed by the department of highways in the state where the highways
are used within the village.
   I.   Exception: Nothing in this section shall be construed as forbidding the
raising or moving of a building where the process is conducted entirely within
the premises of its original location. For the purposes of this section, this
type of operation shall be considered as remodeling and the permit for, and the
conduct of the same, shall be subject to the same regulations as any remodeling
process. (1977 Code)
4-5-2: BUILDING MATERIALS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purpose of this section, the following words as
used herein shall be construed to have the meanings herein ascribed thereto:
   ENGINEERED LUMBER: Prefabricated I-joists, truss joists, and truss rafters,
and laminated beams and studs.
   FACADE: The elevation or exterior face of the building, exclusive of doors,
windows, and trim.
   LOT, KEY: Any corner lot, or any lot which fronts or backs on a state,
county or township road, or on a village collector or arterial road within the
subdivision.
   LOT, THROUGH: A lot, other than a corner lot, which has frontage on two (2)
parallel or approximately parallel streets.
   MASONRY: Face brick, decorative stone, sandstone, exposed aggregate, or any
other high quality masonry products. This does not include materials such as,
but not limited to, unpainted concrete, noncolored concrete blocks or unpainted
tilt-up concrete panels.
   NATURAL MATERIALS: Face brick, decorative stone, sandstone, exposed
aggregate, cement board or any other high quality masonry products or redwoods,
cedar or other high quality wood products that are impervious to weathering or
insect infestation. This does not include materials such as, but not limited
to, painted or unpainted concrete, plain cement blocks or tilt-up concrete
panels or vinyl.
   STRUCTURE: Primary, secondary and accessory structures as defined in the
Minooka zoning code that have electrical meters that serve the structure.
   B.   Building Materials In Business Districts: All business establishments
shall have one hundred percent (100%) of all exterior building facades
constructed of masonry. Alternative façade proposals can be approved by the
board. Consideration may be made for lesser percentages on rear and side
elevations on multi-story buildings, except that street facing elevations on
one (1) story buildings shall maintain one hundred percent (100%) masonry. For
purposes of this section tilt-up concrete panels are not an approved exterior
building facade material. No business establishments shall incorporate an
uninterrupted length of facade exceeding fifty feet (50'), measured
horizontally. All facades greater than fifty feet (50') in length shall
incorporate horizontal architectural relief that may include wall plane
projections, wall plane recesses, pilasters or other elements as approved by
the village building official. The requirements of this section shall apply to
any business establishment receiving a building permit approval after September
1, 2005.
   C.   Building Materials In M1 And M2 Manufacturing Districts: All business
establishments shall have one hundred percent (100%) of exterior building
facades facing the public street constructed of masonry. No business
establishments shall incorporate an uninterrupted length of facade facing the
public street exceeding one hundred fifty feet (150'), measured horizontally.
All facades greater than one hundred fifty feet (150') in length facing the
public street shall incorporate horizontal architectural relief that may
include wall plane projections, wall plane recesses, or pilasters. The
requirements of this section shall apply to any business establishment
receiving building permit approval after September 1, 2005.
   D.   Building Materials In Residential Districts:
      1.   The provisions of this subsection D1 shall apply to all dwellings
constructed in R1A zoning districts:
         a.   Exterior Building Materials:
            (1)   All dwellings: One hundred percent (100%) of the front
elevation exterior building facade shall be constructed of natural materials.
            (2)   Dwellings on key lots and through lots: One hundred percent
(100%) of the front elevation exterior building facade shall be constructed of
natural materials, and fifty percent (50%) of the total remaining exterior
building facade shall be constructed of natural materials.
   No dwellings shall incorporate an interrupted length of facade exceeding
twenty feet (20'), measured horizontally. All facades greater than twenty feet
(20') in length shall incorporate horizontal architectural relief that may
include wall plane projections, wall plane recesses, pilasters or other
elements as approved by the village building official.
         b.   Windows: Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary,
every story of each exterior wall shall contain at least one window, and all
windows shall be a minimum of 5.7 square feet, measured between stops, with a
minimum height of twenty four inches (24") and a minimum width of twenty inches
(20").
      2.   The provisions of this subsection D2 shall apply to all dwellings
constructed in R2 zoning districts:
         a.   Windows: Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary,
every story of each exterior wall shall contain at least one window, and all
windows shall be a minimum of 5.7 square feet, measured between stops, with a
minimum height of twenty four inches (24") and a minimum width of twenty inches
(20").
   E.   Building Materials In All Districts:
      1.   All structures constructed with engineered lumber on or after August
1, 2010, must have a reflective symbol affixed to each electrical meter serving
the structure.
      2.   The reflective symbol shall be in the form of a sticker, issued by
the village of Minooka, that states that the structure is constructed with
engineered lumber.
      3.   Any person violating this subsection by refusing to use the
reflective symbol or by removing the reflective symbol shall be subject to a
fine in an amount of twenty five dollars ($25.00) per violation. Each day that
a violation occurs shall constitute a separate violation, subject to a separate
fine.
      4.   The owner of any structure that was constructed with engineered
lumber prior to August 1, 2010, is requested to place the reflective symbol on
the electrical meter serving the structure on a voluntary basis. (Ord. 2005-29,
6-14-2005; amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005; Ord. 2006-05, 1-24-2006; Ord. 2010-28,
10-26-2010; Ord. 2024-37, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 6
SWIMMING POOLS
SECTION:
4-6-1 Definitions
4-6-2 Compliance
4-6-3 Pool Locations
4-6-4 Overhead And Underground Electrical Conductors
4-6-5 Electrical Devices
4-6-6 Fence Regulations
4-6-7 Water Drainage
4-6-8 Safety Regulations
4-6-9 Penalty
4-6-1: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER: The possessor of any interest in the land, a tenant, lessee, occupant or
person in control of the premises.
PERSON: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, association, company,
governmental agency, club or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL: Any swimming pool, located on private residential
property, the use of which is intended for the owner and guest.
SWIMMING POOL: Any structure basin, chamber or tank containing an artificial
body of water for swimming and wading, having a wall height or water depth of
twenty four inches (24") or more. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-2: COMPLIANCE:
It shall be unlawful to proceed with the construction, installation, or
enlargement of any swimming pool and its appurtenances within the village
without first obtaining a building permit. Upon application for a permit, a
plat of survey must be submitted showing the pool location. If a plat of survey
is not available, the village will accept an accurate sketch of the property.
(Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-3: POOL LOCATIONS:
   A.   Aboveground pools shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any
side or rear property line and at least ten feet (10') from the principal
building.
   B.   Inground pools shall be located at least ten feet (10') from any side
or rear property line and a minimum of ten feet (10') from the principal
building.
   C.   No swimming pool shall encroach onto any dedicated easement.
   D.   No swimming pool shall be located in the front yard of any lot
including both street frontages on corner lots.
   E.   Pumps, filters, and pool disinfecting equipment shall be located at a
distance not less than five feet (5') from any side or rear property line and
not less than five feet (5') from principal building. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-4: OVERHEAD AND UNDERGROUND ELECTRICAL CONDUCTORS:
Swimming pools shall not be located below or within ten feet (10') of overhead
electrical conductors, and five feet (5') of underground conductors. (Ord.
2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-5: ELECTRICAL DEVICES:
All electrical devices used in conjunction with or connected to all pools must
be grounded and protected by approved ground fault interrupter circuits. All
grounding must be in accordance with the National Electrical Code. (Ord. 2000-
42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-6: FENCE REGULATIONS:
   A.   All outdoor swimming pools capable of holding two feet (2') of water or
more shall be completely enclosed by a fence or the yard in which the pool is
located, shall be completely enclosed by a fence with a minimum height from the
established grade of four feet (4'). All fence openings or points of entry into
the pool area shall be equipped with self-closing gates. All gates shall be
self-latching with the latches placed at least four feet (4') above the ground.
Fences shall be constructed so as to prohibit the passage of a sphere larger
than four inches (4") in diameter through any opening or under the fence. Self-
contained fencing around the entire top portion of the pool shall be an
acceptable alternative. A deck railing completely enclosing the pool shall be
an acceptable alternative providing there is a self-latching gate.
   B.   Aboveground pools must have a manually activated entrance ladder that
can be locked in the upright position. (Ord. 2024-42, 10-22-2024)
4-6-7: WATER DRAINAGE:
   A.   Water drained from the pool shall not be discharged to the storm sewer
system during periods of rain or storms. At no time shall the rate of drain
water discharge exceed a flow of two hundred fifty (250) gallons per minute.
   B.   Water drained from the pool shall not be drained over an adjacent
owner's property but must be drained to streets with curb and gutters or to
street drainage ditches with a closed header, hose or pipeline. In no event
shall such water be drained directly into a stormwater detention or retention
basin. Any prohibited drainage shall constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-
12-2000)
4-6-8: SAFETY REGULATIONS:
   A.   All public pools and private inground swimming pools with a diving
board, must be constructed to BOCA specifications.
   B.   All metal fence, enclosures or railings near or adjacent to swimming
pools, which might become electrically alive as a result of contact with broken
overhead conductors or from any other cause, shall be effectively grounded.
   C.   During the construction of an inground pool a four foot (4') temporary
fence must be installed in sufficient strength to prevent access to the
construction area.
   D.   An approved cover shall be installed during the months when the pool is
not in use.
   E.   An anti-siphon device "hose bib vacuum breaker" must be provided on the
faucet supplying water for the pool.
   F.   Every swimming pool shall be equipped with one or more throwing ring
buoys not more than fifteen inches (15") in diameter and having a three-
sixteenths inch (3/16") line at a length of no less than three feet (3')
greater than the longest dimension of the pool, and one or more light, but
strong, poles with blunted ends being not less than twelve feet (12') in
length, for making reach assists or rescues.
   G.   All swimming pools must have gates and ladders locked when not in use.
(Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
4-6-9: PENALTY:
Anyone violating any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2000-42, 9-12-2000)
CHAPTER 7
FLOOD HAZARD AREAS
SECTION:
4-7-1 Purpose
4-7-2 Definitions
4-7-3 Enforcement Official
4-7-4 Duties Of The Enforcement Official(s)
4-7-5 Base Flood Elevation
4-7-6 Occupation And Use Of Flood Fringe Areas
4-7-7 Occupation And Use Of Identified Floodways
4-7-8 Occupation And Use Of Special Flood Hazard Areas Where Floodways Are Not
Identified
4-7-9 Permitting Requirements Applicable To All Floodplain Areas
4-7-10 Other Development Requirements
4-7-11 Variances
4-7-12 Disclaimer Of Liability
4-7-13 Penalty
4-7-14 Abrogation And Greater Restrictions
4-7-15 Severability
4-7-1: PURPOSE:
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to this Village
by 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-2-1, 5/11-12-12, 5/11-30-2, 5/11-30-8 and
5/11-31-2. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain this Village's
eligibility in the National Flood Insurance Program; to minimize potential
losses due to periodic flooding including loss of life, loss of property,
health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services,
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and
impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health,
safety and general welfare; and to preserve and enhance the quality of surface
waters, conserve economic and natural values and provide for the wise
utilization of water and related land resources. This chapter is adopted in
order to accomplish the following specific purposes:
   A.   To meet the requirements of 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/18(g), "An
Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of the State
of Illinois", approved June 10, 1911, as amended;
   B.   To assure that new development does not increase the flood or drainage
hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
   C.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from flood
damage;
   D.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of flooding;
   E.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, and flood rescue and
relief operations; and
   F.   To make Federally subsidized flood insurance available for property in
the Village by fulfilling the requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program.
   G.   To comply with the rules and regulations of the National Flood
Insurance Program codified as 44 CFR 59-79, as amended.
   H.   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources;
   I.   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats;
   J.   To preserve the natural characteristics and functions of watercourses
and floodplains in order to moderate flood and storm water impacts, improve
water quality, reduce soil erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat,
provide recreational opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance
community and economic development. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions are adopted:
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE: A non-habitable structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
ACT: "An Act in Relation to the Regulation of the Rivers, Lakes and Streams of
the State of Illinois", 615 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm, corporation or agency which submits an
application.
APPROPRIATE USE: Only uses of the designated floodway that are permissible and
will be considered for permit issuance. The only uses that will be allowed are
as specified in subsection
4-7-7B of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) probability of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year. The base flood is also known as the 100-year
frequency flood event. Application of the base flood elevation at any location
is as defined in section
4-7-5 of this chapter.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE): The elevation in relation to mean sea level of the
crest of the base flood.
BASEMENT: That portion of the building having its floor subgrade (below ground
level) on all sides.
BUILDING: A structure that is principally above ground and is enclosed by walls
and a roof. The term includes a gas or liquid storage tank, a manufactured
home, mobile home or prefabricated building. This term also includes
recreational vehicles and travel trailers to be installed on a site for more
than one hundred eighty (180) days.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
banks or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, rip-rapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of native vegetation from the bottom
or banks. Channel modification does not include the clearing of dead or dying
vegetation, debris, or trash from the channel. Channelization is a severe form
of channel modification involving a significant change in the channel cross-
section and typically involving relocation of the existing channel (e.g.,
straightening).
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated hydraulically equivalent volume
of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when artificial fill or structures are placed within the
floodplain. The uncompensated loss of natural floodplain storage can increase
off-site flood water elevations and flows.
CONDITIONAL APPROVAL OF A DESIGNATED FLOODWAY MAP CHANGE: Preconstruction
approval by IDNR and the Federal Emergency Management Agency of a proposed
change to the Floodway Map. This preconstruction approval, pursuant to this
chapter, gives assurances to the property owner that once an appropriate use is
constructed according to permitted plans, the Floodway Map can be changed, as
previously agreed, upon review and acceptance of as-built plans.
CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR): A letter which indicates that the
Federal Emergency Management Agency will revise base flood elevations, flood
insurance rate zones, flood boundaries or floodway as shown on an effective
Flood Hazard Boundary Map or Flood Insurance Rate Map, once the as- built plans
are submitted and approved.
CONTROL STRUCTURE: A structure designed to control the rate of flow that passes
through the structure, given a specific upstream and downstream water surface
elevation.
CRITICAL FACILITY: Any facility which is critical to the health and welfare of
the population and, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the
disaster. Damage to these critical facilities can impact the delivery of vital
services, can cause greater damage to other sectors of the community, or can
put special populations at risk. Examples of critical facilities where flood
protection should be required include: emergency services facilities (such as
fire and police stations), schools, hospitals, retirement homes and senior care
facilities, major roads and bridges, critical utility sites (telephone
switching stations or electrical transformers), and hazardous material storage
facilities (chemicals, petrochemicals, hazardous or toxic substances). Examples
of critical facilities where flood protection is recommended include: sewage
treatment plants, water treatment plants, and pumping stations.
DAM: All obstructions, wall embankments or barriers, together with their
abutments and appurtenant works, if any, constructed for the purpose of storing
or diverting water or creating a pool. Dams may also include weirs, restrictive
culverts or impoundment structures. Underground water storage tanks are not
included.
DELEGATED COMMUNITY: A community delegated state permitting authority in the
floodway.
DESIGNATED FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion
of the floodplain adjacent to a stream or watercourse, generally depicted on
the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store and convey the existing 100-year
frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to
the loss of flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%)
increase in velocities.
         A.   The floodways are designated for on the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Maps of Will County, Grundy County, and Kendall County prepared
by FEMA and dated, respectively, February 15, 2019; August 2, 2012; and January
8, 2014. When two (2) floodway maps exist for a waterway, the more restrictive
floodway limit shall prevail.
         B.   The floodways for those parts of unincorporated Kendall and
Grundy Counties that are within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the
Village that may be annexed into the Village are designated for Aux Sable Creek
on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA, and for Kendall
County dated January 8, 2014; and for Grundy County dated August 2, 2012. The
floodways for those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village that may be annexed into the
Village are designated for the DuPage River and the I and M Canal in the
Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map prepared by FEMA and dated February 15,
2019.
         C.   To locate the designated floodway boundary on any site, the
designated floodway boundary should be scaled off the designated floodway map
and located on a site plan, using reference marks common to both maps. Where
interpretation is needed to determine the exact location of the designated
floodway boundary, IDNR/OWR should be contacted for the interpretation.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
         A.   Construction, reconstruction, repair, or placement of a building
or any addition to a building;
         B.   Substantial improvement of an existing building;
         C.   Installing a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a
site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any calendar year. If a
travel trailer or recreational vehicle is on site for more than one hundred
eighty (180) days in any calendar year, it must be fully licensed and ready for
highway use;
         D.   Installing utilities, construction of roads, bridges, or similar
projects;
         E.   Demolition of a structure, redevelopment of a site, clearing of
land as an adjunct of construction;
         F.   Construction or erection of levees, walls, fences, dams, or
culverts; channel modification;
         G.   Filling, dredging, grading, excavating, paving, drilling, mining
or other non-agricultural alterations of the ground surface;
         H.   Storage of materials including the placement of gas and liquid
storage tanks, and channel modifications or any other activity that might
change the direction, height, or velocity of flood or surface waters;
         I.   Any other activity of man that might change the direction,
height, or velocity of flood or surface water, including extensive vegetation
removal;
         Development does not include such activities as re-surfacing of
pavement when there is no increase in elevation, or gardening, plowing, and
similar agricultural practices that do not involve filling, grading, or
construction of levees.
ELEVATION CERTIFICATES: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify the elevation to which a building has been
elevated.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
EXEMPT ORGANIZATIONS: Organizations which are exempt from this chapter per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes including State, Federal or local units of
government.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed or buildings to be constructed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed before the effective date of the Village initial floodplain
management regulations.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation
of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the
pouring of concrete pads).
FEMA: Federal Emergency Management Agency and its regulations at 44 CFR 59-79,
as amended.
FLOOD: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of
normally dry land areas from overflow of inland or tidal waves, or the unusual
and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD FREQUENCY: A period of years, based on a statistical analysis, during
which a flood of a stated magnitude may be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the designated
floodway.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAPS (FIRM): A map prepared by FEMA that depicts the
floodplain or special flood hazard area within a community. This map includes
insurance rate zones and floodplains and may or may not depict floodways and
show base flood elevation.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: An examination, evaluation and determination of flood
hazards and if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations.
FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE): The elevation of the base flood or 100-year
frequency floods plus one foot (1') of freeboard at any given location in the
floodplain.
FLOODPLAIN (OR SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA)): These two (2) terms are
synonymous and mean any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from
any source. Floodplain also includes those areas of known flooding as
identified by the community. The floodplains are those lands within the
jurisdiction of the Village that are subject to inundation by the base flood
and those parts of unincorporated Grundy, Kendall and Will Counties that are
within the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed
into the Village. The floodplains are generally identified as such on panel
number(s):
         A.   17063C 0055F, 0060F, 0065F, and 0070F of the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Grundy County as prepared by the FEMA and dated August 2,
2012.
         B.   17093C 0140H, 0145HF, and 0225H of the Countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Kendall County as prepared by the FEMA and dated January 8, 2014.
         C.   17197C 0140F, 0255F, and 0265F of the Countywide Flood Insurance
Rate Map of Will County as prepared by the FEMA and dated February 15, 2019.
FLOODPROOFING: Any combination of structural and nonstructural additions,
changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to
real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities,
structures and their contents.
FLOODPROOFING CERTIFICATE: A form published by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency that is used to certify that a building has been designed and
constructed to be structurally dry floodproofed to the flood protection
elevation.
FLOODWAY: See definition of designated floodway.
FREEBOARD: An increment of elevation added to the base flood elevation to
provide a factor of safety for uncertainties in calculations, future watershed
development, unknown localized conditions, wave actions and unpredictable
effects such as those caused by ice or debris jams.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is: listed individually in the National
Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register; certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the Historic District or a district preliminarily
determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered Historic District;
individually listed on the State Inventory of Historic Places by the Illinois
Historic Preservation Agency; individually listed on a local Inventory of
Historic Places that has been certified by the Illinois Historic Preservation
Agency.
HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC CALCULATIONS: Engineering analyses which determine
expected flood flows and flood elevations based on land characteristics and
rainfall events.
LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA): Official determination by FEMA that a specific
structure is not in a 100-year floodplain; amends the FIRM.
LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR): Letter that revises base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations, floodplains or floodways as shown on an effective
FIRM.
LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely for parking
of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area
is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is
not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-
elevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is
built on a permanent chassis and is designated for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
manufactured home also includes park trailers, travel trailers and other
similar vehicles placed on site for more than one hundred eighty (180)
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
MITIGATION: Includes those measures necessary to minimize the negative effects
which floodplain development activities might have on the public health, safety
and welfare. Examples of mitigation include compensatory storage, soil erosion
and sedimentation control, and channel restoration.
NAVD 88: National American Vertical Datum of 1988. NAVD 88 supersedes the
National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 (NGVD).
NATURAL: When used in reference to channels means those channels formed by the
existing surface topography of the earth prior to changes made by man. A
natural stream tends to follow a meandering path; its floodplain is not
constrained by levees; the area near the bank has not been cleared, mowed or
cultivated; the stream flows over soil and geologic materials typical of the
area with no substantial alteration of the course or cross section of the
stream caused by filling or excavating. A modified channel may regain some
natural characteristics over time as the channel meanders and vegetation is
reestablished. Similarly, a modified channel may be restored to more natural
conditions by man through regrading and revegetation.
NEW CONSTRUCTION: New construction means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain
management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: Manufactured home park or
subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) has been completed on or after the
effective date of the Village floodplain management regulations.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation or other easily recognized
characteristics.
PUBLIC BODIES OF WATERS: All open public streams and lakes capable of being
navigated by watercraft, in whole or in part, for commercial uses and purposes,
and all lakes, rivers, and streams which in their natural condition were
capable of being improved and made navigable, or that are connected with or
discharge their waters into navigable lakes or rivers within, or upon the
borders of the State of Illinois, together with all bayous, sloughs,
backwaters, and submerged lands that are open to the main channel or body of
water directly accessible thereto.
PUBLIC FLOOD CONTROL PROJECT: A flood control project which will be operated
and maintained by a public agency to reduce flood damages to existing buildings
and structures which includes a hydrologic and hydraulic study of the existing
and proposed conditions of the watershed. Nothing in this definition shall
preclude the design, engineering, construction or financing, in whole or in
part, of a flood control project by persons or parties who are not public
agencies.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE OR TRAVEL TRAILER: A vehicle which is: built on a single
chassis; four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest
horizontal projection; designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by
a light duty truck; and designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling
but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal
use.
REGIONAL PERMITS: Regional permits are offered for pre- approved projects which
are considered minor projects that are permissible per IDNR/OWR part 3708 rules
for Northeastern Illinois designated floodways. A complete listing of the terms
and conditions for specific project types can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR
website.
REGISTERED LAND SURVEYOR: A land surveyor registered in the State of Illinois,
under the Illinois Land Surveyors Act1. 225 ILCS 330/1 et seq.1.
REGISTERED OR LICENSED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER (PE): An engineer registered in
the State of Illinois, under the Illinois Professional Engineering Practice
Act2. 225 ILCS 325/1 et seq.2.
REPAIR, REMODELING OR MAINTENANCE: Development activities which do not result
in any increases in the outside dimensions of a building or any changes to the
dimensions of a structure.
REPETITIVE LOSS: Flood related damages sustained by a structure on two (2)
separate occasions during a ten (10) year period for which the cost of repairs
at the time of each such flood event on the average equals or exceeds twenty
five percent (25%) of the market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A retention facility stores stormwater runoff
without a gravity release. A detention facility provides for storage of
stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a
flood or storm.
RIVERINE FLOODPLAIN: Any floodplain or SFHA subject to flooding from a river,
creek, intermittent stream, ditch, on- stream lake system or any other
identified channel. This term does not include areas subject to flooding from
lakes, ponding areas, areas of sheet flow, or other areas not subject to
overbank flooding.
RUNOFF: The water derived from melting snow or rain falling on the land
surface, flowing over the surface of the ground or collected in channels or
conduits.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or watercourses.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA): See definition of "floodplain".
START OF CONSTRUCTION: Includes substantial improvement and means the date the
building permit was issued. This, provided the actual start of construction,
repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement or other
improvement, was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The
actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a
structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation
of piles, the construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of
excavation or placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. For a
substantial improvement, actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor or other structural part of a building
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
STATEWIDE PERMITS: Statewide permits are offered for pre- approved projects
that are considered minor projects which are permissible per the IDNR/OWR part
3700 rules. A complete listing of the Statewide permits and permit requirements
can be obtained from the IDNR/OWR website.
STRUCTURE: See definition of "building".
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the
cumulative percentage of damage during a 10-year period equals or exceeds fifty
percent (50%) of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred
regardless of actual repair work performed. Volunteer labor and materials must
be included in this determination. The term includes repetitive loss buildings.
See definition of "repetitive loss".
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
improvement of a structure taking place during a 10-year period in which the
cumulative percentage of improvements equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of
the market value of the structure before the improvement or repair is started,
or increases the floor area by more than twenty percent (20%). "Substantial
improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or
not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. This term
includes structures which have incurred repetitive loss or substantial damage,
regardless of the actual work done. The term does not, however, include either:
any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing State or
local Health, Sanitary, or Safety Code specifications which are solely
necessary to assure safe living conditions, or any alteration of a "historic
structure" listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the Illinois
Register of Historic Places, provided that the alteration will not preclude the
structure's continued designation as a historic structure.
TRANSITION SECTION: Reaches of the stream or floodway where water flows from a
narrow cross-section to a wide cross- section or vice versa.
VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure
or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications,
or other evidence of compliance, is presumed to be in violation, until such
time as that documentation is provided. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019; amd. Ord.
2019-06, 2-26-2019)
4-7-3: ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL:
The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for fulfilling all of
the duties listed in section
4-7-4 of this chapter.
To fulfill those duties, the Building Officer and Inspector first should use
the criteria listed in section
4-7-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter to determine whether the
development site is located within a floodplain. Once it has been determined
that the site is located within a floodplain, the Building Officer and
Inspector must determine whether the development site is within a flood fringe,
a designated floodway or floodplain on which no floodway has been identified.
If the site is within a flood fringe, the Building Officer and Inspector shall
require that the minimum requirements of section
4-7-6 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Building
Officer and Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section
4-7-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within an SFHA or
floodplain for which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the
Building Officer and Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of
section
4-7-8 of this chapter be met.
In addition, the general requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter shall be met for all developments meeting the
requirements of section
4-7-6,
4-7-7, or
4-7-8 of this chapter. The Building Officer and Inspector shall assure that all
subdivision proposals shall meet the requirements of section
4-7-10 of this chapter.
If a variance is to be granted for a proposal, the Building Officer and
Inspector shall review the requirements of section
4-7-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the Building
Officer and Inspector shall complete all notification requirements.
In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as required in this
chapter, the Building Officer and Inspector may take any and all actions as
outlined in section
4-7-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-4: DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL(S):
The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for the general
administration and enforcement of this chapter which shall include the
following:
   A.   Determining The Floodplain Designation: Check all new development sites
to determine whether they are in a floodplain using criteria listed in section
4-7-5, "Base Flood Elevation", of this chapter. If they are in a floodplain,
determine whether they are in a floodway, flood fringe or in a floodplain for
which a detailed study has not been conducted and which drains more than one
square mile. If the site is within a flood fringe, the Building Officer and
Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section
4-7-6 of this chapter be met. If the site is within a floodway, the Building
Officer and Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section
4-7-7 of this chapter be met. If the site is located within a floodplain for
which no detailed study has been completed and approved, the Building Officer
and Inspector shall require that the minimum requirements of section
4-7-8 of this chapter be met.
   B.   Professional Engineer Review: If the development site is within a
floodway or in a floodplain for which a detailed study has not been conducted
and which drains more than one square mile, the permit shall be referred to a
PE under the employ or contract of the Village for review to ensure that the
development meets section
4-7-7 or 4-7-8 of this chapter. In the case of an appropriate use, the PE shall
state in writing that the development meets the requirements of section
4-7-7 of this chapter.
   C.   Dam Safety Requirements: Dams are classified as to their size and their
hazard/damage potential in the event of failure. Permits for dams may be
required from IDNR/OWR. Contact IDNR/OWR to determine if a permit is required.
If a permit is required, a permit application must be made to IDNR/OWR prior to
the construction or major modification of jurisdictional dams.
   D.   Other Permit Requirements: Ensure any and all required Federal, State
and local permits are received prior to the issuance of a floodplain
development permit.
   E.   Plan Review And Permit Issuances: Ensure that all development
activities within the floodplains of the jurisdiction of the Village meet the
requirements of this chapter. Issue a floodplain development permit in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter and other regulations of this
community when the development meets the conditions of this chapter.
   F.   Inspection Review: Inspect all development projects before, during and
after construction to assure proper elevation of the structure and to ensure
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Schedule on an annual basis an
inspection of the floodplain and document the results of the inspection.
   G.   Substantial Damage And Substantial Improvement Determinations:
Establish, in coordination with the Building Officer and Inspector, procedures
for administering and documenting determinations, as outlined below, of
substantial improvement and substantial damage made pursuant to section
4-7-9 of this chapter. Determine the market value or require the applicant to
obtain an appraisal of the market value prepared by a qualified independent
appraiser, of the building or structure before the start of construction of the
proposed work. In the case of repair, the market value of the building or
structure shall be the market value before the damage occurred and before any
repairs are made. Compare the cost to perform the improvement, the cost to
repair a damaged building to its pre-damaged condition, or the combined costs
of improvements and repairs, if applicable, to the market value of the building
or structure. Determine and document whether the proposed work constitutes
substantial improvement or substantial damage. Notify the applicant if it is
determined that the work constitutes substantial improvement or repair of
substantial damage and that compliance with the flood resistant construction
requirements of the Village and this chapter is required.
   H.   Elevation And Floodproofing Certificates: Maintain permit files
including: an Elevation Certificate certifying the elevation of the lowest
floor (including basement) of a residential or non-residential building subject
to section
4-7-9 of this chapter, and/or; the elevation to which a non- residential
building has been floodproofed, using a Floodproofing Certificate, for all
buildings subject to section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
   I.   Records For Public Inspection: Maintain for public inspection and
furnish upon request all permit records, including but not limited to base
flood data, floodplain and designated floodway maps, copies of Federal or State
permit documents, variance documentation, soil compaction records, Conditional
Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Revision, Letter of Map Amendment, "as-
built" elevation, floodproofing certificates and elevation certificates for all
buildings constructed subject to this chapter.
   J.   State Permits: Ensure that construction authorization has been granted
by IDNR/OWR, for all development projects subject to sections
4-7-7 and
4-7-8 of this chapter, unless enforcement responsibility has been delegated to
the Village. However, the following review approvals are not delegated to the
Village and shall require review or permits from IDNR/OWR:
      1.   Organizations which are exempt from this chapter, as per the
Illinois Compiled Statutes;
      2.   IDNR/OWR projects, dams and all other State, Federal or local unit
of government projects, including projects of the Village, except for those
projects meeting the requirements of section
4-7-7 of this chapter;
      3.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, per section
4-7-7 of this chapter;
      4.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to section
4-7-7 of this chapter;
      5.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
compensatory storage as indicated in section
4-7-7 of this chapter;
      6.   Permit issuance of structures within, under, or over publicly
navigable rivers, lakes and streams;
      7.   Any changes in the mapped floodway or published flood profiles.
   K.   Cooperation With Other Agencies: Cooperate with State and Federal
floodplain management agencies to improve base flood or 100-year frequency
flood and floodway data and to improve the administration of this chapter;
submit data to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for proposed revisions of a regulatory map
within six (6) months whenever a modification of the floodplain may change the
base flood elevation or result in a change to the floodplain map; submit
reports as required for the National Flood Insurance Program; and notify FEMA
of any proposed amendments to this chapter.
   L.   Promulgate Regulations: Promulgate rules and regulations as necessary
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter, subject however to
the review and approval of IDNR/OWR and FEMA for any chapter changes.
   M.   Variances: If a variance is to be granted, the Building Officer and
Inspector shall review the requirements of section
4-7-11 of this chapter to make sure they are met. In addition, the Building
Officer and Inspector shall complete all notifications requirements.
   N.   Enforcement: In order to assure that property owners obtain permits as
required in this chapter, the Building Officer and Inspector may take any and
all actions as outlined in section
4-7-13 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-5: BASE FLOOD ELEVATION:
This chapter's protection standard is based on the flood insurance study for
Will, Grundy, and Kendall Counties. If a base flood elevation or 100-year
frequency flood elevation is not available for a particular site, then the
protection standard shall be according to the best existing data available in
Federal, State or other sources. When a party disagrees with the best available
data, he/she may finance the detailed engineering study needed to replace
existing data with better data and submit it to IDNR/OWR and FEMA for review
and consideration prior to any development of the site.
   A.   The base flood elevation for the floodplains of the DuPage River shall
be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the Flood Insurance Study
prepared by FEMA for Will, Grundy, and Kendall County and dated, respectively,
February 15, 2019; August 2, 2012; and January 8, 2014, and such amendments to
such study and maps as may be prepared from time to time.
   B.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Will County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the
Village shall be delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Will County prepared by FEMA and dated February 15, 2019,
and such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Grundy County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the
Village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Grundy County prepared by FEMA and dated August 2, 2012, and
such amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be prepared from
time to time. The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for the
floodplains of those parts of unincorporated Kendall County that are within the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the Village or that may be annexed into the
Village shall be as delineated on the 100-year flood profiles in the flood
insurance study of Kendall County prepared by FEMA and dated January 8, 2014,
and such other amendments or revisions to such study and maps as may be
prepared from time to time.
   C.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each
floodplain delineated as an "AH Zone" or "AO Zone" shall be that elevation (or
depth) delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate Map of Will, Grundy,
and Kendall Counties.
   D.   The base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for each of the
remaining floodplains delineated as an "A Zone" on the Countywide Flood
Insurance Rate Map of Will, Grundy, and Kendall Counties shall be according to
the best existing data available from Federal, State or other sources. Should
no other data exist, an engineering study must be financed by the applicant to
determine base flood elevations. When no base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation exists, the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation for a
riverine floodplain shall be determined from a backwater model, such as HEC-II,
HEC-RAS, or a dynamic model such as HIP. The flood flows used in the hydraulic
models shall be obtained from a hydrologic model, such as HEC-HMS, HEC-1, TR-
20, or HIP, or by techniques presented in various publications prepared by the
United States Geological Survey for estimating peak flood discharges. (Ord.
2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-6: OCCUPATION AND USE OF FLOOD FRINGE AREAS:
Development in and/or filling of the flood fringe will be permitted if
protection is provided against the base flood or 100-year frequency flood by
proper elevation and compensatory storage and other provisions of this chapter
are met. No use will be permitted which adversely affects the capacity of
drainage facilities or systems. Developments located within the flood fringe
shall meet the requirements of this section, along with the requirements of
section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
   A.   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body
not exempted by State law shall commence any development in the floodplain
without first obtaining a development permit from the Building Officer and
Inspector.
      1.   Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Officer and Inspector. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale, showing property line
dimensions and legal description for the property, and sealed by a licensed
engineer, architect or land surveyor; existing grade elevations using the NAVD
of 1988 and all changes in grade resulting from excavation or filling; the
location and dimensions of buildings and additions to buildings. For all
proposed buildings, the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and
lowest adjacent grade shall be shown on the submitted plans and the development
will be subject to the requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
      2.   Upon receipt of a development permit application, the Building
Officer and Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood
or 100-year frequency flood elevation. Any development located on land that can
be shown to be higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood
Insurance Rate Map and which has not been filled after the date of the site's
first Flood Insurance Rate Map without a permit, as required by this chapter,
is not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject to the requirements of
this chapter. Conversely, any development located on land shown to be below the
base flood elevation and hydraulically connected, but not shown on the current
Flood Insurance Rate Map, is subject to the provisions of this chapter. The
Building Officer and Inspector shall maintain documentation of the existing
ground elevation at the development site and certification that this ground
elevation existed prior to the date of the site's first Flood Insurance Rate
Map identification.
      3.   The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue a permit unless all other
Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
      4.   A development permit or approval shall become invalid unless the
start of construction, for work authorized by such permit, is commenced within
one hundred eighty (180) days after its issuance, or if the work authorized is
suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty (180) days after the
work commences. Extensions for periods of not more than one hundred eighty
(180) days each shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause shall be
demonstrated.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the flood fringe shall
create a threat to public health and safety.
      1.   Elevation Of Site: If fill is being used to elevate the site above
the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall
submit sufficient data and obtain a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) from FEMA for
the purpose of removing the site from the floodplain.
      2.   Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal to one and five-
tenths (1.5) times the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure. In
the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite or
adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost below
the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed 10-
year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse.
   C.   Construction Of A Building Under A LOMR Based On Fill: A person who has
obtained a Letter of Map Revision Based On Fill that removes a site in the
floodplain due to the use of fill to elevate the site above the BFE, may apply
for a permit from the Village to construct the lowest floor of a building below
the BFE in the floodplain. The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue
such a permit unless the applicant has complied with all the criteria set forth
in the following subsection and maintain the documentation verifying such
compliance.
      1.   Compensatory storage shall be provided per subsection B2 of this
section.
      2.   The elevation of the lowest opening in the basement wall (i.e.,
window wells, access ways) shall be at or above the flood protection elevation
(FPE).
      3.   The lowest adjacent grade to the foundation shall be at or above the
FPE, for a minimum distance of ten feet (10') beyond the outside face of the
structure. However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be
met, the Building Officer and Inspector may waive the ten foot (10') minimum
setback if an Illinois licensed PE certifies that an alternative method to
protect the building from damage due to hydrostatic pressures has been met. The
certifications shall be in the form of a detailed soils and structural design
analysis, which shall be submitted to the Building Officer and Inspector for
review. The Building Officer and Inspector may require such additional
documentation as necessary to prove that the proposed shorter setback distance
will keep the structure reasonably safe. In no case shall the setback distance
be less than four feet (4').
      4.   The grade around the perimeter of the structure, measured at a
distance of twenty feet (20') from the structure, shall be above the BFE.
However, if site conditions are such that this requirement cannot be obtained,
the Building Officer and Inspector may waive the twenty foot (20') minimum
setback distance if an Illinois licensed PE certifies that an alternative
method to protect the building from damages due to hydrostatic pressures have
been met. A detailed soils analysis and structural design proving that a
shorter setback distance will keep the structure reasonably safe from flooding,
shall be submitted to the Village for review. In no case shall the setback
distance be less than four feet (4').
      5.   The ground around the building shall be compacted fill that meets
all requirements of this subsection and is at least five feet (5') thick under
the basement floor slab. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted to
require the removal or replacement of fill that was placed as part of a LOMR-F,
if such fill consists of material, including soils of similar classification
and degree permeability, such as those classified as CH, CL, SC or ML according
to ASTM standard D-2487, Classification of Soils for Engineering Purposes.
      6.   The fill material must be homogeneous and isotropic; that is, the
soil must be all of one material, and the engineering priorities must be in the
same direction.
      7.   All fill material and compaction shall be designed, certified and
inspected by an Illinois licensed PE, as warranted by the site conditions.
      8.   The basement floor shall be at an elevation that is no more than
five feet (5') below the BFE.
      9.   There shall be a granular drainage layer beneath the floor slab, and
minimum of one-quarter (1/4) horsepower sump pump with a backup power supply
shall be provided to remove seepage flow. The pump shall be rated at four (4)
times the estimated seepage rate and shall discharge above the BFE and away
from the building in order to prevent flooding of the basement or uplift of the
floor under the effect of the seepage pressure.
      10.   The drainage system shall be equipped with a positive means of
preventing backflow.
      11.   All foundation elements shall be designed to withstand hydrostatic
pressure in accordance with accepted engineering practices.
      12.   If the applicant is unable to meet all of the requirements set
forth in the preceding paragraphs of this subsection, the Building Officer and
Inspector may allow the construction of a basement below the BFE only if the
applicant demonstrates that the proposed fill and structure meet the guidelines
and requirements set forth in FEMA Technical Bulletin 10-01 and are reasonably
safe from flooding. In order to demonstrate that the proposed structure is
reasonably safe from flooding, the applicant shall submit a detailed
engineering analysis of the proposed fill and foundation wall. The engineered
basement study shall be completed in accordance with the latest edition of FEMA
Technical Bulletin 10-01, with the analysis of the fill being prepared by an
Illinois licensed PE.
      13.   In order to provide the required compensatory storage on site, in
no case shall the depth of excavation in the front and side yards of the lot
exceed eighteen inches (18"), as measured from the previously existing natural
grade. The rear yard shall be permitted to have a greater depth of excavation,
if necessary. All such excavation shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse or storm sewer system. The use of mechanical means to
drain the compensatory storage area will not be permitted. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-
2019)
4-7-7: OCCUPATION AND USE OF IDENTIFIED FLOODWAYS:
This section applies to proposed development, redevelopment, site modification
or building modification within a designated floodway. The designated floodway
for DuPage River shall be as delineated on the Countywide Flood Insurance Rate
Map of Will, Grundy, and Kendall Counties and referenced in section
4-7-2 of this chapter. Only those uses and structures will be permitted which
meet the criteria in this section. All floodway modifications shall be the
minimum necessary to accomplish the purpose of the project. The development
shall also meet the requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
   A.   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation or governmental body,
not exempted by State law, shall commence any development in a floodway without
first obtaining a development permit from IDNR/OWR.
      1.   In a delegated community, an application for a development permit
shall be made on a form provided by the Building Officer and Inspector. The
application shall include the following information:
         a.   Name and address of applicant;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the Designated Floodway Map, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Name of stream or body of water affected;
         d.   Description of proposed activity;
         e.   Statement of purpose of proposed activity;
         f.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity;
         g.   Name and mailing address of the owner of the subject property if
different from the applicant;
         h.   Signature of applicant or the applicant's agent;
         i.   If the applicant is a corporation, the president or other
authorized officer shall sign the application form;
         j.   If the applicant is a partnership, each partner shall sign the
application form; and
         k.   If the applicant is a land trust, the trust officer shall sign
the name of the trustee by him as trust officer. A disclosure affidavit shall
be filed with the application, identifying each beneficiary of the trust by
name and address and defining the respective interest therein.
         l.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale, and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the NAVD of 1988, adjacent property lines
and ownership, drainage and flood control easements, location of any channels
and any existing or future access roads, distance between proposed activity and
navigation channel (when the proposed construction is near a commercially
navigable body of water), designated floodway limit, floodplain limit,
specifications and dimensions of any proposed channel modifications, location
and orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphic or numerical
scale.
            (3)   Cross section views of the project and engineering study
reach showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions
of the work as shown in plan view, existing and proposed elevations, normal
water elevation, 10-year frequency flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and graphic or numerical scales (horizontal and vertical).
            (4)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure post- construction maintenance.
            (5)   A copy of the designated floodway map, marked to reflect any
proposed change in the designated floodway location.
         m.   Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approval
letters that may be required for this type of development.
         n.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the permit criteria of subsection B of
this section.
         o.   If the designated floodway delineation, base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation will change due to the proposed project, the
application will not be considered complete until the IDNR/OWR has indicated
conditional approval of the Designated Floodway Map change. No structures may
be built until a Letter of Map Revision has been approved by FEMA.
         p.   The application for a structure shall be accompanied by drawings
of the site, drawn to scale showing property line dimensions and existing
ground elevations and all changes in grade resulting from any proposed
excavation or filling, and floodplain and floodway limits; sealed by a
registered professional engineer, licensed architect or registered land
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
         q.   If the proposed project involves a channel modification, the
applicant shall submit the following information:
            (1)   A discussion of the purpose of and need for the proposed
work;
            (2)   A discussion of the feasibility of using alternative
locations or methods to accomplish the purpose of the proposed work;
            (3)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts the
project would have on the physical and biological conditions of the body of
water affected;
            (4)   An analysis of the extent and permanence of the impacts each
feasible alternative identified in subsection B2d(1) of this section would have
on the physical and biological conditions of the body of water affected; and,
considering cumulative effects on the physical and biological conditions of the
body of water affected;
            (5)   An analysis of the impacts of the proposed project water
affected.
      2.   The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other local, State and Federal
permits and approvals that may be required for this type of activity. The
Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue the development permit unless
all required Federal and State permits have been obtained. A registered
professional engineer, under the employ or contract of the Village shall review
and approve applications reviewed under this section.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages And A List Of Appropriate Uses:
      1.   Floodway Development: The only development in a floodway which will
be allowed are appropriate uses, which will not cause a rise in the base flood
elevation, and which will not create a damaging or potentially damaging
increase in flood heights or velocity or be a threat to public health and
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel, or permanently impair existing water quality or
aquatic habitat. Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate
mitigation methods as called for in this chapter. Only those appropriate uses
listed in 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3708 will be allowed. Appropriate uses do not
include the construction or placement of any new structures, fill, building
additions, buildings on stilts, excavation or channel modifications done to
accommodate otherwise non-appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including
landscaping or planting designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials
except as specifically defined above as an appropriate use. The approved
appropriate uses are as follows:
         a.   Flood control structures, dikes, dams and other public works or
private improvements relating to the control of drainage, flooding, erosion or
water quality or habitat for fish and wildlife;
         b.   Structures or facilities relating to the use of, or requiring
access to, the water or shoreline, such as pumping and treatment facilities and
facilities and improvements related to recreational boating, commercial
shipping and other functionally water dependent uses;
         c.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls;
         d.   Underground and overhead utilities;
         e.   Recreational facilities such as playing fields and trail systems,
including any related fencing (at least 50 percent open when viewed from any
one direction) built parallel to the direction of flood flows, and including
open air pavilions and toilet facilities (4 stall maximum) that will not block
flood flows nor reduce floodway storage;
         f.   Detached garages, storage sheds or other non-habitable accessory
structures without toilet facilities to existing buildings that will not block
flood flows, nor reduce floodway storage;
         g.   Bridges, culverts, roadways, sidewalks, railways, runways and
taxiways and any modification thereto;
         h.   Parking lots and any modifications thereto (where depth of
flooding at the 100-year frequency flood event will not exceed 1.0 foot) and
aircraft parking aprons built at or below ground elevation;
         i.   The applicant of a short-term recreational use facility parking
lot formally agrees to restrict access during overbank flooding events and
accepts liability for all damage caused by vehicular access during all overbank
flooding events;
         j.   Designated floodway regarding, without fill, to create a positive
non-erosive slope toward a watercourse;
         k.   Floodproofing activities to protect previously existing lawful
structures including the construction of watertight window wells, elevating
structures or construction of floodwalls around residential, commercial or
industrial principal structures where the outside toe of the floodwall shall be
no more than ten feet (10') away from the exterior wall of the existing
structure, and which are not considered substantial improvements to the
structure;
         l.   The replacement, reconstruction, or repair of a damaged building,
provided that the outside dimensions are not increased, and if the building was
damaged to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before the damage
occurred, the building will be protected from flooding to the flood protection
elevation;
         m.   Modifications to an existing building that would not increase the
enclosed floor area of the building below the 100-year frequency flood
elevation, and which will not block flood flows including but not limited to,
fireplaces, bay windows, decks, patios, and second story additions. If the
building is improved to fifty percent (50%) or more of the market value before
the modification occurred (i.e., a substantial improvement), the building will
be protected from flooding to the flood protection elevation.
      2.   Appropriate Use: Appropriate uses do not include the construction or
placement of any new structures, fill, building additions, buildings on stilts,
excavation or channel modifications done to accommodate otherwise non-
appropriate uses in the floodway, fencing (including landscaping or planting
designed to act as a fence) and storage of materials except as specifically
defined above as an appropriate use. Within the designated floodway, the
construction of an appropriate use, will be considered permissible provided
that the proposed project meets the following engineering and mitigation
criteria and is so stated in writing with supporting plans, calculations and
data by a licensed PE and provided that any structure meets the protection
requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter:
         a.   Preservation Of Flood Conveyance, So As Not To Increase Flood
Stages Upstream: For appropriate uses other than bridge or culvert crossings,
on-stream structures or dams, all effective designated floodway conveyance lost
due to the project will be replaced for all flood events up to and including
the 100-year frequency flood. In calculating effective designated floodway
conveyance, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:
            (1)   Designated floodway conveyance,
 
`K' = 1.486 AR2/3
      n
 
      where "n" is Manning's roughness factor, "A" is the effective area of the
cross section and "R" is the ratio of the area to the wetted perimeter. (See
Open Channel Hydraulics, VenTe Chow, 1959, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.)
            (2)   The same Manning's "n" value shall be used for both existing
and proposed conditions unless a recorded maintenance agreement with a Federal,
State or local unit of government can assure the proposed conditions will be
maintained or the land cover is changing from a vegetative to a nonvegetative
land cover.
            (3)   Transition sections shall be provided and used in
calculations of effective designated floodway conveyance. The following
expansion and contraction ratios shall be used unless an applicant's engineer
can prove to IDNR/OWR through engineering calculations or model tests that more
abrupt transitions may be used with the same efficiency:
            (A)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length.
            (B)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length.
            (C)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of
stream length shall be used.
            (D)   Transition sections shall be provided between cross sections
with rapid expansions and contractions and when meeting the designated floodway
delineation on adjacent properties.
            (E)   All cross sections used in the calculations shall be located
perpendicular to flood flows.
         b.   Preservation Of Floodway Storage So As Not To Increase Downstream
Flooding: Compensatory storage shall be provided for any designated floodway
storage lost due to the proposed work from the volume of fill or structures
placed and the impact of any related flood control projects. Compensatory
storage for fill or structures shall be equal to at least one and five-tenths
(1.5) times the volume of floodplain storage lost. Artificially created storage
lost due to a reduction in head loss behind a bridge shall not be required to
be replaced. The compensatory designated floodway storage shall be placed
between the proposed normal water elevation and the proposed 100-year flood
elevation. All designated floodway storage lost below the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced below the existing 10-year flood elevation.
All designated flood elevation storage lost above the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the 10-year flood elevation. All such
excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the watercourse.
If the compensatory storage will not be placed at the location of the proposed
construction, the applicant's engineer shall demonstrate through a
determination of flood discharges and water surface elevations that the
compensatory storage is hydraulically equivalent. Finally, there shall be no
reduction in floodway surface area as a result of a floodway modification,
unless such modification is necessary to reduce flooding at existing structure.
         c.   Preservation Of Floodway Velocities So As Not To Increase Stream
Erosion Or Flood Heights: For all appropriate uses, except bridges or culverts
or on-stream structures, the proposed work will not result in an increase in
the average channel or designated floodway velocities or stage, for all flood
events up to and including the 100-year frequency event. However, in the case
of bridges or culverts or on-stream structures built for the purpose of backing
up water in the stream during normal or flood flows, velocities may be
increased at the structure site if scour, erosion and sedimentation will be
avoided by the use of rip-rap or other design measures.
         d.   Construction Of New Bridges Or Culvert Crossings And Roadway
Approaches: The proposed structure shall not result in an increase of upstream
flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1') when compared to the existing
conditions for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency
event, or the upstream flood stage increases will be contained within the
channel banks (or within existing vertical extensions of the channel banks)
such as within the design protection grade of existing levees or flood walls or
within recorded flood easements. If the proposed construction will increase
upstream flood stages greater than one-tenth foot (0.1'), the developer must
contact IDNR/OWR, Dam Safety Section for a dam safety permit or waiver.
            (1)   The engineering analysis of upstream flood stages must be
calculated using the flood study flows, and corresponding flood elevations for
tailwater conditions for the flood study specified in section
4-7-5 of this chapter. Bridges and culverts must be analyzed using any commonly
accepted FEMA approved hydraulic models.
            (2)   Lost floodway storage must be compensated for per subsection
B2b of this section.
            (3)   Velocity increases must be mitigated per subsection B2c of
this section.
            (4)   If the crossing is proposed over a public water that is used
for recreational or commercial navigation, an IDNR/OWR permit must be received.
            (5)   The hydraulic analysis for the backwater caused by the bridge
showing the existing condition and proposed regulatory profile must be
submitted to IDNR/OWR for concurrence that a CLOMR is not required by
subsection B of this section.
            (6)   All excavations for the construction of the crossing shall be
designed per subsection B2h of this section.
         e.   Reconstruction Or Modification Of Existing Bridges, Culverts And
Approach Roads:
            (1)   The bridge or culvert and roadway approach reconstruction or
modification shall be constructed within no more than one- tenth foot (0.1')
increase in backwater over the existing flood profile for all flood frequencies
up to and including the 100-year event, if the existing structure is not a
source of flood damage.
            (2)   If the existing bridge or culvert and roadway approach is a
source of flood damage to buildings or structures in the upstream floodplain,
the applicant's engineer shall evaluate the feasibility of redesigning the
structure to reduce the existing backwater, taking into consideration the
effects on flood stages on upstream and downstream properties.
            (3)   The determination as to whether or not the existing crossing
is a source of flood damage and should be redesigned must be prepared in
accordance with 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3708 (Floodway Construction in
Northeastern Illinois) and submitted to IDNR/OWR for review and concurrence
before a permit is issued.
         f.   On-Stream Structures Built For The Purpose Of Backing Up Water:
Any increase in upstream flood stages greater than 0.0 foot when compared to
the existing conditions, for all flood events up to and including the 100-year
frequency event shall be contained within the channel banks (or within existing
vertical extensions of the channel banks) such as within the design protection
grade of existing levees or flood walls or within recorded flood easements. A
permit or letter indicating a permit is not required must be obtained from
IDNR/OWR for any structure built for the purpose of backing up water in the
stream during normal or flood flow. All dams and impoundment structures as
defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter shall meet the permitting requirements of 17 Ill. Adm.
Code part 3702 (Construction and Maintenance of Dams). If the proposed activity
involves a modification of the channel or floodway to accommodate an
impoundment, it shall be demonstrated that:
            (1)   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by
providing flood control, public recreation or regional stormwater detention.
            (2)   The impoundment will not prevent the migration of indigenous
fish species, which require access to upstream areas as part of their life
cycle, such as for spawning.
            (3)   The impoundment will not cause or contribute to degraded
water quality or habitat conditions. Impoundment design should include gradual
bank slopes, appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation
basin.
            (4)   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the
upstream watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as
minimize the input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals and other pollutants.
If there is more than one municipality in the upstream watershed, the
municipality in which the impoundment is constructed should coordinate with
upstream municipalities to ensure comprehensive watershed control.
            (5)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         g.   Floodproofing Of Existing Habitable, Residential And Commercial
Structures: If construction is required beyond the outside dimensions of the
existing building, the outside perimeter of the floodproofing construction
shall be placed no further than ten feet (10') from the outside of the
building. Compensation of lost storage and conveyance will not be required for
floodproofing activities.
         h.   Excavation In The Floodway: When excavation is proposed in the
design of bridges and culvert openings, including the modifications to and
replacement of existing bridge and culvert structures, or to compensate for
lost conveyance for other appropriate uses, transition sections shall be
provided for the excavation. The following expansion and contraction ratios
shall be used unless an applicant's engineer can prove to IDNR/OWR through
engineering calculations or model tests that more abrupt transitions may be
used with the same efficiency:
            (1)   When water is flowing from a narrow section to a wider
section, the water should be assumed to expand no faster than at a rate of one
foot (1') horizontal for every four feet (4') of the flooded stream's length;
            (2)   When water is flowing from a wide section to a narrow
section, the water should be assumed to contract no faster than at a rate of
one foot (1') horizontal for every one foot (1') of the flooded stream's
length; and
            (3)   When expanding or contracting flows in a vertical direction,
a minimum of one foot (1') vertical transition for every ten feet (10') of
stream length shall be used.
            (4)   Erosion/scour protection shall be provided inland upstream
and downstream of the transition sections.
         i.   Channel Modification: If the proposed activity involves a channel
modification, it shall be demonstrated that:
            (1)   There are no practicable alternatives to the activity which
would accomplish its purpose with less impact to the natural conditions of the
body of water affected. Possible alternatives include levees, bank
stabilization, floodproofing of existing structures, removal of structures from
the floodplain, clearing the channel, high flow channel, or the establishment
of a stream side buffer strip or green belt. Channel modification is acceptable
if the purpose is to restore natural conditions and improve water quality and
fish and wildlife habitat.
            (2)   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions would be
significantly improved by the modification and no significant habitat area may
be destroyed, or the impacts are offset by the replacement of an equivalent
degree of natural resource values.
            (3)   The activity has been planned and designed and will be
constructed in a way which will minimize its adverse impacts on the natural
conditions of the body of water affected, consistent with the following
criteria:
               (A)   The physical characteristics of the modified channel shall
match as closely as possible those of the existing channel in length, cross-
section, slope and sinuosity. If the existing channel has been previously
modified, restoration of more natural physical conditions should be
incorporated into channel modification design, where practical.
               (B)   Hydraulically effective transitions shall be provided at
both the upstream and downstream ends of the project, designed such that they
will prevent erosion.
               (C)   One-sided construction of a channel shall be used when
feasible. Removal of streamside (riparian) vegetation should be limited to one
side of the channel, where possible, to preserve the shading and stabilization
effects of the vegetation.
               (D)   Clearing of vegetation shall be limited to that which is
essential for construction of the channel.
               (E)   Channel banks shall be constructed with a side slope no
steeper than three to one (3:1) horizontal to vertical, wherever practicable.
Natural vegetation and gradual side slopes are the preferred methods for bank
stabilization. Where high velocities or sharp bends necessitate the use of
alternative stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred
materials. Artificial materials such as concrete, gabions or construction
rubble should be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
               (F)   All disturbed areas associated with the modification shall
be seeded or otherwise stabilized as soon as possible upon completion of
construction. Erosion blanket or an equivalent material shall be required to
stabilize disturbed channel banks prior to establishment of the vegetative
cover.
               (G)   If the existing channel contains considerable bottom
diversity such as deep pools, riffles and other similar features, such features
shall be provided in the new channel. Spawning and nesting areas and flow
characteristics compatible with fish habitat shall also be established, where
appropriate.
               (H)   A sediment basin shall be installed at the downstream end
of the modification to reduce sedimentation and degradation of downstream water
quality.
               (I)   New or relocated channels should be built in the dry and
all items of construction, including vegetation, should be completed prior to
diversion of water into the new channel.
               (J)   There shall be no increases in stage or velocity as the
channel enters or leaves the project site for any frequency flood unless
necessitated by a public flood control project or unless such an increase is
justified as part of a habitat improvement or erosion control project.
               (K)   Unless the modification is for a public flood control
project, there shall be no reduction in the volume of floodwater storage
outside the floodway as a result of the modification; and
            (4)   The project otherwise complies with the requirements of this
section.
         j.   Seeding And Stabilization Plan: For all activities located in a
floodway, a seeding and stabilization plan shall be submitted by the applicant.
         k.   Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Measures: For all activities in
the floodway, including grading, filling and excavation, in which there is
potential for erosion of exposed soil, soil erosion and sedimentation control
measures shall be employed consistent with the following criteria:
            (1)   The construction areas shall be minimized to preserve the
maximum vegetation possible. Construction shall be scheduled to minimize the
time soil is exposed and unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural
vegetation be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior
to the initiation of improvements.
            (2)   Temporary and/or permanent soil stabilization shall be
applied to denuded areas as soon as possible. As a minimum, soil stabilization
shall be provided within fifteen (15) days after final grade is reached on any
portion of the site, and within fifteen (15) days to denuded areas which may
not be at final grade but will remain undisturbed for longer than sixty (60)
days.
            (3)   Sedimentation control measures shall be installed before any
significant grading or filling is initiated on the site to prevent the movement
of eroded sediments off site or into the channel. Potential sediment control
devices include filter fences, straw bale, fences, check dams, diversion
ditches and sediment basins.
            (4)   A vegetated buffer strip of at least twenty five feet (25')
in width shall be preserved and/or re-established, where possible, along
existing channels (see subsection B2p of this section). Construction vehicle
use of channels shall be minimized. Temporary stream crossings shall be
constructed, where necessary, to minimize erosion. Necessary construction in or
along channels shall be restabilized immediately.
            (5)   Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures shall be
designed and implemented consistent with "Procedures and Standards for Urban
Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control in Illinois" (1988) also known as the
"Green Book" and "The Illinois Urban Manual" (NRCS, 1995).
         l.   Public Flood Control Projects: For public flood control projects,
the permitting requirements of this section will be considered met if the
applicant can demonstrate to IDNR/OWR through hydraulic and hydrologic
calculations that the proposed project will not singularly or cumulatively
result in increased flood heights outside the project right-of-way or easements
for all flood events up to and including the 100-year frequency event.
         m.   General Criteria For Analysis Of Flood Elevations:
            (1)   The flood profiles, flows and floodway data in the designated
floodway study, referenced in section
4-7-5 of this chapter must be used for analysis of the base conditions. If the
study data appears to be in error or conditions have changed, IDNR/OWR shall be
contacted for approval and concurrence on the appropriate base conditions data
to use.
            (2)   If the 100-year designated floodway elevation at the site of
the proposed construction is affected by backwater from a downstream receiving
stream with a larger drainage area, the proposed construction shall be shown to
meet the requirements of this section for the 100-year frequency flood
elevations of the designated floodway conditions and conditions with the
receiving stream at normal water elevations.
            (3)   If the applicant learns from IDNR/OWR, local governments or a
private owner that a downstream restrictive bridge or culvert is scheduled to
be removed, reconstructed, modified or a regional flood control project is
scheduled to be built, removed, constructed or modified within the next five
(5) years, the proposed construction shall be analyzed and shown to meet the
requirements of this section for both the existing conditions and the expected
flood profile conditions when the bridge, culvert or flood control project is
built.
         n.   Conditional Letter Of Map Revision: If the appropriate use would
result in a change in the designated floodway location or the 100-year
frequency flood elevation, the applicant shall submit to IDNR/OWR and FEMA all
information, calculations and documents necessary to be issued a conditional
designated floodway map revision and receive from IDNR/OWR a conditional
concurrence of the designated floodway change before a permit is issued. The
final designated floodway map will not be changed by FEMA until as-built plans
or record drawings of initial filling, grading, dredging, or excavating
activities are submitted and accepted by FEMA and IDNR/OWR. In the case of non-
government projects, the Municipality in incorporated areas and the County in
unincorporated areas shall concur with the proposed conditional designated
floodway map revision before IDNR/OWR approval can be given. No filling,
grading, dredging or excavating shall take place until a conditional approval
is issued. After initial filling, grading, dredging or excavating, no
activities shall take place until a final Letter of Map Revision (LOMR) is
issued by FEMA with concurrence from IDNR/OWR.
         o.   Professional Engineer's Supervision: All engineering analyses
shall be performed by or under the supervision of a registered professional
engineer.
         p.   Criteria For Floodway Construction: For all activities in the
floodway involving construction within twenty five feet (25') of the channel,
the following criteria shall be met:
            (1)   A natural vegetation buffer strip shall be preserved within
at least twenty five feet (25') of the ordinary high water mark of the channel.
            (2)   Where it is impossible to protect this buffer strip during
the construction of an appropriate use, a vegetated buffer strip shall be
established upon completion of construction.
            (3)   The use of native riparian vegetation is preferred in the
buffer strip. Access through this buffer strip shall be provided, when
necessary, for stream maintenance purposes.
   After receipt of conditional approval of the designated floodway change and
issuance of a permit and a Conditional Letter of Map Revision, construction as
necessary to change the floodway designation may proceed but no buildings or
structures or other construction that is not an appropriate use may be placed
in that area until the designated floodway map is changed and a final Letter of
Map Revision is received. The designated floodway map will be revised upon
acceptance and concurrence by IDNR/OWR and FEMA of the "as-built" plans.
      3.   State Review: For those projects listed below located in a
designated floodway, the following criteria shall be submitted to IDNR/OWR for
their review and concurrence and/or permit prior to the issuance of a permit by
a community or County delegated State permitting authority in the floodway.
         a.   An engineer's analysis of the flood profile due to a proposed
bridge pursuant to subsection B2d of this section.
         b.   An engineer's determination that an existing bridge or culvert
crossing is not a source of flood damage and the analysis indicating the
proposed flood profile, pursuant to subsection B2e of this section.
         c.   Alternative transition sections and hydraulically equivalent
storage pursuant to subsections B2a, B2b, and B2h of this section.
         d.   The construction of any IDNR/OWR projects, dams (as defined in
section
4-7-2 of this chapter) and all other Federal, State, or local units of
government projects, including projects of the Municipality or County.
         e.   An engineer's determination that a proposed bridge affected by
backwater from a downstream receiving stream may be built with a smaller
opening.
         f.   Projects which revise or establish the floodway and/or flood
profiles.
         g.   Projects in public bodies of water.
      4.   Other Permits: In addition to the other requirements of this
chapter, a development permit for a site located in a floodway shall not be
issued unless the applicant first obtains a permit or written documentation
that a permit is not required from IDNR/OWR, issued pursuant to 615 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/5 et seq. No correspondence from IDNR/OWR shall be required
if the project meets the requirements of regional permit 3. No permit from
IDNR/OWR shall be required if IDNR/OWR has delegated this responsibility to the
Village.
      5.   Permits For Dams: Any work involving the construction, modification
or removal of a dam as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter per 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for Construction
of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of
a dam. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam that does not have an
IDNR/OWR permit, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam
which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building Officer and Inspector
shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office,
and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
      6.   Activities That Do Not Require A Registered Professional Engineer's
Review: The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review. Such activities shall still meet the other
requirements of this chapter, including the mitigation requirements.
         a.   Underground and overhead utilities that:
            (1)   Do not result in any increase in existing ground elevations,
or
            (2)   Do not require the placement of aboveground structures in the
floodway, or
            (3)   In the case of underground stream crossings, the top of the
pipe or encasement is buried a minimum of three feet (3') below the existing
stream bed, and
            (4)   In the case of overhead utilities, no supporting towers are
placed in the watercourse and are designed in such a fashion as not to catch
debris.
         b.   Storm and sanitary sewer outfalls that:
            (1)   Do not extend riverward or lakeward of the existing adjacent
natural bank slope, and
            (2)   Do not result in an increase in ground elevation, and
            (3)   Are designed so as not to cause stream erosion at the outfall
location.
         c.   Construction of sidewalks, athletic fields (excluding fences),
properly anchored playground equipment and patios at grade.
         d.   Construction of shoreline and streambank protection that:
            (1)   Does not exceed one thousand feet (1,000') in length.
            (2)   Materials are not placed higher than the existing top of
bank.
            (3)   Materials are placed so as not to reduce the cross- sectional
area of the stream channel or bank of the lake.
            (4)   Vegetative stabilization and gradual side slopes are the
preferred mitigation methods for existing erosion problems. Where high channel
velocities, sharp bends or wave action necessitate the use of alternative
stabilization measures, natural rock or rip-rap are preferred materials.
Artificial materials such as concrete, construction rubble and gabions should
be avoided unless there are no practicable alternatives.
         e.   Temporary stream crossings in which:
            (1)   The approach roads will be five-tenths foot (0.5') (1/2 foot)
or less above natural grade.
            (2)   The crossing will allow stream flow to pass without backing
up the water above the stream bank vegetation line or above any drainage tile
or outfall invert.
            (3)   The top of the roadway fill in the channel will be at least
two feet (2') below the top of the lowest bank. Any fill in the channel shall
be nonerosive material, such as rip-rap or gravel.
            (4)   All disturbed stream banks will be seeded or otherwise
stabilized as soon as possible upon installation and again upon removal of
construction.
            (5)   The access road and temporary crossings will be removed
within one year after authorization. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-8: OCCUPATION AND USE OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS WHERE FLOODWAYS ARE NOT
IDENTIFIED:
   A.   Development: In floodplains, (including AE, AH, AO and unnumbered A
Zones) where no floodways have been identified and no base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevations have been established by FEMA, and draining more
than a square mile, no development shall be permitted unless the cumulative
effect of the proposals, when combined with all other existing and anticipated
uses and structures, shall not significantly impede or increase the flow and
passage of the floodwaters nor significantly increase the base flood or 100-
year frequency flood elevation.
      1.   Development Permit: No person, firm, corporation, or governmental
body, not exempted by State law, shall commence any development in a floodplain
without first obtaining a development permit from the Building Officer and
Inspector. Application for a development permit shall be made on a form
provided by the Building Officer and Inspector. The application shall be
accompanied by drawings of the site, drawn to scale showing property line
dimensions; and existing grade elevations and all changes in grade resulting
from excavation or filling, sealed by a licensed engineer, architect or
surveyor; the location and dimensions of all buildings and additions to
buildings; and the elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) of all
proposed buildings subject to the requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter.
   The application for a development permit shall also include the following
information:
         a.   A detailed description of the proposed activity, its purpose, and
intended use;
         b.   Site location (including legal description) of the property,
drawn to scale, on the designated floodway maps, indicating whether it is
proposed to be in an incorporated or unincorporated area;
         c.   Anticipated dates of initiation and completion of activity.
         d.   Plans of the proposed activity shall be provided which include as
a minimum:
            (1)   A vicinity map showing the site of the activity, name of the
waterway, boundary lines, names of roads in the vicinity of the site, graphic
or numerical scale and north arrow;
            (2)   A plan view of the project and engineering study reach
showing existing and proposed conditions including principal dimensions of the
structure or work, elevations, using the NAVD 1988, adjacent property lines and
ownership, drainage and flood control easements, distance between proposed
activity and navigation channel (when the proposed construction is in or near a
commercially navigable body of water), floodplain limit, location and
orientation of cross-sections, north arrow, and a graphical or numerical scale;
            (3)   Cross-section views of the project perpendicular to the flow
of floodwater and engineering study reach showing existing and proposed
conditions including principal dimensions of the work as shown in plan view,
existing and proposed elevations, normal water elevation, 10-year frequency
flood elevation, 100-year frequency flood elevation, and graphical or numerical
scales (horizontal and vertical); and
            (4)   A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan for disturbed
areas. This plan shall include a description of the sequence of grading
activities and the temporary sediment and erosion control measures to be
implemented to mitigate their effects. This plan shall also include a
description of final stabilization and revegetation measures, and the
identification of a responsible party to ensure postconstruction maintenance.
         e.   Engineering calculations and supporting data shall be submitted
showing that the proposed work will meet the criteria of subsection B of this
section.
         f.   Any and all other local, State and Federal permits or approvals
that may be required for this type of development.
      2.   Calculation And Documentation: Based on the best available existing
data according to Federal, State or other sources, the Building Officer and
Inspector shall compare the elevation of the site to the base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation. Should no elevation information exist for the site,
the developer's engineer shall calculate the elevation according to subsection
4-7-5D of this chapter. Any development located on land that can be shown to
have been higher than the base flood elevation of the current Flood Insurance
Rate Map identification is not in the floodplain and, therefore, not subject to
the requirements of this chapter. The Building Officer and Inspector shall
maintain documentation of the existing ground elevation at the development site
and certification that this ground elevation existed prior to the date of the
site's first Flood Insurance Rate Map identification.
      3.   Permits: The Building Officer and Inspector shall be responsible for
obtaining from the applicant copies of all other Federal, State, and local
permits, approvals or waivers that may be required for this type of activity.
The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue the development permit
unless all required Federal, State, and local permits have been obtained.
   B.   Preventing Increased Damages: No development in the floodplain, where a
floodway has not been determined shall create a damaging or potentially
damaging increase in flood heights or velocity or threat to public health,
safety and welfare or impair the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
the floodway or channel or impair existing water quality or aquatic habitat.
Construction impacts shall be minimized by appropriate mitigation methods as
called for in this chapter.
      1.   Standards: Within all riverine floodplains where the floodway has
not been determined, the following standards shall apply:
         a.   The developer shall have a registered professional engineer state
in writing and show through supporting plans, calculations and data that the
project meets the engineering requirements of subsections
4-7-7B2a through B2l of this chapter, for the entire floodplain as calculated
under the provisions of subsection
4-7-5D of this chapter. As an alternative, the developer should have an
engineering study performed to determine a floodway and submit that engineering
study to IDNR/OWR for acceptance as a designated floodway. Upon acceptance of
the floodway by IDNR/OWR and FEMA, the developer shall then demonstrate that
the project meets the requirements of section
4-7-7 of this chapter for the designated floodway. The floodway shall be
defined according to the definition of "designated floodway" in section
4-7-2 of this chapter.
         b.   A development permit shall not be issued unless the applicant
first obtains a permit from IDNR/OWR or written documentation that a permit is
not required from IDNR/OWR.
         c.   Any work involving the construction, modification or removal of a
dam as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter per 17 Ill. Adm. Code part 3702 (Rules for Construction
of Dams) shall obtain an IDNR/OWR permit prior to the start of construction of
a dam. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam that does not have an
IDNR/OWR permit, the Building Officer and Inspector shall immediately notify
the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office. If the Building Officer and Inspector finds a dam
which is believed to be in unsafe condition, the Building Officer and Inspector
shall immediately notify the owner of the dam, the IDNR/OWR Bartlett Office,
and the Illinois Emergency Management Agency (IEMA).
         d.   The following activities may be permitted without a registered
professional engineer's review or calculation of a base flood elevation and
designated floodway. Such activities shall still meet the other requirements of
this chapter:
            (1)   Bridge and culvert crossings of streams in rural areas
meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit number 2;
            (2)   Barge fleeting facilities meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit no. 3;
            (3)   Aerial utility crossings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit no. 4;
            (4)   Minor boat docks meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide
permit no. 5;
            (5)   Minor, non-obstructive activities meeting conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit no. 6; activities (not involving fill or positive change
in grade) are covered by this permit;
            (6)   Outfall structures and drainage ditch outlets meeting
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit no. 7;
            (7)   Underground pipeline and utility crossings meeting the
conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit no. 8;
            (8)   Bank stabilization projects meeting the conditions of IDNR/
OWR Statewide permit no. 9;
            (9)   Accessory structures and additions to existing residential
buildings meeting the conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit no. 10;
            (10)   Minor maintenance dredging activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit no. 11;
            (11)   Bridge and culvert replacement structures and bridge
widenings meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR Statewide permit no. 12;
            (12)   Temporary construction activities meeting conditions of
IDNR/OWR Statewide permit no. 13;
            (13)   Special uses of public waters meeting conditions of IDNR/OWR
Statewide permit no. 14; and
            (14)   Any development determined by IDNR/OWR to be located
entirely within a flood fringe area shall be exempt from State floodway permit
requirements.
         e.   The flood carrying capacity within any altered or relocated
watercourse shall be maintained.
      2.   Compensatory Storage: Whenever any portion of a floodplain is
authorized for use, the volume of space which will be occupied by the
authorized fill or structure below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be compensated for and balanced by a hydraulically equivalent
volume of excavation taken from below the base flood or 100-year frequency
flood elevation. The excavation volume shall be at least equal one and five-
tenths (1.5) times to the volume of storage lost due to the fill or structure.
In the case of streams and watercourses, such excavation shall be made opposite
or adjacent to the areas so filled or occupied. All floodplain storage lost
below the existing 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the proposed
10-year flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year
flood elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation.
All such excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and openly to the
watercourse. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-9: PERMITTING REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL FLOODPLAIN AREAS:
In addition to the requirements found in sections
4-7-6,
4-7-7 and
4-7-8 of this chapter, for development in flood fringes, designated floodways
and floodplains where no floodways have been identified, the following
requirements shall be met:
   A.   Public Health Standards:
      1.   No developments in the floodplain shall include locating or storing
chemicals, explosives, buoyant materials, animal wastes, fertilizers, flammable
liquids, pollutants, or other hazardous or toxic materials below the flood
protection elevation (FPE) unless such materials are stored in a floodproofed
and anchored storage tank and certified by a PE or floodproofed building
constructed according to the requirements of section
4-7-10 of this chapter.
      2.   Public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas and electric
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
      3.   Public sanitary sewer systems and water supply systems shall be
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters
into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters.
      4.   New and replacement water supply systems, wells, sanitary sewer
lines and on-site waste disposal systems may be permitted providing all
manholes or other above ground openings located below the FPE are watertight.
      5.   All other activities, defined as development, such as pools, fences,
filling, paving, etc., shall be designed so as not to alter flood flows or
increase potential flood damages.
   B.   Carrying Capacity And Notification: For all projects involving channel
modification, fill or stream maintenance (including levees), the flood carrying
capacity of the watercourse shall be maintained. In addition, the Village shall
notify adjacent communities in writing thirty (30) days prior to the issuance
of a permit for the alteration or relocation of the watercourse.
   C.   Protecting Buildings:
      1.   In addition to the damage prevention requirements in subsections
4-7-6B and
4-7-7B of this chapter, all buildings located within a floodplain, shall be
protected from flood damage below the flood protection elevation. This building
protection criteria applies to the following situations:
         a.   Construction or placement of a new building or alteration or
addition to an existing building valued at more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or seventy (70) square feet.
         b.   Substantial improvements or structural alterations made to an
existing building that increase the floor area by more than twenty percent
(20%) or equal or exceed the market value by fifty percent (50%). Alteration
shall be figured cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially
improved, the existing structure and the addition must meet the flood
protection standards of this section.
         c.   Repairs made to a substantially damaged building. These repairs
shall be figured cumulatively during a 10-year period. If substantially damaged
the entire structure must meet the flood protection standards of this section.
         d.   Installing a manufactured home on a new site or a new
manufactured home on an existing site (the building protection requirements do
not apply to returning a manufactured home to the same site it lawfully
occupied before it was removed to avoid flood damage).
         e.   Installing a travel trailer or recreational vehicle on a site for
more than one hundred eighty (180) days per year; and
         f.   Repetitive loss to an existing building as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter.
      2.   This building protection requirement may be met by one of the
following methods:
         a.   The building may be constructed on permanent land fill in
accordance with the following:
            (1)   The lowest floor (including basement) shall be at or above
the flood protection elevation.
            (2)   The fill shall be placed in layers no greater than six inches
(6") before compaction and should extend at least ten feet (10') beyond the
foundation before sloping below the flood protection elevation.
            (3)   The top of the fill shall be above the flood protection
elevation. However, the ten foot (10') minimum may be waived if a structural
engineer certifies an alternative method to protect the building from damages
due to hydrostatic pressures.
            (4)   The fill shall be protected against erosion and scour during
flooding by vegetative cover, riprap, or other structural measure.
            (5)   The fill shall be composed of rock or soil and not include
debris or refuse material.
            (6)   The fill shall not adversely affect the flow of surface
drainage from or onto neighboring properties and, when necessary, include
stormwater management techniques such as swales or basins.
         b.   The building may be elevated in accordance with the following:
            (1)   The building or improvements shall be elevated on stilts,
piles, walls, crawlspace, or other foundation that is permanently open to flood
waters.
            (2)   If walls are used, all enclosed areas below the flood
protection elevation shall address hydrostatic pressures by allowing the
automatic entry and exit of flood waters. Designs must either be certified by a
licensed professional engineer or by having a minimum of one permanent opening
on each wall no more than one foot (1') above grade with a minimum of two (2)
openings. The openings shall provide a total net area of not less than one
square inch for every one square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding
below the base flood elevation.
            (3)   The lowest floor and all electrical, heating, ventilating,
plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and utility meters shall be located at
or above the flood protection elevation.
            (4)   The foundation and supporting members shall be anchored,
designed, and certified so as to minimize exposure to hydrodynamic forces such
as current, waves, ice, and floating debris.
            (5)   All structural components below the flood protection
elevation shall be constructed of materials resistant to flood damage.
            (6)   Water and sewer pipes, electrical and telephone lines,
submersible pumps, and other service facilities may be located below the flood
protection elevation provided they are waterproofed.
            (7)   The area below the flood protection elevation shall be used
solely for parking or building access and not later modified or occupied as
habitable space.
            (8)   In lieu of the above criteria, the design methods to comply
with these requirements may be certified by a licensed professional engineer or
architect.
         c.   The building may be constructed with a crawlspace located below
the flood protection elevation provided that the following conditions are met:
            (1)   The building must be designed and adequately anchored to
resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
            (2)   Any enclosed area below the flood protection elevation shall
have openings that equalize hydrostatic pressures by allowing for the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of one opening on each wall having a
total net area of not less than one square inch per one square foot of enclosed
area. The openings shall be no more than one foot (1') above grade.
            (3)   The interior grade of the crawlspace below the flood
protection elevation must not be more than two feet (2') below the lowest
adjacent exterior grade.
            (4)   The interior height of the crawlspace measured from the
interior grade of the crawl to the top of the foundations wall must not exceed
four feet (4') at any point.
            (5)   An adequate drainage system must be installed to remove
floodwaters from the interior area of the crawlspace within a reasonable period
of time after a flood event.
            (6)   Portions of the building below the flood protection elevation
must be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage.
            (7)   Utility systems within the crawlspace must be elevated above
the flood protection elevation.
         d.   Non-residential buildings may be structurally dry floodproofed
(in lieu of elevation) provided a licensed professional engineer or architect
submits a FEMA Floodproofing Certificate, documenting that:
            (1)   Below the flood protection elevation, the structure and
attendant utility facilities are watertight and capable of resisting the
effects of the base flood, including sewer back flow.
            (2)   The building design accounts for flood velocities, duration,
rate of rise, hydrostatic and hydrodynamic forces, the effects of buoyancy, and
the impact from debris and ice.
            (3)   Floodproofing measures will be incorporated into the building
design and operable without human intervention and without an outside source of
electricity.
            (4)   Levees, berms, floodwalls and similar works are not
considered floodproofing for the purpose of this subsection.
         e.   Manufactured homes or travel trailers to be permanently installed
on site for more than one hundred eighty (180) days in any year shall be:
            (1)   Elevated to or above the flood protection elevation.
            (2)   Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement
by being tied down in accordance with the rules and regulations for the
Illinois Mobile Home Tie-Down Act issued pursuant to 77 Ill. Adm. Code section
870.
         f.   Travel trailers and recreational vehicles on site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days per year shall meet the elevation requirement and
anchoring requirements of 77 Ill. Adm. Code section 903.4 unless the following
conditions are met:
            (1)   The vehicle must be either self-propelled or towable by a
light duty truck.
            (2)   The hitch must remain on the vehicle at all times.
            (3)   The vehicle must not be attached to external structures such
as decks and porches.
            (4)   The vehicle must be designed solely for recreation, camping,
travel, or seasonal use rather than as a permanent dwelling.
            (5)   The vehicles largest horizontal projections must be no larger
than four hundred (400) square feet.
            (6)   The vehicle's wheels must remain on axles and inflated.
            (7)   Air conditioning units must be attached to the frame so as to
be safe for movement out of the floodplain.
            (8)   Propane tanks and electrical and sewage connections must be
quick-disconnect and be above the base flood elevation.
            (9)   The vehicle must be licensed and titled as a recreational
vehicle or park model, and must either be entirely supported by jacks, or have
a hitch jack permanently mounted, have the tires touching the ground and be
supported by block in a manner that will allow the block to be easily removed
by use of the hitch jack.
         g.   Garages, sheds or other minor accessory structures constructed
ancillary to an existing residential use may be constructed with the lowest
floor below the flood protection elevation provided the following conditions
are met:
            (1)   The structure must be non-habitable.
            (2)   All areas below the base flood or 100-year frequency flood
elevation shall be constructed with waterproof material.
            (3)   The structure must be used only for the storage of vehicles
and tools and cannot be modified later into another use.
            (4)   The structure must be located outside of the floodway or have
the appropriate State and/or Federal permits.
            (5)   Below the base flood elevation, the structure must be built
of materials not susceptible to flood damage.
            (6)   All utilities, plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical must be elevated above the flood protection elevation.
            (7)   The structure must have at least one permanent opening on
each wall not more than one foot (1') above grade with one square inch of
opening for every one square foot of floor area.
            (8)   The structure must be less than fifteen thousand dollars
($15,000.00) in market value or replacement cost whichever is greater or less
than five hundred seventy six (576) square feet (24' x 24').
            (9)   The structure shall be anchored to resist flotation and
overturning.
            (10)   All flammable or toxic materials (gasoline, paint,
insecticides, fertilizers, etc.) shall be stored above the flood protection
elevation.
            (11)   The lowest floor elevation should be documented and the
owner advised of the flood insurance implications.
            (12)   If located in a designated floodway, the structure shall be
constructed and placed on a building site so as not to block flood flows nor
reduce floodway storage and shall also meet the appropriate use criteria of
section
4-7-7 of this chapter and all other applicable requirements of sections
4-7-7 and
4-7-8 of this chapter and this section.
         h.   Existing buildings located within a designated floodway shall
also meet the more restrictive appropriate use standards included in section
4-7-7 of this chapter. Non-conforming structures located in a designated
floodway may remain in use and may only be enlarged, replaced or structurally
altered in accordance with section
4-7-8 of this chapter. A non- conforming structure damaged by flood, fire, wind
or other natural or man-made disaster may be restored unless the damage exceeds
fifty percent (50%) of its market value before it was damaged, in which case it
shall conform to this chapter.
         i.   Construction of new or substantially improved critical facilities
shall be located outside the limits of the floodplain. Construction of new
critical facilities shall be permissible within the floodplain if no feasible
alternative site is available. Critical facilities constructed within the SFHA
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or structurally dry
floodproofed to the 500-year flood frequency elevation or three feet (3') above
the level of the 100-year flood frequency elevation whichever is greater.
Floodproofing and sealing measures must be taken to ensure that toxic
substances will not be displaced by or released into floodwaters. Access routes
elevated to or above the level of the base flood elevation shall be provided to
all critical facilities.
   D.   Filing Fee And Engineer's Services:
      1.   A filing fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid to the
Village Clerk at the time of filing of any application under this chapter.
      2.   The cost incurred by the Village for the review of applications,
plans and specifications, and for inspection of any development, by the Village
Engineer, or by a registered professional engineer under the employ or contract
of the Village, shall be paid by the applicant. Such costs shall be paid to the
Village Clerk at the time of issuance or denial of any permit under this
chapter, or at the time of the issuance or denial of any variance under this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-10: OTHER DEVELOPMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The Board of Trustees shall take into account flood hazards, to the extent that
they are known in all official actions related to land management, use and
development.
   A.   New subdivisions, manufactured home parks, annexation agreements and
planned unit developments (PUDs) within the floodplain shall be reviewed to
assure that the proposed developments are consistent with sections
4-7-6,
4-7-7,
4-7-8 and
4-7-9 of this chapter and the need to minimize flood damage. Plats or plans for
new subdivisions, manufactured home parks and planned unit developments (PUDs)
shall include a signed statement by a registered professional engineer that the
plat or plans account for changes in the drainage of surface waters in
accordance with the Plat Act1. 765 ILCS 205/2.1 .
   B.   Proposals for new subdivisions, manufactured home parks, travel trailer
parks, planned unit developments (PUDs) and additions to manufactured home
parks and additions to subdivisions shall include base flood or 100-year
frequency flood elevation data and floodway delineations. Where this
information is not available from an existing study filed with the Federal,
State or other sources, the applicant's engineer shall be responsible for
calculating the base flood or 100-year frequency flood elevation per subsection
4-7-5D of this chapter and the floodway delineation per the definition of
"designated floodway" in section
4-7-2 of this chapter and submitting it for review and approval as best
available regulatory data.
   C.   Streets, blocks, lots, parks and other public grounds shall be located
and laid out in such a manner as to preserve and utilize natural streams and
channels. Wherever possible, the floodplains shall be included within parks or
other public grounds.
   D.   The Board of Trustees shall not approve any planned unit development
(PUD) or plat of subdivision located outside the corporate limits unless such
agreement or plat is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord.
2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-11: VARIANCES:
No variances shall be granted to any development located in "designated
floodway", as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter. However, when a development proposal is located outside
of a designated floodway, and whenever the standards of this chapter place
undue hardship on a specific development proposal, the applicant may apply to
the Village for a variance. The Plan Commission shall review the applicant's
request for a variance and shall submit its recommendation to the Board of
Trustees.
   A.   No variance shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates that all
of the following conditions are met:
      1.   The development activity cannot be located outside the SFHA;
      2.   An exceptional hardship would result if the variance were not
granted;
      3.   The relief requested is the minimum necessary;
      4.   There will be no additional threat to public health, safety,
beneficial stream uses and functions, especially aquatic habitat or creation of
a nuisance;
      5.   There will be no additional public expense for flood protection,
lost environmental stream uses and functions, rescue or relief operations,
policing, or repairs to streambeds and banks, roads, utilities or other public
facilities;
      6.   The provisions of subsections
4-7-6B and
4-7-8B of this chapter shall still be met;
      7.   The activity is not in a designated floodway;
      8.   The applicant's circumstances are unique and do not establish a
pattern inconsistent with the intent of the NFIP;
      9.   All other required State and Federal permits or waivers have been
obtained; and
      10.   The granting of the variance will not alter the essential character
of the area involved including existing stream uses.
   B.   The Building Officer and Inspector shall notify an applicant in writing
that a variance from the requirements of section
4-7-9 of this chapter, that would lessen the degree of protection to a building
will:
      1.   Result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts
as high as twenty five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of
insurance coverage;
      2.   Increase the risks to life and property; and
      3.   Require that the applicant proceed with knowledge of these risks and
that he will acknowledge in writing that he assumes the risk and liability.
   C.   Variances requested in connection with restoration of a historic site
or historic structure as defined in section
4-7-2 of this chapter, "historic structures", may be granted using criteria
more permissive than the requirements of this section, subject to the
conditions that:
      1.   The repair or rehabilitation is the minimum necessary to preserve
the historic character and design of the structure; and
      2.   The repair or rehabilitation will not result in the structure being
removed as a certified historic structure. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-12: DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY:
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on available information
derived from engineering and scientific methods of study. Larger floods may
occur or flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This
chapter does not imply that development, either inside or outside of the
floodplain, will be free from flooding or damage. This chapter does not create
liability on the part of the Village or any officer or employee thereof for any
flood damage that results from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision made lawfully thereunder. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-13: PENALTY:
Failure to obtain a permit for development in the floodplain or failure to
comply with the conditions of a permit or a variance shall be deemed to be a
violation of this chapter. Upon due investigation, the Building Officer and
Inspector or Municipal Attorney may determine that a violation of the minimum
standards of this chapter exists. The Building Officer and Inspector or
Municipal Attorney shall notify the owner in writing of such violation.
   A.   If such owner fails after ten (10) days' notice to correct the
violation:
      1.   The Village may make application to the Circuit Court for an
injunction requiring conformance with this chapter or make such other order as
the court deems necessary to secure compliance with this chapter.
      2.   Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or more than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each offense.
      3.   A separate offense shall be deemed committed upon each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
      4.   The Village may record a notice of violation on the title to the
property.
   B.   The Building Officer and Inspector shall inform the owner that any such
violation is considered a willful act to increase flood damages and, therefore,
may cause coverage by a standard flood insurance policy to be suspended.
   C.   The Building Officer and Inspector is authorized to issue an order
requiring the suspension of the subject development. The stop-work order shall
be in writing, shall indicate the reason for the issuance, and shall order the
action, if necessary, to resolve the circumstances requiring the stop- work
order. The stop-work order constitutes a suspension of the permit.
   D.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the Building Officer and Inspector. Written notice
of such hearing shall be served on the permittee and shall state: 1) the
grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation; and 2) the time
and place of the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to present evidence on his/her behalf. At the conclusion of the
hearing, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall determine whether the permit
shall be suspended or revoked.
   E.   Nothing herein shall prevent the Village from taking such other lawful
action to prevent or remedy any violations. All costs connected therewith shall
accrue to the person or persons responsible. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
4-7-14: ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS:
This chapter repeals and replaces other ordinances adopted by the Village of
Minooka Board of Trustees to fulfill the requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program. However, this chapter does not repeal the original
resolution or ordinance adopted to achieve eligibility in the program. Nor does
this chapter repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing annexation agreements,
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. Where this chapter and other
ordinance easements, covenants or deed restrictions conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 2019-01,
1-22-2019)
4-7-15: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be deemed separable and the
invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall not affect the validity of the
remainder. (Ord. 2019-01, 1-22-2019)
CHAPTER 8
STORMWATER DRAINAGE AND DETENTION
SECTION:
4-8-1 Authority And Purpose
4-8-2 Definitions
4-8-3 Applicability
4-8-4 Drainage Plan Submittal Requirements
4-8-4-1: Basic Drainage Plan
4-8-4-2: Advanced Drainage Plan
4-8-5 Minimization Of Increases In Runoff Volumes And Rates
4-8-6 Water Quality And Multiple Uses
4-8-7 Design Criteria, Standards And Methods
4-8-8 Accommodating Flows From Upstream Tributary Areas
4-8-9 Early Completion Of Detention Facilities
4-8-10 Reserved
4-8-11 Maintenance Responsibility
4-8-12 Administration
4-8-13 Severability
4-8-14 Penalties
4-8-1: AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Purpose:
      1.   This Chapter is enacted pursuant to the police powers granted to the
Village by the Illinois Compiled Statutes.
      2.   The purpose of this Chapter is to diminish threats to public health,
safety and welfare caused by runoff of excessive stormwater from new
development and redevelopment. This excessive stormwater could result in the
inundation of damageable properties, the erosion and destabilization of
downstream channels, and the pollution of valuable stream and lake resources.
The cause of increases in stormwater runoff quantity and rate and impairment of
quality is the development and improvement of land and as such this Chapter
regulates these activities to prevent adverse impacts.
   B.   Objectives: This Chapter is adopted to accomplish the following
objectives:
      1.   To assure that new development does not increase the drainage or
flood hazards to others, or create unstable conditions susceptible to erosion;
      2.   To protect new buildings and major improvements to buildings from
flood damage due to increased stormwater runoff;
      3.   To protect human life and health from the hazards of increased
flooding on a watershed basis;
      4.   To lessen the burden on the taxpayer for flood control projects,
repairs to flood-damaged public facilities and utilities, correction of channel
erosion problems, and flood rescue and relief operations caused by increased
stormwater runoff quantities from new development;
      5.   To protect, conserve and promote the orderly development of land and
water resources;
      6.   To preserve the natural hydrologic and hydraulic functions of
watercourses and floodplains and to protect water quality and aquatic habitats:
      7.   To preserve the natural characteristics of stream corridors in order
to moderate flood and stormwater impacts, improve water quality, reduce soil
erosion, protect aquatic and riparian habitat, provide recreational
opportunities, provide aesthetic benefits and enhance community and economic
development.
   C.   Incorporation and Adoption of the Will County Stormwater Management
Ordinance: The Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance found in Title V,
Chapter 55 of the Will County Ordinances is hereby adopted by the Village and
incorporated as if fully set forth herein. In the event of a conflict between
the Village Ordinances and the Will County Stormwater Management Ordinance, the
more stringent of the two requirements shall apply. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994;
amd. Ord. 2020-17, 6-23-2020)
4-8-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADVERSE IMPACTS: Any deleterious impact on water resources or wetlands
affecting their beneficial uses including recreation, aesthetics, aquatic
habitat, quality and quantity.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who executes the necessary
forms to procure official approval of a development or permit to carry out
construction of a development from the Village of Minooka.
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION: The elevation at all locations delineating the level of
flooding resulting from the 100-year frequency flood event.
BYPASS FLOWS: Stormwater runoff from upstream properties tributary to a
property's drainage system but not under its control.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or groundwater flows, either
perennial or intermittently.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION: Alteration of a channel by changing the physical
dimensions or materials of its bed or banks. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody rooted
vegetation. Channel modification does not include the clearing of debris or
removal of trash.
COMPENSATORY STORAGE: An artificially excavated, hydraulicly equivalent volume
of storage within the floodplain used to balance the loss of natural flood
storage capacity when fill or structures are placed within the floodplain.
CONDUIT: Any channel, pipe, sewer or culvert used for the conveyance or
movement of water, whether open or closed.
DETENTION BASIN: A facility constructed or modified to provide for the
temporary storage of stormwater runoff and the controlled release by gravity of
this runoff at a prescribed rate during and after a flood or storm.
DETENTION TIME: The mean residence time of stormwater in a detention basin.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
   A.   Preparation of a plot of subdivision;
   B.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any addition
to a building;
   C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site for a
manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than one
hundred eighty (180) days;
   D.   Construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
   E.   Redevelopment of a site;
   F.   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
   G.   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste;
   H.   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
deviation, direction or velocity of stormwater flows from a property.
DRAINAGE PLAN: A plan, including engineering drawings and supporting
calculations, which describes the existing stormwater drainage system and
environmental features, as well as the drainage system and environmental
features which are proposed after development of a property.
DRY BASIN: A detention basin designed to drain completely after temporary
storage of stormwater flows and to normally be dry over the majority of its
bottom area.
EROSION: The general process whereby earth is removed by flowing water or wave
action.
EXCESS STORMWATER RUNOFF: The volume and rate of flow of stormwater discharged
from an urbanized drainage area which is or will be in excess of that volume
and rate which pertained before urbanization.
FLOOD FRINGE: That portion of the floodplain outside of the regulatory
floodway.
FLOODPLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the base flood or the 100-year frequency flood
elevation. The floodplain is also known as the special flood hazard area
(SFHA).
FLOODWAY: The channel and that portion of the floodplain adjacent to a stream
or watercourse which is needed to store and convey the anticipated existing and
future 100-year frequency flood discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase
in stage due to any loss of flood conveyance or storage and no more than a ten
percent (10%) increase in velocities.
HYDROGRAPH: A graph showing for a given location on a stream or conduit, the
flow-rate with respect to time.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system needed to store and
convey flows beyond the capacity of the minor drainage system.
MINOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM: That portion of a drainage system designed for the
convenience of the public. It consists of street gutters, storm sewers, small
open channels, and swales and, where manmade, is usually designed to handle the
10-year runoff event or less.
MITIGATION: Mitigation includes those measures necessary to minimize the
negative effects which stormwater drainage and development activities might
have on the public health, safety and welfare. Examples of mitigation include
compensatory storage, soil erosion and sedimentation control and channel
restoration.
NATURAL: Conditions resulting from physical, chemical and biological processes
without intervention by man.
100-YEAR EVENT: A rainfall, runoff or flood event having a one percent (1%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
PEAK FLOW: The maximum rate of flow of water at a given point in a channel or
conduit.
POSITIVE DRAINAGE: Provision for overland paths for all areas of a property
including depressional areas that may also be drained by storm sewer.
PROPERTY: A parcel of real estate.
REGULATORY FLOODWAY: The channel, including on-stream lakes, and that portion
of the flood plain adjacent to a stream or watercourse as designated by the
IDNR/OWR and generally depicted on the FEMA FIRM map, which is needed to store
and convey the existing and anticipated future 100-year frequency flood
discharge with no more than a 0.1 foot increase in stage due to the loss of
flood conveyance or storage, and no more than a ten percent (10%) increase in
velocities. Refer to Title 4, Chapter 7, Section
4-7-2 "Definitions" for information on designated floodways within the Village
limits within Will County, Grundy County and Kendall County.
RETENTION BASIN: A facility designed to completely retain a specified amount of
stormwater runoff without release except by means of evaporation, infiltration,
emergency bypass or pumping.
SEDIMENTATION: The process that deposits soils, debris and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in bodies of water or stormwater drainage
systems.
STORM SEWER: A closed conduit for conveying collected stormwater.
STORMWATER DRAINAGE SYSTEM: All means, natural or manmade, used for conducting
stormwater to, through or from a drainage area to the point of final outlet
from a property. The stormwater drainage system includes but it not limited to
any of the following: conduits and appurtenance features, canals, channels,
ditches, streams, culverts, streets, storm sewers, detention basins, swales and
pumping stations.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within
a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of
the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground or are
collected in channels or conduits.
TIME OF CONCENTRATION: The elapsed time for stormwater to flow from the most
hydraulicly remote point in a drainage basin to a particular point of interest
in that watershed.
TRIBUTARY WATERSHED: All of the land surface area that contributes runoff to a
given point.
2-YEAR EVENT: A runoff, rainfall or flood event having a fifty percent (50%)
chance of occurring in any given year.
WET BASIN: A detention basin designed to maintain a permanent pool of water
after the temporary storage of stormwater runoff. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994; amd.
Ord. 2020-17, 6-23-2020)
4-8-3: APPLICABILITY:
This Chapter shall apply to all development in the Village. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-
1994)
4-8-4: DRAINAGE PLAN SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Each applicant shall submit the following information, depending on
development size, to ensure that the provisions of this Chapter are met. The
submittal shall include sufficient information to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the property, the potential adverse impacts of the
development on water resources both on-site and downstream, and the
effectiveness of the proposed drainage plan in managing stormwater runoff. The
applicant shall certify on the drawings that all clearing, grading, drainage
and construction shall be accomplished in strict conformance with the drainage
plan. The following information shall be submitted for both existing and
proposed property conditions.
   B.   Properties smaller than ten (10) acres shall submit only the basic
drainage plan called for in Section
4-8-4-1. Properties larger than ten (10) acres shall comply with the submittal
requirements of both the basic drainage plan and the advanced drainage plan of
Section
4-8-4-2. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-4-1: BASIC DRAINAGE PLAN:
   A.   Topographic Map: A topographic survey of the property at one foot (1')
contours under existing and proposed conditions, and area upstream and
downstream, necessary to determine off-site impacts of the proposed drainage
plan. The map shall be keyed to a consistent datum specified by the Village.
   B.   Drainage System: Mapping and descriptions, where relevant, of existing
and proposed drainage system features of the property and immediate vicinity
including:
      1.   The banks and center line of streams and channels;
      2.   Shoreline of lakes, ponds and detention basins;
      3.   Farm drains and tiles;
      4.   Sub-watershed boundaries within the property;
      5.   Watershed soils classifications;
      6.   The property's location within the large watershed;
      7.   Location, size and slope of stormwater conduits and drainage swales;
      8.   Sanitary or combined sewers;
      9.   Depressional storage areas;
      10.   Delineation of upstream and downstream drainage features and
watersheds which might be affected by the development;
      11.   Detention facilities:
      12.   Roads and streets and associated stormwater inlets;
      13.   Base flood elevation, and regulatory floodway where identified for
the property; and
      14.   Basis of design for the final drainage network components.
   C.   Environmental Features: A depiction of environmental features of the
property and immediate vicinity including the following:
      1.   The limits of wetland areas;
      2.   Any designated natural areas; and
      3.   Any proposed environmental mitigation features. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-
1994)
4-8-4-2: ADVANCED DRAINAGE PLAN:
The same information as required in Section
4-8-4-1 is required for properties larger than ten (10) acres along with the
following additional information for the minor drainage system's design runoff
event and the 100-year runoff event of critical duration:
   A.   Elevations and maps of 100-year flooding;
   B.   Cross section data for open channel flow paths and designated overland
flow paths;
   C.   Direction of stormflows;
   D.   Flow rates and velocities at representative points in the drainage
system; and
   E.   A statement by the design engineer of the drainage system's provisions
for handling events greater than the 100-year's runoff. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-
1994)
4-8-5: MINIMIZATION OF INCREASES IN RUNOFF VOLUMES AND RATES:
In the selection of a drainage plan for a development, the applicant shall
evaluate and implement, where practicable, site design features which minimize
the increase in runoff volumes and rates from the site. The applicant's
drainage plan submittal shall include evaluations of site design features which
are consisted with the following hierarchy:
   A.   Minimize impervious surfaces on the property, consistent with the needs
of the project;
   B.   Attenuate flows by use of open vegetated swales and natural depressions
and preserve existing natural stream channels;
   C.   Infiltrate runoff on-site;
   D.   Provide stormwater retention structures;
   E.   Provide stormwater detention structures; and
   F.   Construct storm sewers. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-6: WATER QUALITY AND MULTIPLE USES:
   A.   The drainage system should be designed to minimize adverse water
quality impacts downstream and on the property itself. Detention basins shall
incorporate design features to capture stormwater runoff pollutants. Retention
and infiltration of stormwater shall be promoted throughout the property's
drainage system to reduce the volume of stormwater runoff and to reduce the
quantity of runoff pollutants.
   B.   The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practicable.
Uses considered compatible with stormwater management include open space,
aesthetics, aquatic habitat, recreation (boating, trails, playing fields),
wetlands and water quality mitigation. The applicant should avoid using
portions of the property exclusively for stormwater management. (Ord. 1994-6,
4-12-1994)
4-8-7: DESIGN CRITERIA, STANDARDS AND METHODS:
   A.   Release Rates: The drainage system for a property shall be designed to
control the peak rate of discharge from the property for the 2-year, twenty
four (24) hour and 100-year, twenty four (24) hour rainfall events to levels
which will not cause an increase in flooding or channel instability downstream
when considered in aggregate with other developed properties and downstream
drainage capacities. The peak discharge from events less than or equal to the
2-year event shall not be greater than 0.04 cfs per acre of property drained.
The peak 100-year discharge shall not be greater than 0.15 cfs per acre of
property drained.
   B.   Detention Basin Outlet Design: Backwater on the outlet structure from
the downstream drainage system shall be evaluated when designing the outlet.
   C.   Detention Storage Requirements: The design maximum storage to be
provided in a detention basin shall be based on the runoff from the 100-year,
twenty four (24) hour rainfall event and reservoir (also called modified puls
or level pool) routing or equal. Detention storage shall be computed using
hydrograph methods as described in this Section.
   D.   Drainage System Design And Evaluation: The following criteria should be
used in evaluating and designing the drainage system. The underlying objective
is to provide capacity to pass the 10-year peak flow in the minor drainage
system and an overload flow path for flows in excess of the design capacity.
      1.   Design Methodologies: Major and minor conveyance systems for areas
up to ten (10) acres may be designed using the rational formula. The rational
formula may also be used in sizing the minor drainage system for larger sites.
Runoff hydrograph methods as described in subsection E of this Section must be
used for major drainage system design for all systems with greater than ten
(10) acres of drainage area and for the design of all detention basins.
      2.   Positive Drainage: Whenever practicable, all areas of the property
must be provided an overland flow path that will pass the 100-year flow at a
stage at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the vicinity
of the flow path. Overland flow paths designed to handle flows in excess of the
minor drainage system capacity shall be provided drainage easements. Street
ponding and flow depths shall not exceed six inches (6") at the crown of the
street inclusive of any required overland conveyance.
   E.   Methods For Generating Runoff Hydrographs: Runoff hydrographs shall be
developed incorporating the following assumptions of rainfall amounts and
antecedent moisture.
      1.   Rainfall: Under a continuous simulation approach to drainage system
hydrology is used, all design rainfall events shall be based on the Illinois
State Water Survey's Bulletin 70. The first quartile point rainfall
distribution shall be used for the design and analysis of conveyance systems
with critical durations less than or equal to twelve (12) hours. The third
quartile point rainfall distribution shall be used for the design and analysis
of detention basins and conveyance system with critical durations greater than
twelve (12) and less than or equal to twenty four (24) hours. The fourth
quartile distribution shall be used in the design and analysis of systems with
durations greater than twenty four (24) hours. The first, third and fourth
quartile distributions described by Huff are presented in table 37 of Bulletin
70. The SCS Type II distribution may be used as an alternate to the Huff
distributions.
      2.   Antecedent Moisture: Computations of runoff hydrographs which do not
rely on a continuous accounting of antecedent moisture conditions shall assume
a conservative wet antecedent moisture condition as a minimum.
   F.   Wet Detention Basin Design: Wet detention basins shall be designed to
remove stormwater pollutants, to be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as
much as feasible to be available for recreational use.
      1.   Wet Basin Depths: Wet basins shall be at least three feet (3') deep,
excluding nearshore banks and safety ledges. If fish habitat is to be provided
they shall be at least ten feet (10') deep over twenty five percent (25%) of
the bottom area to prevent winter freeze-out.
      2.   Wet Basin Shoreline Slopes: The side slopes of wet basins at the
normal pool elevation shall not be steeper than five to one (5:1) (horizontal
to vertical).
      3.   Permanent Pool Volume: The permanent pool volume in a wet basin at
normal depth shall be equal to the runoff volume from its watershed for the 2-
year event.
      4.   Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance
between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible, they
should be at opposite ends of the basin.
   G.   Dry Detention Basin Design: In addition to the other requirements of
this Chapter, dry basins shall be designed to remove stormwater pollutants, to
be safe, to be aesthetically pleasing and as much as feasible to be available
to multiple uses.
      1.   Dry Basin Drainage: Dry basins shall be designed so that eighty
percent (80%) of their bottom area shall have standing water no longer than
seventy two (72) hours for any runoff event less than the 100-year event.
Underdrains directed to the outlet control shall be used if necessary to
accomplish this requirement.
      2.   Velocity Dissipation: Velocity dissipation measures shall be
incorporated into dry basin designs to minimize erosion at inlets and outlets
and to minimize the resuspension of pollutants.
      3.   Inlet And Outlet Orientation: To the extent feasible, the distance
between detention inlets and outlets shall be maximized. If possible, they
should be at opposite ends of the basin.
   H.   Minimum Detention Outlet Size: Where a single pipe outlet or orifice
plate is to be used to control discharge, it shall have a minimum diameter of
four inches (4"). If this minimum orifice size permits release rates greater
than those specified in this Section, and regional detention is not a practical
alternative, alternative outlet designs shall be utilized which incorporate
self cleaning flow restrictors.
   I.   Detention In Floodplains: The placement of detention basins within the
floodplain is strongly discouraged because of questions about their reliable
operation during flood events. However, the stormwater detention requirements
of this Chapter may be fulfilled by providing detention storage within flood
fringe areas on the project site provided the following provisions are met.
      1.   Detention In Flood Fringe Areas: The placement of a detention basin
in a flood fringe area shall require compensatory storage for 1.5 times the
volume below the base flood elevation occupied by the detention basin including
any berms. The release from the detention storage provided shall still be
controlled consistent with the requirements of this Section. The applicant
shall demonstrate its operation for all streamflow and floodplain backwater
conditions. Excavations for compensatory storage along watercourses shall be
opposite or adjacent to the area occupied by detention. All floodplain storage
lost below the 10-year flood elevation shall be replaced below the ten-year
flood elevation. All floodplain storage lost above the existing 10-year flood
elevation shall be replaced above the proposed 10-year flood elevation. All
compensatory storage excavations shall be constructed to drain freely and
openly to the watercourse.
      2.   Detention In Floodways: Detention basins shall be placed in the
floodway only in accordance with subsection I3 of this Section.
      3.   On-Stream Detention: On-stream detention basins are discouraged but
allowable if they provide regional public benefits and if they meet the other
provisions of this Chapter with respect to water quality and control of the 2-
year and 100-year, twenty four (24) hour events from the property. Further
criteria are presented in Section
4-8-8 of this Chapter. If on-stream detention is used for watersheds larger
than one square mile, it is recommended that the applicant use dynamic modeling
to demonstrate that the design will not increase stage for any properties
upstream of downstream of the property. Also, impoundment of the stream as part
of on-stream detention:
         a.   Shall not prevent the migration of indigenous fish species, which
require access to upstream areas as part of their life cycle, such as for
spawning,
         b.   Shall not cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality
or stream aquatic habitat,
         c.   Shall not include a design calling for gradual bank slopes,
appropriate bank stabilization measures and a pre-sedimentation basin,
         d.   Shall not involve any stream channelization or the filling of
wetlands,
         e.   Shall require the implementation of an effective nonpoint source
management program throughout the upstream watershed,
         f.   Shall not occur downstream of a wastewater discharge, and
         g.   Shall comply with 92 Illinois Administrative Code parts 702 and
708 and the floodplain chapter of the Village.
   J.   Drainage Into Wetlands: Wetlands shall be protected from damaging
modifications and adverse changes in runoff quality and quantity associated
with land developments. In addition to the other requirements of this Chapter,
the following requirements shall be met for all developments whose drainage
flows into wetlands:
      1.   Detention In Wetlands: Existing wetlands shall not be modified for
the purposes of stormwater detention unless it is demonstrated that the
existing wetland is low in quality and the proposed modifications will maintain
or improve its habitat and ability to perform beneficial functions. Existing
depressional storage in wetlands shall be maintained and the volume of
detention storage provided to meet the requirements of this Section shall be in
addition to this existing storage.
      2.   Sediment Control: The existing wetland shall be protected during
construction by appropriate soil erosion and sediment control measures and
shall not be filled.
      3.   Alteration Of Drainage Patterns: Site drainage patterns shall not be
altered to substantially decrease or increase the existing area tributary to
the wetland.
      4.   Detention/Sedimentation: All runoff from the development shall be
routed through a preliminary detention/sedimentation basin designed to capture
the 2-year, twenty four (24) hour event and hold it for at least twenty four
(24) hours, before being discharged to the wetland. This basis shall be
constructed before property grading begins. In addition, the drainage hierarchy
defined in Section
4-8-5 should be followed to minimize runoff volumes and rates being discharged
to the wetland.
      5.   Vegetated Buffer Strip: A buffer strip of at least twenty five feet
(25') in width, preferably vegetated with native plant species, shall be
maintained or restored around the periphery of the wetland.
   K.   Street, Parking Lot And Culvert Drainage:
      1.   Streets: If streets are to be used as part of the minor or major
drainage system, ponding depths shall not exceed more than six inches (6") at
the crown of the street inclusive of any required overland conveyance and shall
not remain flooded for more than eight (8) hours for any event less than or
equal to the 100-year event.
      2.   Parking Lots: The maximum stormwater ponding depth in any parking
area shall not exceed six inches (6") for more than four (4) hours.
      3.   Culvert Road And Driveway Crossings: Sizing of culvert crossings
shall consider entrance and exit losses as well as tailwater conditions on the
culvert.
   L.   Infiltration Practices: To effectively reduce runoff volumes,
infiltration practices including basins, trenches and porous pavement should be
located on soils in hydrological soil groups "A" or "B" as designated by the
U.S. Soil Conservation Service. Infiltration basins and trenches designed to
recharge ground water shall not be located within seventy five feet (75') of a
water supply well or a building foundation. A sediment settling basin shall be
provided to remove coarse sediment from stormwater flows before they reach
infiltration basins or trenches. Stormwater shall not be allowed to stand more
than seventy two (72) hours over eighty percent (80%) of a dry basin's bottom
area for the maximum design event to be ex-filtrated. The bottom of
infiltration facilities shall be a minimum of four feet (4') above seasonally
high ground water and bedrock.
   M.   Safety Considerations: The drainage system components, especially all
detention basins, shall be designed to protect the safety of any children or
adults coming in contact with the system during runoff events.
      1.   Side Slopes: The side slopes of all detention basins at 100-year
capacity shall be as level as practicable to prevent accidental falls into the
basin and for stability and ease of maintenance. Side slopes of detention
basins and open channels shall not be steeper than three to one (3:1)
(horizontal to vertical).
      2.   Safety Ledge: All wet detention basins shall have a level safety
ledge at least four feet (4') in width two and one-half feet to three feet (21/
2' to 3') below the normal water depth.
      3.   Velocity: Velocities throughout the surface drainage system shall be
controlled to safe levels taking into consideration rates and depths of flow.
      4.   Overflow Structures: All stormwater detention basins shall be
provided with an overflow structure capable of safely passing excess flows at a
stage of at least one foot (1') below the lowest foundation grade in the
vicinity of the detention basin. The design flow rate of the overflow structure
shall be equivalent to the 100-year inflow rate.
   N.   Maintenance Considerations: The stormwater drainage system shall be
designed to minimize and facilitate maintenance. Turfed slideslopes shall be
designed to allow lawnmowing equipment to easily negotiate them. Wet basins
shall be provided with alternate outflows which can be used to completely drain
the pool for sediment removal. (Pumping may be considered if drainage by
gravity is not feasible.) Pre-sedimentation basins shall be included, where
feasible, for localizing sediment deposition and removal. Access for heavy
equipment shall be provided. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994; amd. Ord. 2020-17, 6-23-
2020)
4-8-8: ACCOMMODATING FLOWS FROM UPSTREAM TRIBUTARY AREAS:
Stormwater runoff from areas tributary to the property shall be considered in
the design of the property's drainage system. Whenever practicable, flows from
upstream areas that are not to be detained should be routed around the basin
being provided for the site being developed.
   A.   Upstream Areas Not Meeting Chapter Requirements: When there are areas
not meeting the storage and release rates of this Chapter, tributary to the
applicant's property, regionalized detention on the applicant's property shall
be explored by the applicant. The following steps shall be followed:
      1.   The applicant shall compute the storage volume needed for his
property using the release rates of Section
4-8-6, the applicant's property area, and the procedures described in Section
4-8-7.
      2.   Areas tributary to the applicant's property, not meeting the storage
and release rate requirements of this Chapter, shall be identified.
      3.   Using the areas determined in subsection A2 above, plus the
applicant's property area, total storage needed for the combined properties
shall be computed.
         a.   Allowable release rates shall be computed using the combined
property areas. Storage shall be computed as described in Section
4-8-7. If tributary areas are not developed, a reasonable fully developed land
cover, based on local zoning, shall be assumed for the purposes of computing
storage.
         b.   Once the necessary combined storage is computed the Village may
choose to pay for oversizing the applicant's detention basin to accommodate the
regional flows. The applicant's responsibility will be limited to the storage
for his property as computed in subsection A1 above. If regional storage is
selected by the Village, then the design produced in this subsection A3 shall
be implemented. If regional storage is rejected by the Village, the applicant
shall bypass all tributary area flows around the applicant's basin whenever
practicable. If the applicant must route upstream flows through his basin and
the upstream areas exceed one square mile in size, the applicant must meet the
provisions of this subsection for on-stream basins.
   B.   Upstream Areas Meeting Chapter Requirements: When there are areas which
meet the storage and release rate requirements of this Chapter, tributary to
the applicant's property, the upstream flows shall be bypassed around the
applicant's detention basin, or be routed through the applicant's detention
basin if this is the only practicable alternative. Storage needed for the
applicant's property shall still be computed as described in subsection A1 of
this Section. However, if the Village decides to route tributary area flows
through an applicant's basin, the final design stormwater releases shall be
based on the combined total of the applicant's property plus tributary areas.
It must be shown that at no time will the runoff rate from the applicant's
property exceed the allowable release rate for his/her property alone. (Ord.
1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-9: EARLY COMPLETION OF DETENTION FACILITIES:
Where detention, retention or depressional storage areas are to be used as part
of the drainage system for a property, they shall be constructed as the first
element of the initial earthwork program. Any eroded sediment captured in these
facilities shall be removed by the applicant before project completion in order
to maintain the design volume of the facilities. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-10: RESERVED:
(Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-11: MAINTENANCE RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Definitions:
   MAINTENANCE OR MAINTAIN: Shall mean the inspection, cleaning out, mowing,
repairing, and removing of any and all accumulated sediment, leaves, nuisance,
noxious weeds, invasive or non-native plants debris and obstructions from all
detention ponds, leach basins, pollution control devices or similar
appurtenances of the stormwater drainage system such that a failure to maintain
would be likely to result in an impairment or impeding of the functioning of
the stormwater drainage system. For wet bottom ponds, maintenance shall also
include necessary services that promote a healthy pond ecosystem and prevent
invasive vegetation, algae blooms, or fish kills. All stormwater and drainage
systems or stormwater management facilities shall be continually stabilized to
prevent soil erosion.
   STORMWATER AND DRAINAGE SYSTEM OR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY: Shall be
defined to include all stormwater systems, catch basins, storage structures,
drains, leaching basins, ponds, detention ponds, sediment basins, swales,
overflow weirs and/or structure restrictor manholes, ditches, pipes and
appurtenances located in the Village. This includes, but is not limited to, any
and all pollution control devices utilized as a part of the stormwater and
drainage system.
   B.   Maintenance Requirements: Maintenance of stormwater drainage systems
located on private property shall be the responsibility of the owner of that
property and all future owners of the property. All maintenance of stormwater
and drainage systems shall be the sole financial responsibility of the property
owner. However, representatives of the Village shall be authorized to enter
onto the property at reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting and
determining the need for maintenance of any stormwater drainage system.
   C.   Maintenance Schedule: The design plans for any stormwater drainage
system shall include a written schedule for regular maintenance of each aspect
of the property's stormwater drainage system. Following the completion of any
stormwater drainage system, and after final approvals by the Village, the
property owner shall maintain the stormwater drainage system located on the
property on not less than an annual basis. The annual regular maintenance
schedule, as required by this section, shall be made available to the Village
upon reasonable written request by the Superintendent of Public Works (SPW). If
the SPW makes the determination that specific maintenance problems exist or
issues that require correction, the property owner shall complete the required
maintenance and correct any issues within thirty (30) calendar days of such
written notification. If the maintenance and/or correction of issues is not
made within the time period, the Village may, pursuant to the easement required
by section
4-14-9 of this title enter upon the property and either complete the
maintenance itself and assess all costs to the property owner, or contract with
other contractors for the completion of the maintenance work and assess those
costs to the property owner.
   D.   Bond: The Village also may, at its discretion, request a bond to be
provided by the property owner for maintenance of the stormwater drainage
system in an amount to be determined in the sole discretion of the Village.
(Ord. 2017-26, 10-24-2017)
4-8-12: ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Inspections:
      1.   Inspections During Construction: General site grading shall not
begin until the Superintendent of Public Works has determined that any
necessary detention facilities are in place and operational. The Superintendent
of Public Works (SPW) or his representative will also conduct periodic
inspections of the work in progress to be certain that the drainage system is
being built as designed. If any violations of the provisions or requirements of
this chapter are noted during such inspections, the SPW shall notify the
property owner in writing of the items needing correction. The property owner
shall have ten (10) calendar days to make such corrections unless given a
specific extension of time in writing by the SPW. Failure to complete such
corrections within the specified time period shall constitute a violation of
this chapter.
      2.   Final Inspection: Upon notification by the applicant that the
drainage system is completed, the SPW or his representative shall conduct a
final inspection. If the drainage system is found to contain deficiencies which
require correction the SPW or his representative shall notify the property
owner of the necessary conditions. The property owner shall correct such
deficiencies within ten (10) calendar days unless given a specific extension of
time in writing by the SPW. Failure to make necessary corrections within the
specified time period shall constitute a violation of this chapter.
      3.   Routine Inspections: All privately owned drainage systems shall be
inspected by representatives of the Village not less often than once per year.
A written report shall be filed of the results of any inspection and a copy
sent to the property owner detailing any problems which need correction.
   B.   Enforcement: The administration and enforcement of this chapter shall
be the responsibility of the Superintendent of Public Works (SPW) or his
representatives.
   C.   Appeals: All appeals to the Superintendent of Public Works decisions
regarding the interpretation of this chapter shall be heard by the Village
Board of the Village. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-13: SEVERABILITY:
If any section, clause, provision or portion of this chapter is judged
unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
of this chapter shall remain in force and not be affected by such judgment.
(Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
4-8-14: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned for not more than
six (6) months. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. (Ord. 1994-6, 4-12-1994)
CHAPTER 9
SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL
SECTION:
4-9-1 Findings And Purpose
4-9-2 Definitions
4-9-3 General Principles
4-9-4 Site Development Permit
4-9-5 Design And Operation Standards And Requirements
4-9-6 Enforcement
4-9-1: FINDINGS AND PURPOSE:
   A.   Findings: The Board of Trustees of the Village hereby finds that:
      1.   Excessive quantities of soil may erode from areas undergoing
development for certain nonagricultural uses including but not limited to the
construction of dwelling units, commercial buildings and industrial plants, the
building of roads and highways, the modification of stream channels and
drainageways, and the creation of recreational facilities;
      2.   The washing, blowing, and falling of eroded soil across and upon
roadways endangers the health and safety of users thereof, by decreasing vision
and reducing traction of road vehicles;
      3.   Soil erosion necessitates the costly repairing of gulleys, washed-
out fills, and embankments;
      4.   Sediment from soil erosion tends to clog sewers and ditches and to
pollute and silt rivers, streams, lakes, wetlands, and reservoirs;
      5.   Sediment limits the use of water and waterways for most beneficial
purposes, promotes the growth of undesirable aquatic weeds, destroys fish and
other desirable aquatic life, and is costly and difficult to remove; and
      6.   Sediment reduces the channel capacity of waterways and the storage
capacity of floodplains and natural depressions, resulting in increased chances
of flooding at risk to public health and safety.
   B.   Purpose: The Board of Trustees therefore declares that the purpose of
this Chapter is to safeguard persons, protect property, prevent damage to the
environment, and promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating and
controlling the design, construction, use and maintenance of any development or
other activity which disturbs or breaks the topsoil or otherwise results in the
movement of earth on land situated in the Village. It is the intention of this
Chapter that the delivery of sediment from sites affected by land-disturbing
activities be limited, as closely as practicable, to that which would have
occurred if the land had been left in its natural undisturbed state. (Ord.
1996-2, 1-9-1996)
4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this Chapter certain terms used herein are defined as set
forth below:
BUILDING PERMIT: A permit issued by the Village of Minooka for the
construction, erection or alteration of a structure or building.
CERTIFY OR CERTIFICATION: Formally attesting that the specific inspections and
tests where required have been performed, and that such tests comply with the
applicable requirements of this Chapter.
CLEARING: Any activity which removes vegetative ground cover.
CUBIC YARDS: The amount of material in excavation and/or fill measured by the
method of "average end areas".
EXCAVATION: Any act by which organic matter, earth, sand, gravel, rock or any
other similar, material is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed,
displaced, relocated or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting
therefrom.
EXISTING GRADE: The vertical location of the existing ground surface prior to
excavation or filling.
FILL: Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material is
deposited, placed, replaced, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved by
man to a new location and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FINAL GRADE: The vertical location of the ground or pavement surface after the
grading work is completed in accordance with the site development plan.
GRADING: Excavation or fill or any combination thereof and shall include the
conditions resulting from any excavation or fill.
NATURAL DRAINAGE: Channels formed in the existing surface topography of the
earth prior to changes made by unnatural causes.
PARCEL: All contiguous land in one ownership.
PERMITTEE: Any person to whom a site development permit is issued.
PERSON: Any individual, firm or corporation, public or private, the state of
Illinois and its agencies or political subdivisions, and the United States of
America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent, servant, officer or
employee of any of the foregoing.
REMOVAL: Cutting vegetation to the ground or stumps, complete extraction, or
killing by spraying.
SITE: A lot or parcel of land, or a contiguous combination thereof, where
grading work is performed as a single unified operation.
SITE DEVELOPMENT: Altering terrain and/or vegetation and constructing
improvements.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT: A permit issued by the village of Minooka for the
construction or alteration of ground improvements and structures for the
control of erosion, runoff and grading.
STOCKPILE: Earth, soil, or other similar material stripped and piled into a
mound which is greater than one hundred (100) square yards and remaining in
place for more than seven (7) days.
STREAM: Any river, creek, brook, branch, flowage, ravine, or natural or manmade
drainageway which has a definite bed and banks or shoreline, in or into which
surface or ground water flows, either perennially or intermittently.
STRIPPING: Any activity which removes the vegetative surface cover including
tree removal, clearing, and storage or removal of topsoil.
VACANT: Land on which there are no structures or only structures which are
secondary to the use or maintenance of the land itself.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Will County and Grundy County, Illinois.
WETLANDS: Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-33, 12-17-
2008)
4-9-3: GENERAL PRINCIPLES:
It is the objective of this chapter to control soil erosion and sedimentation
caused by development activities, including clearing, grading, stripping,
excavating, and filling of land, in the village. Measures taken to control soil
erosion and off site sediment runoff should be adequate to assure that sediment
is not transported from the site by a storm event of 10-year frequency or less.
The following principles shall apply to all development activities within the
village and to the preparation of the submissions required under section
4-9-4 of this chapter:
   A.   Development should be related to the topography and soils of the site
so as to create the least potential for erosion. Areas of steep slopes where
high cuts and fills may be required should be avoided wherever possible, and
natural contours should be followed as closely as possible.
   B.   Natural vegetation should be retained and protected wherever possible.
Areas immediately adjacent to natural watercourses, lakes, ponds, and wetlands
should be left undisturbed wherever possible. Temporary crossings of
watercourses, when permitted, must include appropriate stabilization measures.
   C.   Special precaution should be taken to prevent damages resultant from
any necessary development activity within or adjacent to any stream, lake,
pond, or wetland. Preventative measures should reflect the sensitivity of these
areas to erosion and sedimentation.
   D.   The smallest practical area of land should be exposed for the shortest
practical time during development.
   E.   Sediment basins or traps, filter barriers, diversions, and any other
appropriate sediment or runoff control measures should be installed prior to
site clearing and grading and maintained to remove sediment from runoff waters
from land undergoing development.
   F.   The selection of erosion and sedimentation control measures should be
based on assessment of the probable frequency of climatic and other events
likely to contribute to erosion, and on evaluation of the risks, costs, and
benefits involved.
   G.   In the design of erosion control facilities and practices, aesthetics
and the requirements of continuing maintenance should be considered.
   H.   Provision should be made to accommodate the increased runoff caused by
changed soil and surface conditions during and after development. Drainageways
should be designed so that their final gradients and the resultant velocities
and rates of discharge will not create additional erosion on site or
downstream.
   I.   Permanent vegetation and structures should be installed and functional
as soon as practical during development.
   J.   Those areas being converted from agricultural purposes to other land
uses should be vegetated with an appropriate protective cover prior to
development.
   K.   All waste generated as a result of site development activity should be
properly disposed of and should be prevented from being carried off the site by
either wind or water.
   L.   All construction sites should provide measures to prevent sediment from
being tracked onto public or private roadways. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
4-9-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT:
   A.   Permit Required: Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no
person shall commence or perform any clearing, grading, stripping, excavating,
or filling of land which meets any of the following provisions without having
first obtained a site development permit from the Village Board. (Ord. 2017-16,
6-27-2017)
      1.   Any land disturbing activity (i.e., clearing, grading, stripping,
excavation, fill, or any combination thereof) that will affect an area in
excess of one (1) acre;
      2.   Any land disturbing activity that will affect an area in excess of
five thousand (5,000) square feet if the activity is within twenty five feet
(25') of a lake, pond, stream, or wetland; or
      3.   Excavation, fill, or any combination thereof that will exceed one
hundred (100) cubic yards.
   B.   Exceptions: A permit shall not be required for any of the following;
provided, that the person responsible for any such development shall implement
necessary soil erosion and sediment control measures to satisfy the principles
set forth in section
4-9-3 of this chapter:
      1.   Excavation below final grade for the basement and footings of a
single-family residence and appurtenant structures on a site in excess of two
(2) acres for which a building permit has been issued by the Village;
      2.   Agricultural use of land, including the implementation of
conservation measures included in a farm conservation plan approved by the Soil
and Water Conservation District, and including the construction of agricultural
structures;
      3.   Installation, renovation, or replacement of a septic system to serve
an existing dwelling or structure. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
   C.   Application For Permit; Fee: Application for a site development permit
shall be made by the owner of the property or his authorized agent to the
Building Department on a form furnished for that purpose. Each application
shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the owner or developer of the site
and of any consulting firm retained by the applicant together with the name of
the applicant's principal contact at such firm, and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). Each application shall include
certification that any land clearing, construction, or development involving
the movement of earth shall be in accordance with the plans approved upon
issuance of the permit. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-2017)
   D.   Submissions: Each application for a site development permit shall be
accompanied by the following information:
      1.   A vicinity map in sufficient detail to enable easy location in the
field of the site for which the permit is sought, and including the boundary
line and approximate acreage of the site, existing zoning, and a legend and
scale.
      2.   A development plan of the site showing:
         a.   Existing topography of the site and adjacent land within
approximately one hundred feet (100') of the boundaries, drawn at no greater
than two foot (2') contour intervals and clearly portraying the conformation
and drainage pattern of the area.
         b.   The location of existing buildings, structures, utilities,
streams, lakes, floodplains, wetlands and depressions, drainage facilities,
vegetative cover, paved areas, and other significant natural or manmade
features on the site and adjacent land within one hundred feet (100') of the
boundary.
         c.   A general description of the predominant soil types on the site,
their location, and their limitations for the proposed use.
         d.   Proposed use of the site, including present development and
planned utilization; areas of clearing, stripping, grading, excavation, and
filling; proposed contours, finished grades, and street profiles; provisions
for storm drainage, including storm sewers, swales, detention basins and any
other measures to control the rate of runoff, with a drainage area map,
indications of flow directions, and computations; kinds and locations of
utilities; and areas and acreages proposed to be paved, covered, sodded or
seeded, vegetatively stabilized, or left undisturbed.
      3.   An erosion and sediment control plan showing all measures necessary
to meet the objectives of this chapter throughout all phases of construction
and permanently after completion of development of the site, including:
         a.   Location and description, including standard details, of all
sediment control measures and design specifics of sediment basins and traps,
including outlet details.
         b.   Location and description of all soil stabilization and erosion
control measures, including seeding mixtures and rates, types of sod, method of
seedbed preparation, expected seeding dates, type and rate of lime and
fertilizer application, kind and quantity of mulching for both temporary and
permanent vegetative control measures, and types of nonvegetative stabilization
measures.
         c.   Location and description of all runoff control measures,
including diversions, waterways, and outlets.
         d.   Location and description of methods to prevent tracking of
sediment off site, including construction entrance details, as appropriate.
         e.   Description of dust and traffic control measures. (Ord. 1996-2,
1-9-1996)
         f.   An exhibit indicating location and dimensions of all stockpiles,
description of stabilization methods, and approximate dates from the creation
of each stockpile until complete removal. (Ord. 2008-33, 12-17-2008)
         g.   Description of off site fill or borrow volumes, locations, and
methods of stabilization.
         h.   Provisions for maintenance of control measures, including type
and frequency of maintenance, easements, and estimates of the cost of
maintenance.
         i.   Identification (name, address, and telephone) of the person(s) or
entity which will have legal responsibility for maintenance of erosion control
structures and measures during development and after development is completed.
(Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
      4.   The proposed phasing of development of the site, including stripping
and clearing, rough grading and construction, and final grading and
landscaping. Phasing should identify the expected date on which clearing will
begin, the estimated duration of exposure of cleared areas, and the sequence of
installation of temporary sediment control measures (including perimeter
controls), clearing and grading, installation of temporary soil stabilization
measures, installation of storm drainage, paving streets and parking areas,
final grading and the establishment of permanent vegetative cover, and the
removal of temporary measures. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant
to notify the Superintendent of Public Works of any significant changes which
occur in the site development schedule after the initial erosion and sediment
control plan has been approved.
   These submissions shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter and the standards and requirements contained in the latest version
of the Illinois Urban Manual prepared for Illinois Environmental Protection
Agency (IEPA) by the United States Department of Agriculture's (USDA) - Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) in Illinois and adopted by the Will
County and/or Grundy County Soil and Water Conservation District, which
standards and requirements are hereby incorporated into this chapter by
reference. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-2017)
   The Village Board may waive specific requirements for the content of
submissions upon finding that the information submitted is sufficient to show
that the work will comply with the objectives and principles of this chapter.
(Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
   E.   Bonds: The applicant is required to file with the Village a faithful
performance bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security
satisfactory to the Village Attorney in an amount deemed sufficient by the
Village Engineer to cover all costs of improvements, landscaping, maintenance
of improvements and landscaping, and soil erosion and sediment control measures
for such period as specified by the Village, and engineering and inspection
costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements installed on the
site.
   F.   Review And Approval: Each application for a site development permit
shall be reviewed and acted upon according to the following procedures:
      1.   The Village Engineer will review each application for a site
development permit to determine its conformance with the provisions of this
chapter and report his findings to the Village Board. The Village Engineer may
also refer any application to the Will and/or Grundy County Soil and Water
Conservation District and/or any other local government or public agency within
whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comment. Within sixty
(60) days after receiving an application, unless additional review time is
necessary, the Village Board, shall in writing: (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-2017)
         a.   Approve the permit application if it is found to be in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter and issue the permit;
         b.   Approve the permit application subject to such reasonable
conditions as may be necessary to secure substantially the objectives of this
chapter and issue the permit subject to these conditions; or
         c.   Disapprove the permit application, indicating the deficiencies
and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or submission.
      2.   No site development permit shall be issued for an intended
development site unless:
         a.   The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and
planned unit development, has been approved by the Village where applicable, or
         b.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the Village, or
         c.   The proposed earth moving is coordinated with any overall
development program previously approved by the Village for the area in which
the site is situated; and
         d.   All relevant Federal and State permits (i.e., for floodplains and
wetlands) have been received for the portion of the site subject to soil
disturbance. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
      3.   Pending preparation and approval of a revised plan, development
activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance with conditions
established by the Village. Failure of the Village Board to act on an
application or revised application within sixty (60) days of its submittal,
unless the Village Engineer has determined that additional review time is
necessary, shall entitle the applicant to appeal the delay in accordance with
the appeals procedure set forth hereinafter. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-2017)
   G.   Expiration Of Permit: Every site development permit shall expire and
become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been
commenced within one hundred eighty (180) days, or is not completed by a date
which shall be specified in the permit; except that the Village Board may, if
the permittee presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have
prevented work being commenced or completed within the specified time limits,
grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the
expiration date of the permit. The Village Board may require modification of
the erosion control plan to prevent any increase in erosion or offsite sediment
runoff resulting from any extension.
   H.   Appeals: The applicant, or any person or agency which received notice
of the filing of the application, may make an appeal of the decision of the
Village Board. Upon receipt of an appeal, the Village Board shall schedule and
hold a public hearing, after giving fifteen (15) days' notice thereof. The
Village Board shall render a decision within thirty (30) days after the
hearing. Factors to be considered on review shall include, but need not be
limited to, the effects of the proposed development activities on the surface
water flow to tributary and downstream lands, any comprehensive watershed
management plans, or the use of any retention facilities; possible saturation
of fill and unsupported cuts by water, both natural and domestic; runoff
surface waters that produce erosion and silting of drainageways; nature and
type of soil or rock which when disturbed by the proposed development
activities may create earth movement and produce slopes that cannot be
landscaped; and excessive and unnecessary scarring of the natural landscape
through grading or removal of vegetation. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
   I.   Retention Of Plans: Plans, specifications, and reports for all site
developments shall be retained in printable document format (PDF), as well as
in original form or on microfilm by the Village. (Ord. 2017-16, 6-27-2017)
4-9-5: DESIGN AND OPERATION STANDARDS AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Applicability: All clearing, grading, stripping, excavating, and
filling which is subject to the permit requirements of this chapter shall be
subject to the applicable standards and requirements set forth in this section.
   B.   Responsibility: The permittee shall not be relieved of responsibility
for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, and the Village or
its officers or agents will not be made liable for such damage, by: 1) the
issuance of a permit under this chapter, 2) compliance with the provisions of
that permit or with conditions attached to it by the Village Board, 3) failure
of Village officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions,
4) failure of Village officials to recommend denial of or to deny a permit, or
5) exemptions from the permit requirements of this chapter.
   C.   Site Design Requirements:
      1.   On-site sediment control measures, as specified by the following
criteria, shall be constructed and functional prior to initiating clearing,
grading, stripping, excavating or fill activities on the site.
         a.   For disturbed areas draining less than one (1) acre, filter
barriers (including filter fences, straw bales, or equivalent control measures)
shall be constructed to control all off-site runoff as specified in referenced
handbooks. Vegetated filter strips, with a minimum width of twenty five feet
(25'), may be used as an alternative only where runoff in sheet flow is
expected.
         b.   For disturbed areas draining more than one (1) but less than five
(5) acres, a sediment trap or equivalent control measure shall be constructed
at the downslope point of the disturbed area.
         c.   For disturbed areas draining more than five (5) acres, a sediment
basin or equivalent control measure shall be constructed at the downslope point
of the disturbed area.
         d.   Sediment basins and sediment traps designs shall provide for both
detention storage and sediment storage. The detention storage shall be composed
of equal volumes of "wet" detention storage and "dry" detention storage and
each shall be sized for the 2-year, 24-hour runoff from the site under maximum
runoff conditions during construction. The release rate of the basin shall be
that rate required to achieve minimum detention times of at least ten (10)
hours. The elevation of the outlet structure shall be placed such that it only
drains the dry detention storage.
         e.   The sediment storage shall be sized to store the estimated
sediment load generated from the site over the duration of the construction
period with a minimum storage equivalent to the volume of sediment generated in
one (1) year. For construction periods exceeding one (1) year, the 1-year
sediment load and a sediment removal schedule may be substituted.
      2.   Stormwater conveyance channels, including ditches, swales, and
diversions, and the outlets of all channels and pipes shall be designed and
constructed to withstand the expected flow velocity from the 10-year frequency
storm without erosion. All constructed or modified channels shall be stabilized
within forty eight (48) hours, consistent with the following standards:
         a.   For grades up to four percent (4%), seeding in combination with
mulch, erosion blanket, or an equivalent control measure shall be applied. Sod
or erosion blanket or mat shall be applied to the bottom of the channel.
         b.   For grades of four percent (4%) to eight percent (8%), sod or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied in the channel.
         c.   For grades greater than eight percent (8%), rock, riprap, or an
equivalent control measure shall be applied, or the grade shall be effectively
reduced using drop structures.
      3.   Disturbed areas shall be stabilized with temporary or permanent
measures within seven (7) calendar days following the end of active
disturbance, or redisturbance, consistent with the following criteria:
         a.   Appropriate temporary or permanent stabilization measures shall
include seeding, mulching, sodding, and/or nonvegetative measures.
         b.   Areas having slopes greater than twelve percent (12%) shall be
stabilized with sod, mat or blanket in combination with seeding, or equivalent.
      4.   Land disturbance activities in stream channels shall be avoided,
where possible. If disturbance activities are unavoidable, the following
requirements shall be met:
         a.   Construction vehicles shall be kept out of the stream channel to
the maximum extent practicable. Where construction crossings are necessary,
temporary crossings shall be constructed of nonerosive material, such as riprap
or gravel.
         b.   The time and area of disturbance of stream channels shall be kept
to a minimum. The stream channel, including bed and banks, shall be
restabilized within forty eight (48) hours after channel disturbance is
completed, interrupted, or stopped.
         c.   Whenever channel relocation is necessary, the new channel shall
be constructed in the dry and fully stabilized before flow is diverted.
      5.   Storm sewer inlets and culverts shall be protected by sediment traps
or filter barriers meeting accepted design standards and specifications. (Ord.
1996-2, 1-9-1996)
      6.   If dewatering devices are used, discharge locations shall be
protected from erosion. All pumped discharges shall be routed through
appropriately designed sediment traps or basins, or equivalent.
      7.   Each site shall have graveled (or equivalent) entrance roads, access
drives, and parking areas of sufficient length and width to prevent sediment
from being tracked onto public or private roadways. Any sediment reaching a
public or private road shall be removed by shoveling or street cleaning (not
flushing) before the end of each workday and transported to a controlled
sediment disposal area.
      8.   All temporary and permanent erosion and sediment control practices
must be maintained and repaired as needed to assure effective performance to
their intended function.
      9.   All temporary erosion and sediment control measures shall be
disposed of within thirty (30) days after final site stabilization is achieved
with permanent soil stabilization measures. Trapped sediment and other
disturbed soils resulting from the disposition of temporary measures should be
permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion and sedimentation. (Ord.
1996-2, 1-9-1996; amd. Ord. 2008-33, 12-17-2008)
   D.   Handbooks Adopted By Reference: The standards and specifications
contained in "Standards And Specifications For Soil Erosion And Sediment
Control" (the Yellow Book) and the "Illinois Procedures And Standards For Urban
Soil Erosion And Sedimentation Control" (the Green Book) cited in section
4-9-4 of this chapter, are hereby incorporated into this section and made a
part hereof by reference for the purpose of delineating procedures and methods
of operation under site development and erosion and sedimentation control plans
approved under section
4-9-4 of this chapter. In the event of conflict between provisions of said
manuals and of this chapter, this chapter shall govern.
   E.   Maintenance Of Control Measures: All soil erosion and sediment control
measures necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be maintained
periodically by the applicant or subsequent landowner during the period of land
disturbance and development of the site in a satisfactory manner to ensure
adequate performance.
   F.   Inspection: The village board or its designee shall make inspections as
hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work
completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the work fails to comply with
the site development or erosion and sedimentation control plan as approved.
Plans for grading, stripping, excavating, and filling work bearing the stamp of
approval of the village board or its designee shall be maintained at the site
during progress of the work. In order to obtain inspections and to ensure
compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, the grading or
building permit, and this chapter the permittee shall notify the village board
or its designee within two (2) working days of the completion of the
construction stages specified below:
      1.   Upon completion of installation of sediment and runoff control
measures (including perimeter controls and diversions), prior to proceeding
with any other earth disturbance or grading,
      2.   After stripping and clearing,
      3.   After rough grading,
      4.   After final grading,
      5.   After seeding and landscaping deadlines, and
      6.   After final stabilization and landscaping, prior to removal of
sediment controls.
   If stripping, clearing, grading and/or landscaping are to be done in phases
or areas, the permittee shall give notice and request inspection at the
completion of each of the above work stages in each phase or area. If an
inspection is not made and notification of the results given within five (5)
working days after notice is received by the village from the permittee, the
permittee may continue work at his own risk, without presuming acceptance by
the village. Notification of the results of the inspection shall be given in
writing at the site.
   G.   Special Precautions:
      1.   If at any stage of the grading of any development site the village
board determines by inspection that the nature of the site is such that further
work authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any property, public
way, stream, lake, wetland, or drainage structure, the village board may
require, as a condition of allowing the work to be done, that such reasonable
special precautions to be taken as is considered advisable to avoid the
likelihood of such peril. "Special precautions" may include, but shall not be
limited to, a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage
facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant
materials for erosion control, and recommendations of a registered soils
engineer and/or engineering geologist which may be made requirements for
further work.
      2.   Where it appears that storm damage may result because the grading on
any development site is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee
required to install temporary structures or take such other measures as may be
required to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large
developments or where unusual site conditions prevail, the village board may
specify the time of starting grading and time of completion or may require that
the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of
protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains.
   H.   Amendment Of Plans: Major amendments of the site development or erosion
and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted to the village board and
shall be processed and approved or disapproved in the same manner as the
original plans. Field modifications of a minor nature may be authorized by the
village board by written authorization to the permittee. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-
1996)
   I.   Stockpiles:
      1.   The area of land exposed during site development should be limited
to the smallest working area practicable. The period of time during which land
is exposed without vegetation should be limited to the shortest period
practicable.
      2.   The base of stockpiles shall not be located within two hundred feet
(200') of the perimeter of the development or within two hundred feet (200')
from the nearest home, and stockpiles shall not be located on floodplains,
overflow routes, areas subject to frequent inundation, or park sites.
Stockpiles shall not be located with a downslope drainage length of less than
twenty five feet (25') to a roadway or drainage channel. Filter barriers,
including straw bales, filter fence, or equivalent, shall be installed
immediately on the downslope side of the stockpiles.
      3.   Stockpiles shall not exceed twenty five feet (25') in height.
      4.   Any stockpile that remains undisturbed longer than seven (7) days
shall have approved sediment and erosion control measures, such as a silt
fence, surrounding the entire base of the stockpile, and a gradient ratio of
not more than three to one (3:1).
      5.   No stockpile shall be allowed to remain in the development phase
after completion of the last structure in that development phase, and no
occupancy permit shall be issued for the last structure in the development
phase until all dirt stockpiles are removed from that phase. Without prior
written approval from the village, all dirt stockpiles shall be removed for
each phase no later than three (3) years after the first building permit is
issued for that phase or prior to the issuance of the last occupancy permit in
the phase, whichever is first to occur.
      6.   The permittee, developer, and/or owner shall abide by the village's
noxious weeds ordinance (title 7, chapter 3 of this code), and shall not permit
weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy, poison
oak, poison sumac or other weeds of a like kind, to grow in and around any
stockpile.
      7.   Any stockpile that remains in the same place longer than one year
must be seeded or sodded and maintained in that condition for the remainder of
the term of that stockpile.
      8.   Stockpiles must be maintained in such a way as to minimize the
height and to minimize the danger to children, including the removal of all
potentially harmful debris.
      9.   All stockpiles in existence at the time of passage of this
subsection, but which do not conform to one or more provisions of this
subsection, shall be brought into compliance by July 30, 2009. (Ord. 2008-33,
12-17-2008)
4-9-6: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Exceptions: The village board may, in accordance with the following
procedures, authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set
forth in this chapter:
      1.   Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition
of the applicant for a site development permit, stating fully the grounds of
the petition and the facts relied upon by the applicant. Such petition shall be
filed with the site development permit application. In order for the petition
to be granted, it shall be necessary that the village board find all of the
following facts with respect to the land referred to in the petition:
         a.   That the land is of such shape or size or is affected by such
physical conditions or is subject to such title limitations of record, that it
is impossible or impractical for the applicant to comply with all of the
requirements of this chapter;
         b.   That the exception is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the applicant; and
         c.   That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject
property.
      2.   Each application for an exception shall be referred to the village
board for review.
      3.   The village board shall hold a public hearing on each application
for exception, within thirty (30) days after receiving application, in the
manner provided with respect to appeals. After public hearing, the village
board may approve the site development permit application with the exceptions
and conditions it deems necessary or it may disapprove such site development
permit application and exception application or it may take such other action
as appropriate.
   B.   Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit: In the event any person holding
a site development permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the
permit, or carries on site development in such a manner as to materially
adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working
in the neighborhood of the development site or so as to be materially
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to property or improvements in
the neighborhood, the village board may suspend or revoke the site development
permit.
      1.   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop work order issued
by the village board and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person
performing the work. The stop work order shall be effective immediately, shall
state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed. A stop work order shall remain in effect until the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the village board at which the conditions of the
subsections below can be met.
      2.   No site development permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked
until a hearing is held by the village board. Written notice of such hearing
shall be served on the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and
shall state:
         a.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or
revocation, in clear and concise language; and
         b.   The time when and place where such hearing will be held. Such
notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to the
date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the village board shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked.
   C.   Violations And Penalties: No person shall construct, enlarge, alter,
repair, or maintain any grading, excavation or fill, or cause the same to be
done, contrary to or in violation of any terms of this chapter. Any person
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and each day during which any violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a
separate offense. Upon conviction of any such violation, such person,
partnership, or corporation shall be punished by a fine of not more than one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. In addition to any other penalty
authorized by this section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted
of violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be required to restore
the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to
bear the expense of such restoration.
   D.   Separability: The provisions and sections of this chapter shall be
deemed to be separable, and the invalidity of any portion of this chapter shall
not affect the validity of the remainder. (Ord. 1996-2, 1-9-1996)
CHAPTER 10
STREAM AND WETLAND PROTECTION
SECTION:
4-10-1 Authority
4-10-2 Short Title
4-10-3 Purpose And Intent
4-10-4 Definitions
4-10-5 Special Use Permit
4-10-5-1: Application For Permit; Fee
4-10-5-2: Submissions
4-10-5-3: Bonds
4-10-5-4: Review And Approval
4-10-5-5: Permit Exceptions
4-10-5-6: Effect On Other Permits
4-10-6 General Provisions; Area Affected
4-10-6-1: Lowland Conservancy Overlay District
4-10-6-2: District Boundary
4-10-6-3: Minimum Setback Of Development Activity From Streams
4-10-6-4: Site Development Plan
4-10-6-5: Geologic And Soil Characteristics; Report
4-10-6-6: Hydrologic Controls/Drainage Control Plan
4-10-6-7: Site Grading And Excavation Plan
4-10-6-8: Natural Vegetation Buffer Strip Required
4-10-6-9: Mitigation Of Direct Impacts
4-10-7 Watercourse Relocation And Minor Modifications
4-10-7-1: Permitting Stream Modification
4-10-7-2: Content Of Stream Modification/Relocation Plan
4-10-7-3: Armoring Of Channels And Banks
4-10-7-4: Use Of Culverts
4-10-7-5: On Stream Impoundments
4-10-8 Impact Assessment
4-10-9 Stream Maintenance Easement
4-10-10 Nonconforming Uses
4-10-11 Board Of Appeals
4-10-11-1: Variances
4-10-11-2: Appeals
4-10-12 Bonds
4-10-13 Liability
4-10-14 Separability
4-10-15 Retroactivity
4-10-16 Enforcement
4-10-16-1: Stop Work Order; Revocation Of Permit
4-10-16-2: Violations And Penalties
4-10-1: AUTHORITY:
The lowland conservancy overlay district is adopted by the board of trustees,
pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-13-1. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-2: SHORT TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the MINOOKA LOWLAND CONSERVANCY
OVERLAY DISTRICT ORDINANCE. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-3: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to promote the health, safety and
general welfare of the present and future residents of Minooka and downstream
drainage areas by providing for the protection, preservation, proper
maintenance, and use of Minooka watercourses, lakes, ponds, floodplain and
wetland areas. This chapter is more specifically adopted:
   A.   To prevent flood damage by preserving storm and flood water storage
capacity;
   B.   To maintain the normal hydrologic balance of streams, floodplains,
ponds, lakes, wetlands, and ground water by storing and providing for
infiltration of wet period runoff in floodplains and wetlands, and releasing it
slowly to the stream to maintain in-stream flow;
   C.   To manage stormwater runoff and maintain natural runoff conveyance
systems, and minimize the need for major storm sewer construction and
drainageway modification;
   D.   To improve water quality, both by filtering and storing sediments and
attached pollutants, nutrients, and organic compounds before they drain into
streams or wetlands, and by maintaining the natural pollutant assimilating
capabilities of streams, floodplains and wetlands;
   E.   To protect shorelines and stream banks from soil erosion, using natural
means and materials wherever possible;
   F.   To protect fish spawning, breeding, nursery and feeding grounds;
   G.   To protect wildlife habitat;
   H.   To preserve areas of special recreational, scenic, or scientific
interest, including natural areas and habitats of endangered species;
   I.   To maintain and enhance the aesthetic qualities of developing areas;
and
   J.   To encourage the continued economic growth and high quality of life of
the Village which depends in part on an adequate quality of water, a pleasing
natural environment, and recreational opportunities in proximity to the
Village.
In order to achieve the purpose and intent of this Chapter, Village hereby
designates the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District which shall be considered
as an overlay to the zoning districts created by the Village zoning ordinances
as amended. Any proposed development activity within the District must obtain a
special use permit as approved by the governing body of the Village. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-4: DEFINITIONS:
ARMORING: A form of channel modification which involves the placement of
materials (concrete, riprap, bulkheads, etc.) within a stream channel or along
a shoreline to protect property above streams, lakes and ponds from erosion and
wave damage caused by wave action and stream flow.
BULKHEAD: A retaining wall that protects property along water.
CHANNEL: A natural or artificial watercourse of perceptible extent that
periodically or continuously contains moving water, or which forms a connecting
link between two (2) bodies of water. It has a definite bed and banks that
serve to contain the water.
CHANNEL MODIFICATION OR CHANNELIZATION: To alter a watercourse by changing the
physical dimension or materials of the channel. Channel modification includes
damming, riprapping (or other armoring), widening, deepening, straightening,
relocating, lining and significant removal of bottom or woody vegetation.
Channel modification does not include the clearing of debris or trash from the
watercourse. Channelization is a severe form of channel modification involving
a significant change in the channel cross-section and typically involving
relocation of the existing channel (e.g., straightening).
CONTROL STRUCTURES: A structure designed to control the rate of stormwater
runoff that passes through the structure, given a specific upstream and
downstream water surface elevation.
CULVERT: A structure designed to carry drainage water or small streams below
barriers such as roads, driveways, or railway embankments.
DEPRESSION 1 AREA: Any area which is lower in elevation on all sides than
surrounding properties (i.e., does not drain freely), or whose drainage is
severely limited such as by a restrictive culvert. A depressional area will
fill with water on occasion when runoff into it exceeds the rate of
infiltration into underlying soil or exceeds the discharge through its
controlled outlet. Large depressional areas may provide significant stormwater
or floodplain storage.
DEVELOPMENT: The carrying out of any building, agricultural, or mining
operation, or the making of any change in the use or appearance of land, and
the dividing of land into two (2) or more parcels. The following activities or
uses shall be taken, for the purposes of this Chapter, to involve development
as defined herein:
   A.   Any construction, reconstruction, or alteration of a structure to
occupy more or less ground area, or the on-site preparation for same;
   B.   Any change in the intensity of use of land, such as an increase in the
number of dwelling units on land, or a material increase in the site coverage
of businesses, manufacturing establishments, offices, and dwelling units,
including mobile homes, campers, and recreational vehicles, on land;
   C.   Any agricultural use of land including, but not limited to, the use of
land in horticulture, floriculture, forestry, dairy, livestock, poultry,
beekeeping, pisciculture, and all forms of farm products and farm production;
   D.   The commencement of drilling, except to obtain soil samples, or the
commencement of mining, filling, excavation, dredging, grading or other
alterations of the topography;
   E.   Demolition of a structure or redevelopment of a site;
   F.   Clearing of land as an adjunct of construction for agricultural,
private residential, commercial or industrial use;
   G.   Deposit of refuse, solid or liquid waste, or fill on a parcel of land,
or the storage of materials;
   H.   Construction, excavation, or fill operations relating to the creation
or modification of any road, street, parking facility or any drainage canal, or
to the installation of utilities or any other grading activity that alters the
existing topography;
   I.   Construction or erection of dams, levees, walls, fences, bridges or
culverts; and
   J.   Any other activity that might change the direction, height, or velocity
of flood or surface waters.
DISTRICT: The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District as defined in Section
4-10-6-2 of this Chapter.
EROSION: The general process whereby soils are moved by flowing water or wave
action.
FILTERED VIEW: The maintenance or establishment of woody vegetation of
sufficient density to screen developments from a stream or wetland, to provide
for streambank stabilization and erosion control, to serve as an aid to
infiltration of surface runoff, and to provide cover to shade the water. The
vegetation need not be so dense as to completely block the view. Filtered view
means no clear cutting.
FLOODPLAIN: That land adjacent to a body of water with ground surface
elevations at or below the 100-year frequency flood elevation.
FLOODWAY: That portion of the floodplain (sometimes referred to as the base
floodplain or special flood hazard area) required to store and convey the base
flood. The floodway is the 100-year floodway as designated and regulated by the
Illinois Department of Transportation/Division of Water Resources. The
remainder of the floodplain which is outside the regulatory floodway is
referred to as the flood fringe or floodway fringe.
HYDRAULIC CHARACTERISTICS: The features of a watercourse which determine its
water conveyance capacity. These features include but are not limited to: size
and configuration of the cross-section of the watercourse and floodway; texture
and roughness of materials along the watercourse; alignment of watercourse;
gradient of watercourse; amount and type of vegetation within the watercourse;
and size, configuration, and other characteristics of structures within the
watercourse. In low-lying areas the characteristics of the overbank area also
determine water conveyance capacity.
LAKE OR POND: Any inland waterbody, fed by spring or surface water flow.
LOT: An area of land, with defined boundaries, that is designated in official
assessor's records as being one parcel.
NATURAL: In reference to watercourses, means those stream channels, grassed
waterways and swales formed by the existing surface topography of the earth
prior to changes made by unnatural causes. A natural stream tends to follow a
meandering path; its floodplain is not constrained by levees; the area near the
bank has not been cleared, mowed or cultivated; the stream flows over soil and
geologic materials typical of the area with no alteration of the course or
cross-section of the stream caused by filling or excavating.
ORDINARY HIGH WATER MARK (OHWM): The point on the bank or shore up to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous so as to leave a
distinctive mark such as by erosion, destruction or prevention of terrestrial
vegetation, predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized
characteristics.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL: A person trained in one or more of the disciplines of
biology, geology, soil science, engineering, or hydrology whose training and
experience ensure a competent analysis and assessment of stream, lake, pond and
wetland conditions and impacts.
REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER: A professional engineer registered under the
provisions of "The Illinois Professional Engineering Act" and any act
amendatory thereof.
RETENTION/DETENTION FACILITY: A facility that provides for storage of storm
water runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood or
storm.
RUNOFF: The portion of precipitation on the land that is not absorbed by the
soil or plant material and which runs off the land.
SEDIMENTATION: The processes that deposit soils, debris, and other materials
either on other ground surfaces or in water bodies or watercourses.
SETBACK: The horizontal distance between any portion of a structure or any
development activity and the ordinary high water mark of a perennial or
intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a lake or pond, or the
edge of a wetland, measured from the structure's or development's closest point
to the ordinary high water mark, or edge.
STREAM: A body of running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a
channel on or below the surface of the ground; 7.5 minute topographic maps of
the U.S. Geological Survey are one reference for identifying perennial and
intermittent streams. For purposes of this Chapter, the term "stream" does not
include storm sewers.
STRUCTURE: Anything that is constructed, erected or moved to or from any
premises which is located above, on, or below the ground including, but not
limited to roads, signs, billboards, and mobile homes. Temporary recreational
facilities including, but not limited to, tents, camper trailers, and
recreation vehicles are not considered structures when used less than one
hundred eighty (180) days per year and located landward of the minimum setback
provided as a natural vegetation strip.
VEGETATION: All plant growth, especially trees, shrubs, mosses, and grasses.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert,
swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or man-made drainageway,
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater runoff
and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently.
WETLAND: Those transitional lands between terrestrial and aquatic system where
the water table is usually at or near the surface or the land is covered by
shallow water. Classification of areas as wetlands shall follow the
"Classification of Wetlands and Deepwater Habitats of the United States" as
published by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS/OBS-79/31). (Ord. 1996-1,
1-9-1996)
4-10-5: SPECIAL USE PERMIT:
To ensure that proposed development activity can be carried out in a manner
which is compatible and harmonious with the natural amenities of the Lowland
Conservancy Overlay District and with surrounding land uses, a request for a
special use permit for such development activity must be submitted for approval
by the governing body of the Village.
No special use permit shall be issued unless the Village finds that:
   A.   The development will not detrimentally affect or destroy natural
features such as ponds, streams, wetlands, and forested areas, nor impair their
natural functions, but will preserve and incorporate such features into the
development's site;
   B.   The location of natural features and the site's topography have been
considered in the designing and siting of all physical improvements;
   C.   Adequate assurances have been received that the clearing of the site of
topsoil, trees, and other natural features will not occur before the
commencement of building operations; only those areas approved for the
placement of physical improvements may be cleared;
   D.   The development will not reduce the natural retention storage capacity
of any watercourse, nor increase the magnitude and volume of flooding at other
locations; and that in addition, the development will not increase stream
velocities; and
   E.   The soil and subsoil conditions are suitable for excavation and site
preparation, and the drainage is designed to prevent erosion and
environmentally deleterious surface runoff.
There shall be no development, including the immediate or future clearing or
removal of natural ground cover and/or trees, within the Lowland Conservancy
Overlay District for any purpose, unless a special use permit is granted
subject to the provisions of this Chapter or the provisions of the Village
Zoning Ordinance 1. See Title 5 of this Code.1.
Dumping, filling, mining, excavating, dredging, or transferring of any earth
material within the district is prohibited unless a special use permit is
granted.
No ponds or impoundments shall be created nor other alterations or improvements
shall be allowed in the district for recreational uses, storm water management,
flood control, agricultural uses or as scenic features unless a special use
permit is granted. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-1: APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE:
Application for a special use permit shall be made by the owner of the
property, or his/her authorized agent, to the Village on a form furnished for
that purpose. Each application shall bear the name(s) and address(es) of the
owner or developer of the site and of any consulting firm retained by the
applicant together with the name of the applicant's principal contact at such
firm, and shall be accompanied by a filing fee of one hundred dollars
($100.00). Each application shall include certification that any land clearing,
construction, or development involving the movement of earth shall be in
accordance with the plans approved upon issuance of the permit. (Ord. 1996-1,
1-9-1996)
4-10-5-2: SUBMISSIONS:
Each application for a special use permit shall be accompanied by the following
information as specified in the sections cited:
                                    Section
General Provisions:
Site Development Plan               4-10-6-4
Geologic and Soil Report            4-10-6-5
Drainage Control Plan               4-10-6-6
Site Grading and Excavation Plan    4-10-6-7
Landscape Plan                      4-10-6-8
Justification for Watercourse
Relocation and Minor Modifications:
Stream Modification/Relocation Plan 4-10-7-2
Channel and Bank Armoring           4-10-7-3
Culverts                            4-10-7-4
On-Stream Impoundments              4-10-7-5
Impact Assessment                   4-10-8
(at option of the Village)
 
Where a proposed development activity is less than two and one-half (21/2)
acres in area the Village, upon approval of the Village Engineer, may waive or
simplify any or all of the submission requirements (Sections
4-10-6-4 through
4-10-6-8); provided, that the person responsible for any such development shall
implement necessary protection measures to satisfy the purpose and intent set
forth in Section
4-10-3 of this Chapter. (See Section
4-10-11-1, Variances.) (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-3: BONDS:
The applicant may be required to file with the Village a faithful performance
bond or bonds, letter of credit, or other improvement security satisfactory to
the Village Attorney, in an amount deemed sufficient by the Village to cover
all costs of improvements, landscaping, or maintenance of improvements and
landscaping, for such period as specified by the Village, and engineering and
inspection costs to cover the cost of failure or repair of improvements
installed on the site. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-4: REVIEW AND APPROVAL:
Each application for a special use permit shall be reviewed and acted upon
according to the following procedures:
   A.   The Village Board will review each application for a special use permit
to determine its conformance with the provisions of this Chapter. The Board may
also refer any application to the Will County and/or Grundy County Soil and
Water Conservation District and/or any other local government or public agency
within whose jurisdiction the site is located for review and comments. Within
thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village Board shall in
writing: 1) approve the permit application, if it is found to be in conformance
with the provisions of this Chapter and issue the permit; 2) approve the permit
application subject to such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to secure
substantially the objectives of this Chapter, and issue the permit subject to
these conditions; or 3) disapprove the permit application, indicating the
deficiencies and the procedure for submitting a revised application and/or
submission.
   B.   No special use permit shall be issued for an intended development site
unless:
      1.   The development, including but not limited to subdivisions and
planned unit developments, has been approved by the Village where applicable;
or
      2.   Such permit is accompanied by or combined with a valid building
permit issued by the Village; or
      3.   The proposed development is coordinated with any overall development
program previously approved by the Village for the area in which the site is
situated.
   C.   Failure of the Village to act on an original or revised application
within thirty (30) days of receipt shall authorize the applicant to proceed in
accordance with the plans as filed, unless such time is extended by agreement
between the Village and the applicant. Pending preparation and approval of a
revised plan, development activities shall be allowed to proceed in accordance
with conditions established by the Village. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-5: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to:
   A.   Emergency work necessary to preserve life or property; when emergency
work is performed under this Section, the person performing it shall report the
pertinent facts relating to the work to the Village within ten (10) days after
commencement of the work and shall thereafter obtain a special use permit and
shall perform such work as may be determined by the agency to be reasonably
necessary to correct any impairment to the watercourse, lake, pond, floodplain
or wetland (in terms of the purposes of this Chapter, subsection
4-10-3A through J);
   B.   Work consisting of the operation, repair, or maintenance of any lawful
use of land existing on the date of adoption of the Ordinance codified in this
Chapter;
   C.   Lands adjacent to farm ditches if:
      1.   Such lands are not adjacent to a natural stream or river; or
      2.   Those parts of such drainage ditches adjacent to such lands were not
streams before ditching; or
      3.   Such lands are maintained in agricultural uses without buildings and
structures.
   Where farm ditches are found to contribute to adverse environmental impacts
or hazards to persons or property, the Village may include designated farm
ditches in the District. The Village may also require that linings, bulkheads,
dikes and culverts to be removed to mitigate hazards, or that other mitigative
measures be taken, such as the maintenance of a natural vegetation buffer
strip. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-5-6: EFFECT ON OTHER PERMITS:
The granting of a special use permit under the provisions herein shall in no
way affect the owner's responsibility to obtain the approval required by any
other statute, ordinance, or regulation of any State agency or subdivision
thereof, or to meet other Village ordinances and regulations. Where State and/
or Federal permits are required, a special use permit will not be issued until
they are obtained. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6: GENERAL PROVISIONS; AREA AFFECTED:
This Chapter applies to development in or near streams, lakes, ponds and
wetlands within the Village. Streams, lakes, and ponds (including intermittent
streams) are those which are shown on the United States Department of the
Interior Geological Survey (USGS) 7.5 minute quadrangle maps and those
additional streams, lakes, and ponds delineated on maps adopted as part of this
Chapter. Those maps are hereby made a part of this Chapter, and two (2) copies
thereof shall remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk for public
inspection. Within the jurisdiction of the Village, those waterbodies and
watercourses that are named and are subject to the provisions of this Chapter
are: (list of waterbodies and watercourses). Wetlands are those designated in
the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Illinois Department of Conservation wetland
inventory and those additional wetlands delineated on maps adopted as part of
this Chapter.
If new drainage courses, lakes, ponds or wetlands are created as part of a
development, the requirements for setbacks and uses within setbacks, and the
criteria for watercourse relocation and minor modification shall apply. The
District shall be amended as appropriate to include these areas. (Ord. 1996-1,
1-9-1996)
4-10-6-1: LOWLAND CONSERVANCY OVERLAY DISTRICT:
The Lowland Conservancy Overlay District shall be considered as an overlay to
the zoning districts created by the Village Zoning Ordinance as amended 1. See
Title 5 of this Code. 1. In addition to the requirements of this Chapter,
applicants for a special use permit within the District shall meet all
requirements of the underlying zoning districts. In the event of a conflict
between the overlay district requirements and the underlying zoning district
requirements, the most restrictive requirements prevail. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-
1996)
4-10-6-2: DISTRICT BOUNDARY:
The procedures, standards and requirements contained in this Chapter shall
apply to all lots within wetlands and streams, and all lots lying wholly or in
part:
   A.   Within the special flood hazard area (SFHA) designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA); or
   B.   Within one hundred feet (100') of the ordinary high water mark (OHWM)
of a perennial stream or intermittent stream, the ordinary high water mark of a
lake or pond, or the edge of a wetland; or
   C.   Within depressional areas serving as floodplain or stormwater storage
areas, as designated on the Lowland Conservancy District Map.
The District is designated on a map labeled "Lowland Conservancy Overlay
District Map", which is made to be part of this Chapter and which has the same
force and effect as if all the notations, references, and descriptions shown
thereon were set forth or described herein. Designated areas are shown on said
Map which shall be and remain on file in the office of the Village Clerk, and
additional areas may be approved from time to time and be made exhibits hereto.
(Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-3: MINIMUM SETBACK OF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY FROM STREAMS:
   A.   Minimum Setback: Absolutely no development activity (except as provided
below) may occur within the minimum setback which is defined as seventy five
feet (75') from the ordinary high water mark of streams, lakes and ponds, or
the edge of wetlands, or within a designated depressional area. In no case
shall the setback be less than the boundary of the 100-year floodway as defined
by FEMA. These setback requirements do not apply to a stream in a culvert
unless the stream is taken out of the culvert as part of development activity.
If a culvert functions as a low-flow culvert, where water is intended to
periodically flow over it, the setback requirements apply.
   B.   Development Activities: The following development activities may be
permitted, subject to issuance of a special use permit, as set out in Section
5-10-9 of this Code, within the minimum setback areas only if, as a practical
matter, they cannot be located outside the setback area. Such development
activities will only be approved based upon a report, prepared by a qualified
professional, which demonstrates that they will not adversely affect water
quality; destroy, damage or disrupt significant habitat area. adversely affect
drainage and/or stormwater retention capabilities; adversely affect flood
conveyance and storage; lead to unstable earth conditions, create erosion
hazards, or be materially detrimental to any other property in the area of the
subject property or to the Village as a whole, including the loss of open space
or scenic vistas:
      1.   Minor improvements such as walkways, benches, comfort stations,
informational displays, directional signs, foot bridges, observation decks, and
docks;
      2.   The maintenance, repair, replacement, and reconstruction of existing
highways and bridges, electrical transmission and telecommunication lines,
poles, and towers; and
      3.   The establishment and development of public and private parks and
recreation areas, outdoor education areas, historic natural and scientific
areas, game refuges, fish and wildlife improvement projects, game bird and
animal farms, wildlife preserves and public boat launching ramps.
   C.   Considerations: Review of the proposed development activity within the
minimum setback area will consider the following:
      1.   Only limited filling and excavating necessary for the development of
public boat launching ramps, swimming beaches, or the development of park
shelters or similar structures is allowed. The development and maintenance of
roads, parking lots and other impervious surfaces necessary for permitted uses
are allowed only on a very limited basis, and where no alternate location
outside of the setback area is available.
      2.   Land surface modification within the minimum setback shall be
permitted for the development of stormwater drainage swales between the
developed area of the site (including a stormwater detention facility on the
site) and a stream, lake or pond, or wetlands detention basins within the
setback are generally discouraged, unless it can be shown that resultant
modifications will not impair water quality, habitat, or flood storage
functions.
      3.   No filling or excavating within wetlands is permitted except to
install piers for the limited development of walkways and observation decks.
Walkways and observation decks should avoid high quality wetland areas, and
should not adversely affect natural areas designated in the Illinois Natural
Areas Inventory or the habitat of rare or endangered species.
      4.   Wetland area occupied by the development of decks and walkways must
be mitigated by an equal area of wetland habitat improvement.
      5.   Modification of degraded wetlands for purposes of stormwater
management is permitted where the quality of the wetland is improved and total
wetland acreage is preserved. Where such modification is permitted, wetlands
shall be protected from the effects of increased stormwater runoff by measures
such as detention or sedimentation basins, vegetated swales and buffer strips,
and sediment and erosion control measures on adjacent developments. The direct
entry of storm sewers into wetlands shall be avoided. Environmental impact
analysis of wetland modification may be required in accordance with Section 4-
10-8 of this Chapter.
   D.   Applicants For Special Use Permit:
      1.   An applicant for a special use permit must stabilize areas left
exposed after land surface modification with vegetation normally associated
with that stream or wetland. The planting of native riparian vegetation is
recommended as the preferred stabilization measure. Other techniques should be
used only when and where vegetation fails to control erosion. The preferred
alternative is riprap, using natural rock materials where practicable,
installed on eroding bank areas in a manner that provides interstitial space
for vegetative growth and habitat for macroinvertebrates and other stream
organisms. Lining of the stream channel bottom is not permitted.
      2.   The applicant shall minimize access to the applicant's proposed
development activity within all or part of the Lowland Conservancy Overlay
District where such access could adversely affect the stream, lake, pond,
wetland, or related environmentally sensitive areas. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-4: SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN:
A site development plan must be prepared for any proposed development within,
or partly within, the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District and must indicate:
   A.   Dimension and area of parcel, showing also the vicinity of the site in
sufficient detail to enable easy location, in the field, of the site for which
the special use permit is sought, and including the boundary line, underlying
zoning, a legend, a scale, and a north arrow (this requirement may be satisfied
by the submission of a separate vicinity map);
   B.   Location of any existing and proposed structures;
   C.   Location of existing or proposed on-site sewage systems or private
water supply systems;
   D.   Location of any perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond, and its
ordinary high water mark;
   E.   Location and landward limit of all wetlands;
   F.   Location of setback lines as defined in this Chapter;
   G.   Location of the 100-year floodway;
   H.   Location of existing or future access roads;
   I.   Specifications and dimensions of stream, wetland or other water areas
proposed for alterations;
   J.   Cross-sections and calculations indicating any changes in flood storage
volumes; and
   K.   Such other information as reasonably requested by the Village.
The applicant shall present evidence, prepared by a qualified professional,
that demonstrates that the proposed development activity will not endanger
health and safety, including danger from the obstruction or diversion of flood
flow. The developer shall also show, by submitting appropriate calculations and
resource inventories, that the proposed development activity will not
substantially reduce natural floodwater storage capacity, destroy valuable
habitat for aquatic or other flora and fauna, adversely affect water quality or
ground water resources, increase stormwater runoff velocity so that water
levels on other lands are substantially raised or the danger from flooding
increased, or adversely impact any other natural stream, floodplain, or wetland
functions, and is otherwise consistent with the intent of this Chapter. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-5: GEOLOGIC AND SOIL CHARACTERISTICS; REPORT:
The site proposed for development shall be investigated to determine the soil
and geologic characteristics, including soil erosion potential. A report,
prepared by a licensed professional engineer, geoscientist, or soil scientist
experienced in the practice of geologic and soil mechanics, shall be submitted
with every application for land development within the Lowland Conservancy
Overlay District. This report shall include a description of soil type and
stability of surface and subsurface conditions. Any area which the
investigation indicates as being subject to geologic or soil hazards shall not
be subjected to development, unless the engineer or soil scientist can
demonstrate conclusively that these hazards can be overcome. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-
1996)
4-10-6-6: HYDROLOGIC CONTROLS/DRAINAGE CONTROL PLAN:
A drainage control plan that describes the hydraulic characteristics of on-site
and nearby watercourses as well as the proposed drainage plan, prepared by a
registered professional engineer experienced in hydrology and hydraulics, shall
be submitted with each application for land development within the Lowland
Conservancy Overlay District. Unless otherwise noted, the following
restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to all development within
the Lowland Conservancy Overlay District:
   A.   Natural open-channel drainageways shall be preserved; and
   B.   Runoff from areas of concentrated impervious cover (e.g., roofs,
driveways, streets, patios, etc.) shall be collected and transported to a
drainageway (preferably a natural drainageway) with sufficient capacity to
accept the discharge without undue erosion or detrimental impact. Vegetated
drainage swales are preferred over conveyances constructed of concrete or other
manufactured materials.
The drainage control plan shall identify appropriate measures, such as recharge
basins and detention/retention basins, which will limit the quantitative and
qualitative effects of stormwater runoff to pre-development conditions. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-7: SITE GRADING AND EXCAVATION PLAN:
Section
4-10-6-7 applies to the extent that grading and excavation and erosion control
plans, which satisfy the following requirements, are not already required by a
jurisdiction.
   A.   Application; Contents Of Plan: A site grading and excavation plan,
prepared by a registered professional engineer, trained and experienced in
civil engineering, shall be submitted with each application for a special use
permit and shall include the following:
      1.   Details of the existing terrain and drainage pattern with one foot
(1') contours;
      2.   Proposed site contours at one foot (1') intervals;
      3.   Dimensions, elevation and contours of grading, excavation and fill;
      4.   A description of methods to be employed in disposing of soil and
other materials that is removed from allowable grading and excavation sites,
including location of the disposal site if on the property;
      5.   A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed,
including the total area of soil surface to be disturbed during each stage, and
estimated starting and completion dates. The schedule shall be prepared so as
to limit, to the shortest possible period, the time soil is exposed and
unprotected. In no case shall the existing natural vegetation be destroyed,
removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to initiation of the
improvements; and
      6.   A detailed description of the revegetation and stabilization methods
to be employed, to be prepared in conjunction with the landscape plan per
Section
4-10-6-8. This description should include locations of erosion control measures
such as sedimentation basins, straw bales, diversion swales, etc.
   B.   Compliance With Chapter: The grading and excavation plan must be
consistent with all the provisions of this Chapter.
   C.   Restrictions And Requirements: Unless otherwise provided in this
Chapter, the following restrictions, requirements and standards shall apply to
all development within the District:
      1.   Every effort shall be made to develop the site in such a manner so
as to minimize the alteration of the natural topography;
      2.   No grading, filling, cleaning, clearing, terracing or excavation of
any kind shall be initiated until final engineering plans are approved and the
special use permit is granted by the Village; and
      3.   The depositing of any excavation, grading or clearing material
within a stream, lake, pond or wetland area (i.e., within the District) shall
be prohibited.
   D.   Installation Of Physical Barrier: In addition to locating all site
improvements on the subject property to minimize adverse impacts on the stream,
lake, pond, or wetland, the applicant shall install a berm, curb, or other
physical barrier during construction, and following completion of the project,
where necessary, to prevent direct runoff and erosion from any modified land
surface into a stream, lake, pond, or wetland. All parking and vehicle
circulation areas should be located as far as possible from a stream, lake,
pond or wetland.
   E.   Limit Activity: The Village may limit development activity in or near a
stream, lake, pond, or wetland to specific months, and to a maximum number of
continuous days or hours, in order to minimize adverse impacts. Also, the
Village may require that equipment be operated from only one side of a stream,
lake, or pond in order to minimize bank disruption. Other development
techniques, conditions, and restrictions may be required in order to minimize
adverse impacts on streams, lakes, ponds or wetlands, and on any related areas
not subject to development activity. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-8: NATURAL VEGETATION BUFFER STRIP REQUIRED:
To minimize erosion, stabilize the stream bank, protect water quality, maintain
water temperature at natural levels, preserve fish and wildlife habitat, to
screen manmade structures, and also to preserve aesthetic values of the natural
watercourse and wetland areas, a natural vegetation strip shall be maintained
along the edge of the stream, lake, pond or wetland. The natural vegetation
strip shall extend landward a minimum of twenty five feet (25') from the
ordinary high water mark of a perennial or intermittent stream, lake or pond
and the edge of a wetland.
Within the natural vegetation strip, trees and shrubs may be selectively pruned
or removed for harvest of merchantable timber, to achieve a filtered view of
the water body from the principal structure and for reasonable private access
to the stream, lake, pond or wetland. Said pruning and removal activities shall
ensure that a live root system stays intact to provide for stream bank
stabilization and erosion control.
A landscape plan, prepared by a professional landscape architect, shall be
submitted with each special use permit application for development activity
within the lowland conservancy overlay district and contain the following:
   A.   A plan describing the existing vegetative cover of the property and
showing those areas where the vegetation will be removed as part of the
proposed construction; and
   B.   A plan describing the proposed revegetation of disturbed areas
specifying the materials to be used.
The vegetation must be planned in such a way that access for stream maintenance
purposes shall not be prevented. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-6-9: MITIGATION OF DIRECT IMPACTS:
Direct impacts to jurisdictional waters of the United States, including
jurisdictional wetland, shall be mitigated at a minimum replacement ratio of
1.5:1 (replacement area:impact area). Mitigation for the impacts shall meet or
exceed the quality of the area impacted based on a floristic evaluation of the
impacted area. Mitigation areas shall be managed and monitored for a period of
five (5) years following seeding of the mitigation area(s). The development of
the mitigation area and its management and monitoring program shall be
described in a written document submitted as part of the special use permit
application. The document shall be based on the most current guidelines for
mitigation available from the Chicago district of the corps of engineers. (Ord.
2007-08, 1-23-2007)
4-10-7: WATERCOURSE RELOCATION AND MINOR MODIFICATIONS:
Watercourse relocation or modification is generally not permitted because these
activities are not usually consistent with the purposes of this chapter. Under
certain circumstances, relocation and minor modification may be permitted
through a special use permit where certain problems can be mitigated by
relocation and/or minor modification, specifically when:
   A.   Off site hydrologic conditions are causing erosion, flooding and
related problems; or
   B.   On site soil and geologic conditions are resulting in unstable
conditions that pose hazards to life, health, and existing structures or
property; or
   C.   The quality of previously modified or relocated streams can be improved
through restoration; or
   D.   Officially adopted storm water management plans call for placement of
detention or retention facilities in a stream; or
   E.   Public utilities, including sanitary sewers, pipelines, and roadways
require stream crossing or relocation where there are not practical
alternatives.
Modification of watercourses as a convenience for site design purposes is not
permitted. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-1: PERMITTING STREAM MODIFICATION:
Stream modification, when permitted, is subject to the following conditions and
restrictions:
   A.   Water quality, habitat and other natural functions must be
significantly improved by the modification; no significant habitat area may be
destroyed;
   B.   The amount of flow and velocity of a stream is not to be increased or
decreased as the stream enters or leaves a subject property, unless this
reflects an improvement over previous conditions in terms of reduced flooding,
reduced erosion, or enhanced low flow conditions;
   C.   Prior to diverting water into a new channel, a qualified professional
approved by the village shall inspect the stream modification, and issue a
written report to the village that the modified stream complies with the
requirements of section
4-10-7-2 of this chapter; and
   D.   Stream channel enlargement, or other modifications that would increase
conveyance, shall not be permitted if the intended purpose is to accommodate
development activities in the floodplain. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-2: CONTENT OF STREAM MODIFICATION/RELOCATION PLAN:
Stream relocation may be permitted in accordance with a stream relocation plan
which provides for:
   A.   The creation of a natural meander pattern, pools, riffles, substrate;
   B.   The formation of gentle side slopes (at least 3 feet horizontally per 1
foot vertically), including installation of erosion control features;
   C.   The utilization of natural materials wherever possible;
   D.   The planting of vegetation normally associated with streams, including
primarily native riparian vegetation;
   E.   The creation of spawning and nesting areas wherever appropriate;
   F.   The reestablishment of the fish population wherever appropriate;
   G.   The restoration of water flow characteristics compatible with fish
habitat areas, wherever appropriate;
   H.   The filling and revegetation of the prior channel;
   I.   A proposed phasing plan, specifying time of year for all project
phases;
   J.   Plans for sediment and erosion control; and
   K.   Establishment of a low-flow channel which reflects the conditions of a
natural stream. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-3: ARMORING OF CHANNELS AND BANKS:
Armoring in the form of bulkheads, riprap or other materials or devices is not
permitted except in accordance with the following:
   A.   Significant erosion cannot be prevented in any other way and the use of
vegetation and gradual bank slopes has not sufficiently stabilized the
shoreline or bank;
   B.   The bulkhead or other device is not placed within a wetland, or between
a wetland and a lake or pond;
   C.   The bulkhead, riprap or other device will minimize the transmittal of
wave energy or currents to other properties; and
   D.   The exchange in the horizontal or vertical configuration of the land
must be kept to a minimum.
Where permission to install bulkheads or other armoring devices is requested as
part of the special use permit application, documentation and certification
pertaining to the items above must be submitted. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-4: USE OF CULVERTS:
Culverts are not permitted in streams except in accordance with the following:
   A.   Where a culvert is necessary for creating access to a property; use of
culverts as a convenience, in order to facilitate general site design, is not
to be considered.
   B.   The culvert must allow passage of fish inhabiting the stream, and
accommodate the 100-year flood event without increasing upstream flooding,
except where a restricting culvert is desirable as part of an overall storm and
floodwater management plan;
   C.   The culvert must be maintained free of debris and sediment to allow
free passage of water, and if applicable, fish; and
   D.   The stream bottom should not be significantly widened for the placement
of a culvert as this increases siltation; if multiple culverts must be
installed, one culvert should be at the level of the bottom of the stream and
the others at or above normal water elevation. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-7-5: ON-STREAM IMPOUNDMENTS:
Impoundment of streams is not permitted except in accordance with the
following:
   A.   The impoundment is determined to be in the public interest by providing
regional stormwater detention, flood control, or public recreation;
   B.   The impoundment will not prevent the upstream migration of indigenous
fish species;
   C.   A nonpoint source control plan has been implemented in the upstream
watershed to control the effects of sediment runoff as well as minimize the
input of nutrients, oil and grease, metals, and other pollutants;
   D.   Impoundments without permanent low-flow pools are preferred except
where a permanent pool is necessary to achieve the intended benefits of the
impoundment (e.g., recreation or water quality mitigation); and
   E.   Impoundment design shall include gradual bank slopes, appropriate bank
stabilization measures, and a pre-sedimentation basin. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-8: IMPACT ASSESSMENT:
The Village may ask an applicant to submit a report prepared by a qualified
professional, and approved by the Village, in order to assess the potential
impact of proposed development on a lake, stream or wetland and associated
environmentally sensitive areas, including loss of flood storage potential,
loss of habitat, changes in species diversity and quantity, impacts on water
quality, increases in human intrusion, and impacts on associated streams,
lakes, ponds, wetlands or downstream areas. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-9: STREAM MAINTENANCE EASEMENT:
The applicant shall grant an access easement for stream maintenance purposes to
the Village over twenty five feet (25') parallel to the stream bank. (Ord.
1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-10: NONCONFORMING USES:
See
Title 5, Chapter 10 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-11: BOARD OF APPEALS:
See
Title 2, Chapter 1 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-11-1: VARIANCES:
See Section
5-11-6 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-11-2: APPEALS:
See Section
5-11-7 of the Village Code. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-12: BONDS:
The Village may require the posting of a bond or surety to ensure compliance
with any aspect of this Chapter. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-13: LIABILITY:
Prior to issuance of a construction permit, the applicant shall enter into an
agreement with the Village which runs with the property, in a form acceptable
to the Village Attorney, indemnifying the Village for any damage resulting from
development activity on the subject property which is related to the physical
condition of the stream or wetland. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-14: SEPARABILITY:
Every section, provision, or part of this Chapter is declared separable from
every other section, provision, or part; and if any section, provision, or part
thereof shall be held invalid, it shall not affect any other section,
provision, or part. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-15: RETROACTIVITY:
The requirements of this Chapter apply to all platted and unplatted lands
within the jurisdiction of the Village. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-16: ENFORCEMENT:
Authority for administration of this Chapter resides with the Village Board.
Appeals regarding decisions of the Village Board in granting special permits
shall be made according to the provisions of Section
4-10-11-2. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-16-1: STOP-WORK ORDER; REVOCATION OF PERMIT:
In the event any person holding a special use permit pursuant to this Chapter
violates the terms of the permit, or carries on-site development in such a
manner so as to materially and adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety
of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the development site, or
so as to be materially detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to
property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Village may suspend or revoke
the special use permit.
   A.   Suspension of a permit shall be by a written stop-work order issued by
the Village and delivered to the permittee or his agent or the person
performing the work. The stop-work order shall be effective immediately, shall
state the specific violations cited, and shall state the conditions under which
work may be resumed. A stop-work order shall remain in effect until the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Village Board, at which the conditions of
subsection B below can be met.
   B.   No special use permit shall be permanently suspended or revoked until a
hearing is held by the Village Board. Written notice of such hearing shall be
served on the permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall
state:
      1.   The grounds for complaint or reasons for suspension or revocation,
in clear and concise language; and
      2.   The time when and place where such hearing will be held.
Such notice shall be served on the permittee at least five (5) days prior to
the date set for the hearing. At such hearing, the permittee shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and may call witnesses and present evidence on his/her
behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing the Village Board shall determine
whether the permit shall be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
4-10-16-2: VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES:
No person shall undertake or continue any development activity contrary to or
in violation of any terms of this Chapter. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter is
committed, continued, or permitted shall constitute a separate offense. Upon
conviction of any such violation, such person, partnership, or corporation
shall be punished by a fine as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. In addition to any other penalty
authorized by this Section, any person, partnership, or corporation convicted
of violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be required to restore
the site to the condition existing prior to commission of the violation, or to
bear the expense of such restoration. (Ord. 1996-1, 1-9-1996)
CHAPTER 11
TRAILER COACHES AND TRAILER COACH PARKS
SECTION:
4-11-1 Definitions
4-11-2 Location Of Trailer Coaches
4-11-3 New Trailer Coach Parks Prohibited
4-11-4 Storage, Temporary Occupancy Of Trailer Coaches
4-11-5 Penalty
4-11-1: DEFINITIONS:
TRAILER COACH: Any vehicle or similar portable structure used or so constructed
as to permit its being used as a conveyance upon the public streets or highways
and designed to permit the occupancy thereof as a dwelling place for one or
more persons.
TRAILER COACH PARK: An area of land on which two (2) or more occupied trailer
coaches are harbored either free of charge or for revenue purposes. (Ord. 1968-
7, 8-16-1968)
4-11-2: LOCATION OF TRAILER COACHES:
No person shall locate a trailer coach on any property within the village;
provided, that trailer coaches so located on the effective date hereof shall be
permitted to remain and should any such trailer coach be removed, it may be
replaced by another, but such replacement must be made within sixty (60) days
after such removal. No presently located trailer coach which may be moved to a
different location on the property, nor any trailer coach located as a
replacement unit shall be located in the following manner:
   Closer than ten feet (10') to a side lot.
   Closer than thirty five feet (35') to a public street.
   Closer than ten feet (10') to an alley. (Ord. 1968-7, 8-16-1968)
4-11-3: NEW TRAILER COACH PARKS PROHIBITED:
No person shall establish a new trailer coach park on any property within the
village. Any such parks now so located and licensed by the state of Illinois
shall be permitted to continue operation so long as they shall be so licensed,
but should said license lapse or be revoked, it shall not be renewed. (Ord.
1968-7, 8-16-1968)
4-11-4: STORAGE, TEMPORARY OCCUPANCY OF TRAILER COACHES:
No person shall store unoccupied trailer coaches, nor display the same for
sale. Temporary occupancy of travel or camping type trailer coaches for periods
of not to exceed one week will be allowed. (Ord. 1968-7, 8-16-1968)
4-11-5: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this chapter shall be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 12
SATELLITE ANTENNA
SECTION:
4-12-1 Definition
4-12-2 Satellite Antenna Regulations
4-12-1: DEFINITION:
SATELLITE ANTENNA: Any parabolic or spherical antenna which receives television
or other signals from orbiting satellites or other devices. The height of a
ground mounted antenna shall be the total maximum to which it is capable of
being raised and shall be measured from the highest point of the finished grade
adjacent to the structure. The height of a roof mounted antenna shall be the
total maximum to which it is capable of being raised and shall be measured from
the highest point of the finished grade of the roof adjacent to the structure.
A satellite antenna shall be considered as an accessory structure when it is
not part of a public utility. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985)
4-12-2: SATELLITE ANTENNA REGULATIONS:
   A.   In all zoning districts the following requirements apply:
      1.   Guywires and satellite antennas shall be considered an accessory
structure and shall meet setbacks for accessory structures except where it is a
part of a public utility.
      2.   Satellite antennas shall meet all manufacturer's specifications. The
mast or tower shall be of noncombustible and corrosive resistant materials. The
miscellaneous hardware, such as brackets, turnbuckles, clips and similar type
equipment subject to rust or corrosion, shall be protected with a zinc or
cadmium coating by either galvanizing or sherardizing process after forming.
These finishes are selected to guard against corrosion and to protect the
elements against electrolytic action due to the use of adjoining dissimilar
metals. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985)
      3.   Any part of the satellite antenna including, but not restricted to,
the reflector, probe, guywires, and signal transmission cable, shall have
vertical and horizontal clearance from any electric lines which conform to the
latest edition of the national electrical code. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985; amd.
Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
      4.   All signal transmission cable, control wires, and electrical lines
shall be buried in accordance with national electrical code. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-
25-1985)
      5.   Every satellite antenna must be adequately grounded for protection
against a direct strike of lightning, with an adequate ground wire. Ground
wires shall be of the type approved by the latest edition of the national
electrical code for grounding masts and lightning arrestors, and shall be
installed in a mechanical manner with as few bands as possible, maintaining a
clearance of at least two inches (2") from combustible materials. Lightning
arrestors shall be used, which are approved as safe by the Underwriters
Laboratories, Inc., and both sides of the line must be adequately protected
with proper arrestors to remove static changes accumulated on the line. When
lead-in conductors of polyethylene ribbon type are used, lightning arrestors
must be installed in each conductor. When coaxial cable or shielded twin lead
is used for lead-in, suitable protection may be provided without lightning
arrestors by grounding the exterior metal sheath. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985;
amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-2005)
      6.   Satellite antennas shall be nonreflective and their color shall
blend in with the surroundings. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985)
      7.   The satellite antenna shall be installed and maintained in
compliance with the requirements of the building code and the national
electrical code. For satellite antennas larger than four feet (4') in diameter,
a building permit shall be required prior to construction. Permit is to cost
twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 1996-26, 8-13-1996; amd. Ord. 2005-39, 8-
23-2005)
   B.   In single-family residential zones the following requirements shall
apply:
      1.   Satellite antennas are permitted only within the rear yard buildable
area for a principal or accessory structure. The locations shall be a fixed
point on the ground.
      2.   Satellite antennas of three feet (3') in diameter are permitted on
the roof. No satellite earth station exceeding three feet (3') in diameter
shall be mounted on any roof. Any dish of less than three feet (3') in diameter
may be mounted upon a roof of a primary or accessory structure on the lot but
shall not be mounted on chimneys, towers, trees, poles or spires. A roof
mounted dish shall be mounted directly to the part of the roof not visible from
the street immediately in front of the structure or from the side street in
case of a corner lot. Roof mounted dishes may only be mounted on the rear
portion of any roof and not on the front side of any roof. Any roof mounted
dish must be designed to withstand a wind support of eighty five (85) miles per
hour.
   C.   In mixed zoning districts, multi-family, B-1, office and commercial
zoning districts the following requirements shall apply:
      1.   Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the
buildable area for a principal or accessory structure; however, not in the area
to the front of the main structure. The location shall be at a fixed point on
the ground or on a structure.
      2.   Satellite antennas are permitted on the roof subject to approval but
shall be no higher than four feet (4'), including base. The purpose of the
review is to ensure contiguous uses are not visually impacted by the satellite
antennas.
      3.   No ground mounted satellite antenna shall be higher than twelve feet
(12'), including base, and there shall be no more than one satellite antenna
per lot. The antenna shall be shielded from any abutting single-family zoning
district, residence, or public street by a six foot (6') high solid wall or
fence.
   D.   In zoning district B-2, the following requirements shall apply:
      1.   Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the
buildable area for a principal or accessory structure; however, not in the area
to the front of the structure. The location shall be at a fixed point on the
ground or on a structure.
      2.   Satellite antennas are permitted on the roof subject to approval of
the village board; but shall be no higher than ten feet (10'), including base.
The purpose of this approval is to ensure that contiguous uses are not visually
impacted by the satellite antennas. If the board is not satisfied with the
proposal, it shall be referred to the environmental development commission for
action.
      3.   No ground mounted satellite antenna shall be higher than fifteen
feet (15'), including base, and there shall be no more than one satellite
antenna per lot. The antenna shall be shielded from any abutting single-family
zoning district, residence, or public street by a six foot (6') high solid wall
or fence.
   E.   In industrial districts M-1 and M-2 the following requirements shall
apply:
      1.   Satellite antennas are permitted anywhere on a lot within the
buildable area for a principal or accessory structure. The location shall be at
a fixed point on the ground or on a structure.
      2.   Satellite antennas are permitted on the roof but shall be no higher
than fifteen feet (15'), including base.
      3.   No ground mounted satellite antenna shall be higher than twenty five
feet (25'), including base. The antenna shall be shielded from any abutting
single-family zoning district, or residence by an eight foot (8') high solid
wall or fence.
   F.   Satellite antennas legally in existence at the time of the passage of
this chapter shall be considered "grandfathered" for a period of six (6) months
from the effective date of this chapter. At the end of the six (6) month period
the antenna must be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
   G.   No variances may be granted which would allow satellite antennas in the
required front yard setback. (Ord. 1985-21, 11-25-1985; amd. Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-
1998)
CHAPTER 13
SITE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW
SECTION:
4-13-1 Purpose And Intent
4-13-2 Applicability
4-13-3 Classification Of Projects
4-13-4 Application And Review Procedures
4-13-5 Approval Criteria And Standards
4-13-6 Amendments To Approved Plans
4-13-7 Fees
4-13-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to establish procedures and standards for the
review and approval of site plans to ensure full compliance with all local,
state and federal ordinances and regulations and to ensure that a proposed land
use or activity is compatible with the character of the surrounding area, the
adjacent uses of land, the natural environment, the capacities of public
services and will protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 2002-03,
2-26-2002)
4-13-2: APPLICABILITY1. See also section
4-9-4 of this title.1:
   A.   This chapter shall apply to the following:
      1.   The construction of any new, nonresidential building or structure;
      2.   The expansion of any nonresidential building or structure;
      3.   The conversion, in whole or in part, of an existing building from
residential to nonresidential use;
      4.   The construction of any new residential structure containing three
(3) or more dwelling units;
      5.   The modification or expansion of an existing residential structure
which results in an increase in the number of dwelling units in the structure
to three (3) or more;
      6.   Any development in any district for which a special use permit is
required;
      7.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet; or
      8.   The establishment of a new nonresidential use even if no buildings
or structures are proposed.
   B.   This chapter does not apply to the construction or modification of
single-family detached homes, two-family homes, agricultural buildings or
structures, or existing buildings or premises legally established prior to the
adoption of this chapter.
   C.   No land, building, or structure shall be erected or used and no
building permit or sign permit shall be issued for a development within the
scope of this chapter unless and until a site plan has been approved in
accordance with this chapter. No land, building or structure shall be occupied
or used and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued until all requirements
and conditions of the site plan approval have been implemented and all
improvements completed in accordance with an approved site plan. (Ord. 2002-03,
2-26-2002)
4-13-3: CLASSIFICATION OF PROJECTS:
Any development or construction which is subject to the scope of this chapter
shall be classified as either a minor or major site plan. The determination of
this classification shall be made by the zoning officer according to the
following criteria:
   A.   Minor Site Plan Review: A project requiring minor site plan review
shall be any of the following:
      1.   An expansion of any nonresidential building or structure not
exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet or ten percent (10%) of the existing
floor area, whichever is less.
      2.   A change in use of an existing building that does not comply with
current site design standards such as, but not limited to, landscaping,
lighting, parking, signs or drainage.
      3.   The construction or expansion of paved areas, including access
drives and parking lots, involving an area of more than one thousand (1,000)
square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet.
   B.   Major Site Plan Review: A project requiring major site plan review
shall be any project which is not classified as a minor site plan review. (Ord.
2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-4: APPLICATION AND REVIEW PROCEDURES:
   A.   Application: Application for site plan approval may be made separate
from or in conjunction with an application for land subdivision. The village
may approve a site plan prior to the platting, division, or consolidation of
land conditioned upon such platting, division or consolidations. Site plans for
which the proposed use requires a zoning map amendment shall only be acted upon
by the village after a map amendment has been approved according to the
procedures set forth in the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Preapplication Conference: Prior to submitting a site plan application,
the applicants or agent should schedule a preapplication conference with the
zoning officer. The purpose of this meeting is to familiarize the applicant
with the review procedures and submission requirements and to familiarize the
village staff with the nature of the project. No decisions relative to the
acceptability of the plan may be made at this meeting. At this time the
determination will be made, based on the presented information, as to whether
the project shall be considered a minor or major site plan. The applicant
should bring to this meeting any working drawings, plans, sketches, surveys,
reports or other such information that will aid the village staff in assessing
the project.
   C.   Application Procedure:
      1.   Minor Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for
review and approval of a site plan to the village of Minooka. The application
shall consist of the following:
         a.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit;
         b.   All information requested by the village staff that is deemed
necessary to review the minor site plan including drawings, sketches and
calculations.
      2.   Major Site Plan: The applicant shall submit a formal application for
review and approval of a site plan to the village of Minooka. The application
shall consist of the following:
         a.   A fully executed professional fee agreement and deposit;
         b.   Ten (10) copies of the site plan and supporting documents as
described in subsection D2a of this section;
         c.   Upon receipt of the application the zoning officer shall review
the completeness of the application and upon determination that the application
is complete, forward a copy of the application to the village planner, village
engineer, public works department, and any other department or agency deemed
necessary. If the application is incomplete, the zoning officer shall notify
the applicant in writing of this determination and specify what materials or
information are required to complete the application. No action will be taken
on the application until the application has been determined to be complete.
   D.   Submission Requirements: The site plan application shall include at a
minimum the following:
      1.   Minor Site Plan:
         a.   As determined and requested by village staff.
      2.   Major Site Plan:
         a.   A drawing or drawings prepared at a scale of not less than one
inch (1") to one hundred feet (100') which shall include:
            (1)   General Information:
               (A)   Name, address and phone number of the developer.
               (B)   Name, address and phone number of the record owner if
different from developer.
               (C)   Name, address and phone number of the architect, engineer,
landscape designer, land planner, surveyor or consulting firm responsible for
preparing the plan(s).
               (D)   Seal and registration of any architect, engineer, or
similar professional involved in the preparation of the plan(s).
               (E)   Date of plan preparation/revision.
               (F)   North arrow and scale.
               (G)   Legal description of the property.
               (H)   If applicable, a site data table indicating the gross
acreage, net acreage, site coverage percentage, building area(s), floor to area
ratio.
            (2)   Existing Conditions:
               (A)   Zoning and use of the property.
               (B)   Zoning and use of all adjacent properties.
               (C)   The bearings and distance of all property lines and the
source of this information.
               (D)   Existing topography of the site shown at two foot (2')
intervals and extending a minimum of twenty five feet (25') beyond the property
lines of the site.
               (E)   Building setback lines.
               (F)   Location and extent of any water bodies, wetlands, streams
and flood plains or adjacent to the site.
               (G)   Location and size of existing trees.
               (H)   Location of other notable natural features.
               (I)   Location and dimension of any existing easements.
               (J)   Copies of any applicable covenants or deed restrictions.
               (K)   Location, size and ground floor elevation of all existing
buildings on the site.
               (L)   The location and dimension of any other structures or
improvements on the site.
               (M)   Location, names and widths of existing streets and rights
of way within or adjacent to the site.
               (N)   Location and size of any existing storm sewer, water main,
sanitary sewer, culverts, drains, field tiles, on site disposal systems, wells,
power or telephone poles, electrical lines, telephone lines, and gas lines on
the subject site or of any such entities off site that will serve the subject
site.
               (O)   The location, front view and dimension of existing signs.
            (3)   Proposed Development:
               (A)   Proposed use and zoning.
               (B)   A grading plan showing the proposed changes in the
topography of the site at two foot (2') intervals with spot grades provided at
significant points.
               (C)   The location and dimensions of all provisions for water
supply and sanitary sewer.
               (D)   A storm water detention/retention plan including storm
water runoff and detention calculation. The methods for computing such
requirements shall be those specified in the village's subdivision ordinance.
               (E)   The location, elevation, and size of all catch basins,
ditches, swales, retention basins and storm sewers.
               (F)   An erosion control plan, the requirements for which shall
be consistent with the village's subdivision ordinance.
               (G)   The location, dimensions and foundation/floor elevations
of all proposed buildings or expansions on the site.
               (H)   The location and dimensions of proposed driveways, parking
areas, loading areas and sidewalks.
               (I)   The location, dimensions, front view and materials of
proposed signs.
               (J)   The location and type of exterior lighting, including a
point by point photometric plan if required by the village.
               (K)   The location and nature of electrical, telephone, gas,
cable or other utility services to be installed at the site.
               (L)   Building plans showing at a minimum the floor plans and
elevations of all proposed principal and accessory buildings and a schedule of
the type and color exterior surface materials.
               (M)   Landscape plans including a schedule of all plantings by
type and size as well as any berming, fencing, screening, or other hardscape
features proposed.
         b.   Supporting reports, documents, exhibits, etc.
   E.   Review Procedures:
      1.   Minor Site Plan:
         a.   The village staff shall review the information requested and
either approve the minor site plan or prepare a report to the applicant
indicating any deficiencies in the site plan in meeting all applicable
requirements of this code. The applicant shall modify the site plan to correct
any deficiencies or apply for formal relief or variance for the deficiency if
such application is available.
      2.   Major Site Plan:
         a.   Application Evaluation And Review: Within twenty (20) days of the
application being determined to be complete, the zoning officer shall schedule
a meeting with the petitioner and the village staff to review the application.
The zoning officer will provide small scale copies of the plan to the planning
commissioners and village board members with a request for their comments and
concerns. The village staff shall evaluate the application's conformance with
the approval criteria and standards of this chapter and identify any areas in
which there are deficiencies in meeting the criteria and standards.
         b.   Conditions Of Approval: The village staff may impose conditions
on the site plan. Any condition imposed must relate directly to the approval
criteria and standards and be necessary to meet the intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-5: APPROVAL CRITERIA AND STANDARDS:
   A.   Staff Review Of Application: The village staff shall review the site
plan application to ensure that it complies with all of the criteria and
standards below.
   B.   Criteria And Standards:
      1.   Site Configuration: Buildings and structures will meet or exceed
setback standards, height and other dimensional standards and be appropriately
placed in relation to natural features of the site.
      2.   Buildings: Buildings shall be designed, situated and constructed so
as to conform to any applicable design criteria of the village. All buildings
shall have a strong visual relationship and design compatibility between the
building, the site, and adjacent development. The exterior appearances and mass
of the building(s) shall complement the existing development and character
within the surrounding area.
      3.   Impact On Surrounding Land Uses And Zoning: The proposed site plan
will be harmonious with and not harmful or injurious to existing and planned
uses in the immediate area. The proposed improvements will be coordinated with
improvements serving the site and other properties in the area. The site plan
shall meet the intent of this chapter and the intent of the village of Minooka
zoning ordinance.
      4.   Preservation Of Natural Features: The site plan shall demonstrate
judicious effort to preserve the integrity of the land, natural topography,
drainage, wetlands, watercourses, flood plains, and existing vegetation.
      5.   Public Services And Utilities: The site plans shall be served
adequately with sanitary sewer, public water, and storm sewer and such
utilities shall be provided in accordance with the recommendations of the
village engineer.
      6.   Signs: Proposed signs shall meet the requirements of all applicable
village regulations and shall be generally complementary with surrounding
properties and traffic operations. The size, location, design and lighting of
the signs shall be considered in relation to adjacent sites, glare, traffic
safety, and compatibility with adjoining properties.
      7.   Exterior Lighting: The site plan shall provide for exterior lighting
that meets the following standards:
         a.   At the expense of the developer, all roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities in unsubdivided and other
developments shall be sufficiently illuminated to ensure the security of
property and the safety of persons using such roads, driveways, sidewalks,
parking lots and other common areas and facilities. Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing standards, the following minimum standards shall
apply:
         b.   For residential uses, lights shall be installed in parking areas
containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be illuminated between
dusk and dawn. For nonresidential uses, lights shall be installed in all
parking areas containing five (5) or more parking spaces and shall be
illuminated between dusk and dawn, whenever said premises is open for
operation. "Open for operation" shall be construed to mean any time that a
retail business is open for the sale of goods or services or a retail, office
or industrial facility actually has employees working within or upon said
premises, other than guards or watchmen. Lights shall not be more than fifteen
feet (15') in height in residential zoning districts, and not more than thirty
feet (30') in height in other zoning districts.
         c.   Where lighted areas are required, lighting shall be provided as
follows:
 
                             Minimum1 Maximum1
Residential zoning districts 1.0      2.0
Commercial zoning districts  1.0      3.0
Industrial zoning districts  2.5      5.0
Data center zoning districts 1.0      3.0
 
      Note:
         1.   Average ground level foot-candles.
 
   Average foot-candles at property line shall not exceed 0.5 foot-candle as
measured at the property line.
         d.   All lighting shall be constructed, positioned and maintained in
such a way so as not to reflect light either directly or indirectly onto
adjacent properties.
      8.   Parking And Loading: The number, location and dimensions of all
parking and loading spaces and the design of parking and loading areas shall
meet the requirements of all applicable Village regulations.
      9.   Landscaping And Screening: Landscaping and screening on the site
shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements:
         a.   Landscaping and screening shall be provided along property lines
between nonresidential uses and residential uses, with a minimum of seventy
five percent (75%) opacity six feet (6') above grade.
         b.   All yards and open spaces surrounding buildings, parking lots,
stormwater detention areas, access drives and streets shall be landscaped with
trees and shrubs, and shall be maintained by the property owner. (Ord. 2002-03,
2-26-2002)
         c.   Trees in front yards shall be planted at a ratio of at least one
(1) 21/2-inch caliper shade tree (as measured 6 inches above grade) for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Strategic grouping of trees is
encouraged, as opposed to even spacing of trees. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-19-2017)
         d.   Yard areas shall be landscaped at a ratio of at least one shrub
or tree for every ten feet (10') of the principal building's nearest exterior
wall. Strategic grouping is also encouraged. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
         e.   For parking areas greater than thirty (30) spaces, a minimum of
twenty (20) square feet of interior landscaped area per space shall be
provided. In order to qualify as an interior landscaped area, said area shall
be located wholly within or projecting inward from the boundaries of the
parking area. Said areas shall include concrete curb or combination concrete
curb and gutter. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-19-2017)
         f.   All trash enclosure areas and containers shall be fully screened
from streets and adjacent properties with a six foot (6') high sight obscuring
fence, wall or landscaped area placed around said facility. All trash
enclosures must be placed on a concrete pad sufficient to support said
enclosure to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
         g.   Except as otherwise permitted, overnight outdoor storage of
goods, products, materials, supplies, machinery, equipment or parking of
commercial vehicles shall not be allowed in the front yard. In the B2
Commercial District or manufacturing districts, permitted overnight outdoor
storage and permitted outdoor activities shall be screened as provided in
section
5-7-2 or
5-8-2 of this Code. The outdoor storage of uncontained bulk materials capable
of becoming airborne such as coal, sand, sulfur, etc., is prohibited. (Ord.
2006-44, 11-28-2006)
      10.   Vehicular Access And Circulation: The site plan shall provide for
the safe, convenient, uncongested and well defined access and circulation of
vehicles. Access to the site shall be designed to minimize traffic conflicts.
All streets and driveways shall be designed to meet all applicable Village
regulations. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
      11.   Nonmotorized Transportation Access And Circulation: Safe,
convenient and aesthetically pleasing pedestrian and bicycle circulation routes
shall be provided within and accessing the site. Sidewalks adjacent to parking
stalls shall have seven foot (7') minimum width. Wheel stops will only be
permitted on privately maintained property and only when approved by the
Village. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-19-2017)
      12.   Drainage And Stormwater Management: The site plan shall provide for
site surface drainage and stormwater management facilities that meet or exceed
the applicable standards of the Village. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
      13.   Parking Lot Curbs: All parking lot pavement edges shall abut
concrete barrier curbs or combination concrete curb and gutter. Parking lots
shall not extend within ten feet (10') of the right-of-way that abuts a public
street. (Ord. 2017-32, 12-19-2017; amd. Ord. 2024-51, 11-26-2024)
4-13-6: AMENDMENTS TO APPROVED PLANS:
   A.   Amendments: An applicant may request a change in an approved site plan.
A change in an approved site plan, which results in a major change, shall
require approval of the staff. All amendments shall follow the procedures and
conditions herein required for original application submittal and review. A
change considered only a minor change shall require only the submission of a
revised plan to the Zoning Officer.
   B.   Determination Of Major And Minor Changes: A determination of whether a
change in an approved site plan is a major or minor change shall be made by the
Zoning Officer according to the guidelines below. The applicant may appeal the
determination of a major change to the Village Administrator.
      1.   Guidelines For Major Changes:
         a.   A change in the original concept of the development.
         b.   A change in the original use or character of the development.
         c.   A change in the type of dwelling unit as identified on the
approved site plan.
         d.   An increase in the number of dwelling units planned.
         e.   Rearrangement of lots, blocks or building tracts.
         f.   A change in the character per function of any street.
         g.   A reduction in the amount of land set aside for common open
space.
         h.   An increase or decrease in any building area over five percent
(5%).
         i.   An increase or decrease over five percent (5%) in any building
height.
         j.   Significant variations in the design layout of the site plan,
such as, but not limited to, the deletion, relocation or addition or on site
improvements such as drives, parking lots, structures, berms, curbs,
landscaping, utilities.
      2.   Guidelines For Minor Changes:
         a.   Any minor variations in layout that does not constitute a major
change.
         b.   An increase or decrease in any building area less than five
percent (5%).
         c.   An increase or decrease less than five percent (5%) in any
building height.
         d.   Changes in the species of required trees, shrubs or ground cover
designated on the site plan. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
4-13-7: FEES:
Fees for the review of site plans shall be covered by the professional fee
agreement. No action on any site plan application shall be taken by the Village
until the application fee, professional fee agreement, and deposit have been
made. (Ord. 2002-03, 2-26-2002)
CHAPTER 14
SITE RUNOFF
SECTION:
4-14-1 General Provisions
4-14-2 Definitions
4-14-3 Permit Procedures And Requirements
4-14-4 Waivers To Stormwater Management Requirements
4-14-5 General Performance Criteria For Stormwater Management
4-14-6 Basic Stormwater Management Design Criteria
4-14-7 Requirements For Stormwater Management Plan Approval
4-14-8 Construction Inspection
4-14-9 Maintenance And Repair Of Stormwater Facilities
4-14-10 Enforcement And Penalties
4-14-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Findings Of Fact: It is hereby determined that:
      1.   Development projects alter the hydrologic response of local
watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream
channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition;
      2.   This stormwater runoff causes increased quantities of waterborne
pollutants; and
      3.   Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be
controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from
development sites.
   Therefore, the village of Minooka establishes these policies applicable to
all discharges to surface waters within the village to provide reasonable
guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting
local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of
stormwater runoff discharges from development projects and other construction
activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff
rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source
pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will
prevent threats to public health and safety.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater
management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general
health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this
jurisdiction. This chapter seeks to meet that purpose through the following
objectives:
      1.   Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in
order to reduce flooding, siltation, increases in stream temperature, and
stream bank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream channels;
      2.   Minimize pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development that
would otherwise degrade local water quality;
      3.   Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff that flows
from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the
predevelopment hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and
      4.   Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and
pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to
ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no
threat to public safety.
   C.   Applicability: This chapter shall be applicable to all development
applications for sites of 1.0 acre or more, unless eligible for an exemption or
granted a waiver by the village under the specifications of section
4-14-4 of this chapter. This chapter also applies to development activities
that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are
part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following
applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct development
activities may take place at different times on different schedules.
   To prevent the adverse impacts of stormwater runoff, the village has
developed a set of performance standards that must be met at new development
sites to the maximum extent practicable. The following activities may be exempt
from these stormwater performance criteria: Repairs to any stormwater treatment
practice deemed necessary by the village.
   When a development plan is submitted that qualifies as a redevelopment
project as defined in section
4-14-2 of this chapter, decisions on permitting shall be determined by the
building and zoning officer and the village engineer shall determine on site
stormwater requirements. This determination shall be dependent upon the amount
of impervious area created by the redevelopment and its impact on water
quality. Final authorization of all redevelopment projects will be determined
after review by the village board.
   D.   Compatibility With Other Permit And Ordinance Requirements: This
chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other
ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The
requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and
where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law,
whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards
for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence.
(Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACCELERATED EROSION: Erosion caused by development activities that exceed the
natural processes by which the surface of the land is worn away by the action
of water, wind, or chemical action.
APPLICANT: Any person, firm or governmental agency who has filed an application
for a stormwater management permit.
BUILDING: Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having walls and a
roof, designed for the shelter of any person, animal, or property, and
occupying more than one hundred (100) square feet of area.
CHANNEL: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, flowage, slough, ditch, conduit, culvert, gully,
ravine, wash or natural or manmade drainageway, which has a definite bed and
bank or shoreline, in or into which surface or ground water flows, either
perennially or intermittently.
DEDICATION: The deliberate appropriation of property by its owner for general
public use.
DETENTION: The temporary storage of storm runoff in a stormwater management
practice with the goals of controlling peak discharge rates and providing
gravity settling of pollutants.
DETENTION FACILITY: A detention basin or alternative structure designed for the
purpose of temporary storage of stream flow or surface runoff and gradual
release of stored water at controlled rates.
DEVELOPER: A person who undertakes development.
DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to real estate, including:
         A.   Preparation of a plot of subdivision;
         B.   Construction, reconstruction or placement of a building or any
addition to a building;
         C.   Installation of a manufactured home on a site, preparing a site
for a manufactured home, or installing a travel trailer on a site for more than
one hundred eighty (180) days;
         D.   Construction of roads, bridges or similar projects;
         E.   Redevelopment of a site;
         F.   Filling, dredging, grading, clearing, excavating, paving or other
nonagricultural alterations of the ground surface;
         G.   Storage of materials or deposit of solid or liquid waste; or
         H.   Any other activity that might alter the magnitude, frequency,
deviation, direction or velocity of stormwater flows from a property.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT: A legal right granted by a landowner to a grantee allowing
the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN: A plan that is designed to minimize the
accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during construction
activities.
FEE IN LIEU: A payment of money in place of meeting all or part of the
stormwater performance standards required by this chapter.
ILLINOIS URBAN MANUAL: The "Illinois Urban Manual" developed by the USDA
natural resources conservation service and the Illinois environmental
protection agency, current edition.
INDUSTRIAL STORMWATER PERMIT: A national pollutant discharge elimination system
permit issued to a commercial industry or group of industries which regulates
the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or
specifies on site pollution control strategies.
INFILTRATION: The passage or movement of water into the soil surfaces.
JURISDICTIONAL WETLAND: An area that is inundated or saturated by surface water
or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence
of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly
known as hydrophytic vegetation.
LAND DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY: Any activity that changes the volume or peak flow
discharge rate of rainfall runoff from the land surface. This may include the
grading, digging, cutting, scraping, or excavating of soil, placement of fill
materials, paving, construction, substantial removal of vegetation, or any
activity which bares soil or rock or involves the diversion or piping of any
natural or manmade watercourse.
LANDOWNER: The legal or beneficial owner of land, including those holding the
right to purchase or lease the land, or any other person holding proprietary
rights in the land.
MAINTENANCE AGREEMENT: A legally recorded document that acts as a property deed
restriction, and which provides for long term maintenance of stormwater
management practices.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION: Pollution from any source other than from any
discernible, confined, and discrete conveyances, and shall include, but not be
limited to, pollutants from construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff
sources.
OFF SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located outside the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for development activity.
OFFSET FEE: A monetary compensation paid to a local government for failure to
meet pollutant load reduction targets.
ON SITE FACILITY: A stormwater management measure located within the subject
property boundary described in the permit application for development activity.
RECHARGE: The replenishment of underground water reserves.
REDEVELOPMENT: Any construction, alteration or improvement exceeding 1.0 acre
in areas where existing land use is commercial, industrial, institutional or
multi-family residential.
STOP WORK ORDER: An order issued which requires that all construction activity
on a site be stopped.
STORM WATER TREATMENT PRACTICES (SWTPs): Measures, either structural or
nonstructural, that are determined to be the most effective, practical means of
preventing or reducing point source or nonpoint source pollution inputs to
stormwater runoff and water bodies.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT: The use of structural or nonstructural practices that
are designed to reduce stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes,
peak flow discharge rates and detrimental changes in stream temperature that
affect water quality and habitat.
STORMWATER RETROFIT: A stormwater management practice designed for an existing
development site that previously had either no stormwater management practice
in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management
requirements of the site.
STORMWATER RUNOFF: The waters derived from melting snow or rain falling within
a tributary drainage basin which are in excess of the infiltration capacity of
the soils of that basin, which flow over the surface of the ground or are
collected in channels or conduits.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Illinois.
WATER QUALITY VOLUME (WQV): The storage needed to capture and treat ninety
percent (90%) of the average annual stormwater runoff volume. Numerically WQV
will vary as a function of long term rainfall statistical data.
WATERCOURSE: Any river, stream, creek, brook, branch, natural or artificial
depression, ponded area, slough, gulch, draw, ditch, channel, conduit, culvert,
swale, grass waterway, gully, ravine, wash, or natural or manmade drainageway,
which has a definite channel, bed and banks, in or into which stormwater runoff
and floodwater flow either regularly or intermittently. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-
2009)
4-14-3: PERMIT PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: No landowner or land operator shall receive any of the
building, grading or other development permits required for land disturbance
activities of 1.0 acre or more without first meeting the requirements of this
chapter prior to commencing the proposed activity.
   B.   Application Requirements: The stormwater management plan shall be
prepared to meet the requirements of section
4-14-5 of this chapter, the maintenance agreement shall be prepared to meet the
requirements of section
4-14-9 of this chapter, and applicable fees. The stormwater management plan
need not consist of separate documents but may be incorporated into the
drawings and specifications for the project.
   C.   Application Procedure: Applications for land disturbance activity
permits must be accompanied by four (4) sets of drawings submitted to the
building and zoning officer. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-4: WAIVERS TO STORMWATER MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Waiver Eligibility Criteria: Every applicant shall provide for
stormwater management as required by this chapter unless this requirement is
waived by the village planning and zoning commission.
   The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or
in part by the village planning and zoning commission after a hearing, upon
request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following
conditions applies:
      1.   It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely
to impair attainment of the objectives of this chapter.
      2.   Alternative minimum requirements for on site management of
stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan
that has been approved by the village and the implementation of the plan is
required by local ordinance.
      3.   Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off site facility.
The off site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately
sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than
that which would be afforded by on site practices and there is a legally
obligated entity responsible for long term operation and maintenance of the
stormwater practice.
      4.   The village finds that meeting the minimum on site management
requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical
characteristics of a site.
      5.   Nonstructural practices will be used on the sites that reduce: a)
the generation of stormwater from the site, b) the size and cost of stormwater
storage and c) the pollutants generated at the site. These nonstructural
practices are explained in detail in the "Illinois Urban Manual".
   B.   Assurances Required For Waiver: In instances where one of the
conditions above applies, the village may grant a waiver from strict compliance
with these stormwater management provisions, as long as the variance will not
result in the following impacts to downstream waterway:
      1.   Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other
structures;
      2.   Degradation of biological functions or habitat;
      3.   Accelerated stream bank or streambed erosion or siltation; or
      4.   Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, and
property. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-5: GENERAL PERFORMANCE CRITERIA FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT:
Unless judged by the village to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following
performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all
development sites one acre or greater:
   A.   All site designs shall, to the maximum extent practicable, establish
stormwater management practices to control the peak flow rates of stormwater
discharge associated with specified design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater runoff and stormwaterborne pollutants. These practices should seek
to utilize pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to infiltrate stormwater
runoff from driveways, sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped areas
to the maximum extent practical. Preference should generally be given to
stormwater detention facilities that incorporate wet or wetland bottom
detention facilities where practical. Where wet stormwater detention facilities
are provided, all flows shall be routed through the detention facility (i.e.,
low flows shall not be bypassed).
   B.   Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, preference may be given
to dry basins with low flow bypass if the facility is proposed for multiple
uses that require that the pond bottom be dry as much as practical.
   C.   The drainage system should incorporate multiple uses where practical,
including, but not limited to, open spaces, recreation, and wetlands. The
applicant should avoid using the portions of the property exclusively for
stormwater management.
   D.   To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel
protection criterion shall be provided as prescribed in the "Illinois Urban
Manual".
   E.   Development projects disturbing one acre or more of land cover shall
submit a notice of intent (NOI) to the Illinois environmental protection agency
and comply with all the provisions of the national pollutant discharge
elimination system (NPDES) general permit ILR10 or its equivalent and shall
submit a copy of the required storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to
the village.
   F.   Certain industrial sites are required to prepare and implement an
SWPPP, and shall file a notice of intent (NOI) under the provisions of the
NPDES general permit. The stormwater pollution prevention plan requirement
applies to both existing and new industrial sites.
   G.   Prior to design, applicants are required to consult with the village
building and zoning officer to determine if they are subject to additional
stormwater design requirements.
   H.   The calculations for determining peak flows as required by chapter 8 of
this title shall be used for sizing all stormwater management practices where
applicable. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-6: BASIC STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Minimum Control Requirements: All stormwater management practices will
be designed so that the specific storm frequency storage volumes as required by
the village are met, unless the village grants the applicant a waiver or the
applicant is exempt from such requirements.
   In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control
than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the village reserves
the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to
control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff.
   B.   Site Design Feasibility: Stormwater management practices for a site
shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Among the factors
that should be considered:
      1.   Topography;
      2.   Maximum drainage area;
      3.   Depth to water table;
      4.   Soils;
      5.   Slopes;
      6.   Terrain;
      7.   Head; and
      8.   Location in relation to environmentally sensitive features or ultra-
urban areas.
   Applicants shall consult the "Illinois Urban Manual" for guidance on the
factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting a stormwater
management practice.
   C.   Conveyance Issues: All stormwater management practices shall be
designed to convey stormwater to allow for the maximum removal of pollutants
and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include, but not be limited to:
      1.   Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to outflow points;
      2.   Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
      3.   Elimination of erosive flow velocities; and
      4.   Providing of underdrain systems, where applicable.
   The village design standards and the "Illinois Urban Manual" shall provide
detailed guidance on the requirements for conveyance for each of the approved
stormwater management practices.
   D.   Treatment/Geometry Conditions: All stormwater management practices
shall be designed to capture and treat stormwater runoff according to the
specifications outlined in the "Illinois Urban Manual". These specifications
will designate the water quantity and quality treatment criteria that apply to
an approved stormwater management practice.
   E.   Landscaping Plans Required: All stormwater management practices must
have a landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the approved
stormwater management practice and how and who will manage and maintain this
vegetation. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-7: REQUIREMENTS FOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN APPROVAL:
   A.   Stormwater Management Plan Required For All Developments: No
application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater
management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality
impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed, unless
granted a waiver. This plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on
site or off site and, if on site, the general location and type of practices.
   The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other
interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater
management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional
engineer (PE) who will verify that the design of all stormwater management
practices meet the submittal requirements. No building, grading, or sediment
control permit shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management
plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by
the village building and zoning officer after determining that the plan or
waiver is consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Stormwater Management Concept Plan Requirements: A stormwater
management concept plan shall be required with all permit applications for
sites 5.0 acres or greater in size, and will include sufficient information
(e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc.) to evaluate the environmental
characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed
development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and
the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing
stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this conceptual
planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures
necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management
of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the
following information shall be included in the concept plan:
      1.   A map (or maps) indicating the location of existing and proposed
buildings, roads, parking areas, utilities, structural stormwater management
and sediment control facilities. The map(s) will also clearly show proposed
land use with tabulation of the percentage of surface area to be adapted to
various uses, drainage patterns, locations of utilities, roads and easements,
the limits of clearing and grading, a written description of the site plan and
justification of proposed changes in natural conditions may also be required;
      2.   Sufficient engineering analysis to show that the proposed stormwater
management measures are capable of controlling runoff from the site in
compliance with this chapter and the specifications of the "Illinois Urban
Manual" or other criteria acceptable to the village;
      3.   A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources at the site
and surrounding area as it exists prior to the commencement of the project and
a description of the watershed and its relation to the project site. This
description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover,
topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site. Particular
attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide
particular opportunities or constraints for development;
      4.   A written description of the required maintenance burden for any
proposed stormwater management facility; and
      5.   The village may also require a concept plan to consider the maximum
development potential of a site under existing zoning, regardless of whether
the applicant presently intends to develop the site to its maximum potential.
   For development or redevelopment occurring on a previously developed site,
an applicant shall be required to include within the stormwater concept plan
measures for controlling existing stormwater runoff discharges from the site in
accordance with the standards of this chapter to the maximum extent
practicable.
   C.   Final Stormwater Management Plan Requirements: After review of the
stormwater management concept plan, and modifications to that plan as deemed
necessary by the village, a final stormwater management plan must be submitted
for approval. The final stormwater management plan, in addition to the
information from the concept plan, shall include all of the information
required by this chapter. This includes:
      1.   Contact Information: The name, address, and telephone number of all
persons having a legal interest in the property and the tax reference number
and parcel number of the property or properties affected.
      2.   Topographic Base Map: A one inch equals two hundred feet (1" = 200')
scale, or larger, topographic base map of the site which extends a minimum of
one hundred feet (100') beyond the limits of the proposed development and
indicates existing surface water drainage including streams, ponds, culverts,
ditches, and wetlands, current land use including all existing structures,
locations of utilities, roads, and easements, and significant natural and
manmade features not otherwise shown.
      3.   Calculations: Hydrologic and hydraulic design calculations for the
predevelopment and postdevelopment conditions for the design storms specified
in this chapter. Such calculations shall include:
         a.   A description of the design storm frequency, intensity and
duration;
         b.   Time of concentration;
         c.   Soil curve numbers or runoff coefficients;
         d.   Peak runoff rates and total runoff volumes for each watershed
area;
         e.   Infiltration rates, where applicable;
         f.   Culvert capacities;
         g.   Flow velocities, data on the increase in rate and volume of
runoff for the design storms; and
         h.   Documentation of sources for all computation methods and field
test results.
      4.   Soils Information: If a stormwater management control measure
depends on the hydrologic properties of soils (e.g., infiltration basins), then
a soils report shall be submitted. The soils report shall be based on on site
boring logs or soil pit profiles. The number and location of required soil
borings or soil sits shall be determined based on what is needed to determine
the suitability and distribution of soil types present at the location of the
control measure.
      5.   Maintenance And Repair Plan: The design and planning of all
stormwater management facilities shall include detailed maintenance and repair
procedures to ensure their continued function. These plans will identify the
parts or components of a stormwater management facility that need to be
maintained and the equipment and skills or training necessary. Provisions for
the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance
program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall
be included in the plan.
      6.   Landscaping Plan: The applicant must present a detailed plan for
management of vegetation at the site after construction is finished, including
who will be responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what
practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is
preserved.
      7.   Maintenance Easements: The applicant must ensure access to all
stormwater treatment practices at the site for the purpose of inspection and
repair by securing all the maintenance easements needed on a permanent basis.
These easements will be recorded with the plan and will remain in effect even
with transfer of title to the property.
      8.   Maintenance Agreement: The applicant must execute an easement and an
inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land
served by any on site stormwater management measure in accordance with the
specifications of this chapter.
      9.   Erosion And Sediment Control Plans For Construction Of Stormwater
Management Measures: The applicant must prepare an erosion and sediment control
plan for all construction activities related to implementing any on site
stormwater management practices.
      10.   Other Environmental Permits: The applicant shall ensure that all
other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to
approval of the final stormwater design plan.
   D.   Performance Bond/Security: The village may, at its discretion, require
the submittal of a performance security in the form of a letter of credit prior
to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are
installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater
management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be
the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices
approved under the permit, plus twenty five percent (25%). The performance
security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work
specified in the stormwater management plan.
   The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon
submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a registered
professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in
accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this
chapter. The village will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to
ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of
this chapter. Provisions for a partial pro rata release of the performance
security based on the completion of various development stages can be arranged
at the discretion of the village. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-8: CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION:
   A.   Notice Of Construction Commencement: The applicant must notify the
village in advance before the commencement of construction. Regular inspections
of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the
staff of the village or certified by a professional engineer or their designee
who has been approved by the village. All inspections shall be documented and
written reports prepared that contain the following information:
      1.   The date and location of the inspection;
      2.   Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater
management plan;
      3.   Variations from the approved construction specifications; and
      4.   Any violations that exist.
   If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing
of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. No added
work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously
completed has received approval by the Village.
   B.   Landscaping And Stabilization Requirements: Any area of land from which
the natural vegetative cover has been either partially or wholly cleared or
removed by development activities shall be revegetated within fourteen (14)
days from the substantial completion of such clearing and construction. The
following criteria shall apply to revegetation efforts:
      1.   Reseeding must be done with an annual or perennial cover crop
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until such time as the cover crop is established
over ninety percent (90%) of the seeded area;
      2.   Replanting with native woody and herbaceous vegetation must be
accompanied by placement of straw mulch or its equivalent of sufficient
coverage to control erosion until the plantings are established and are capable
of controlling erosion;
      3.   Any area of revegetation must exhibit survival of a minimum of
seventy five percent (75%) of the cover crop throughout the year immediately
following revegetation; and
      4.   Revegetation must be repeated in successive years until the minimum
seventy five percent (75%) survival for one year is achieved.
   In addition to the above requirements, a landscaping plan must be submitted
with the final design describing the vegetative stabilization and management
techniques to be used at a site after construction is completed. This plan will
explain how the site will be stabilized after construction, and who will be
responsible for the maintenance of vegetation at the site and what practices
will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. (Ord.
2009-05, 1-27-2009)
4-14-9: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR OF STORMWATER FACILITIES:
   A.   Stormwater Drainage System Easements: Prior to the issuance of any
permit that requires a stormwater drainage system or stormwater management
facility as defined in section
4-8-11 of this title, the applicant or owner of the property must execute and
provide to the Village a written maintenance easement or include the
maintenance easement on the final plat of subdivision (hereinafter the
"easement") that shall run with the land and will be binding on all subsequent
owners of the land served by the stormwater drainage system or stormwater
management facility. The easement shall allow and provide for Village access to
the stormwater management facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection
by the Village or its contractor or agent, and for regular or special
assessments against property owners to insure that the stormwater drainage
system or stormwater management facility is maintained in proper working
condition, and that it continues to meet design standards and any other
provisions established by this chapter. The easement shall be executed by the
property owner and shall be recorded by the Village at the owner or applicant's
cost.
   B.   Annual Maintenance Schedule: As required by section
4-8-11 of this title, maintenance of all stormwater management facilities and
stormwater drainage systems shall be ensured by an annual written maintenance
schedule to be provided not less than annually to the Village upon the
Village's written request.
   C.   Annual Maintenance Requirements: All stormwater management facilities
and stormwater drainage systems may be inspected at least annually by the
Village, which will document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance
including but not limited to the requirements of this chapter. The annual
maintenance may include, but not be limited to, removal of silt, litter and
other debris from the stormwater and drainage systems, catch basins, inlets,
and drainage pipes as well as grass cutting and invasive vegetation removal,
and the necessary replacement of any landscape vegetation. In the event that
the annual maintenance plan as prepared by the property owner and approved by
the Village is not adhered to, the Village has the right to enter onto the
property pursuant to the easement referenced in subsection A of this section
and shall notify the property owner of violations and any and all required
maintenance. Within thirty (30) calendar days of said notice, the property
owner shall perform the specified maintenance at its own expense. Within thirty
six (36) hours of notice, the property owner shall perform any specified
emergency maintenance as may be required by the Village pursuant to written
notice.
   D.   Failure To Maintain: In the event that the property owner does not
operate and maintain the stormwater drainage system or stormwater management
facility as required by the Village pursuant to this chapter, the Village shall
be authorized to take one or more of the following actions (or a combination of
the same):
      1.   The Village or its agents may go onto the property and maintain the
stormwater and drainage system. Not less than ten (10) days before taking such
action, the Village shall provide to the property owner (as determined by
reference to the tax rolls maintained by the respective County Treasurer) by
certified return receipt requested mail, notice of its intention to do so. The
Village, pursuant to the easement referred to in subsection A of this section
will carry out the provisions of this subsection and will invoice the cost of
the specified maintenance to the property owner, who shall pay the amount of
the invoice within thirty (30) days of the Village's mailing by certified
return receipt requested mail. If the property owner fails to pay the amount of
the invoice, all costs, fees or expenses incurred by the Village in maintaining
the stormwater drainage system or stormwater management facility pursuant to
this subsection may be, without further notice, assessed as a lien on the
property and the property served by the stormwater drainage system to be
collected in any manner as provided by law.
      2.   Require the owner to provide a letter of credit in an amount
sufficient to ensure maintenance of the stormwater drainage system or
stormwater management facility in a form satisfactory to the Village. The owner
shall provide the requested letter of credit within fifteen (15) business days
of receiving such request from the Village. The letter of credit shall provide
that the payment to the Village shall be assured upon submission by the Village
of notice of a demand on the letter of credit to the respective issuer
certifying that the property owner has not maintained the stormwater drainage
system as required by this chapter.
   E.   Records Of Installation And Maintenance Activities: Property owners
responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater drainage system
or stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and
all maintenance and repairs available for inspection by the Village upon
reasonable written notice, and shall retain all such records for a period of at
least eight (8) years. Said records shall also be made available to the Village
during any inspection of the facility or other reasonable times upon request.
(Ord. 2017-26, 10-24-2017)
4-14-10: ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations: Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted
contrary to this chapter may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in
a manner provided by law.
   B.   Notice Of Violation: When the Village determines that an activity is
not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this chapter, it
shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The
notice of violation shall contain:
      1.   The name and address of the owner or applicant;
      2.   The address when available or a description of the building,
structure or land upon which the violation is occurring;
      3.   A statement specifying the nature of the violation;
      4.   A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the
development activity into compliance with this chapter and a time schedule for
the completion of such remedial action;
      5.   A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be
assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; and
      6.   A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to
the Village Administrator by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen
(15) days of service of notice of violation.
   C.   Stop Work Orders: Persons receiving a notice of violation will be
required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in
effect until the Village confirms that the development activity is in
compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to
address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal,
or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in
this chapter.
   D.   Civil And Criminal Penalties: In addition to or as an alternative to
any penalty provided herein or by law, any person convicted of violating any of
the provisions or requirements of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of
not less than twenty five dollars ($25.00) and not more than as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this Code. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a
separate offense.
   E.   Restoration Of Lands: Any violator may be required to restore land to
its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken
within a reasonable time after notice, the Village may take necessary
corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property
until paid.
   F.   Holds On Occupation Permits: Occupation permits will not be granted
until all corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted
by the Village. (Ord. 2009-05, 1-27-2009)
CHAPTER 15
REGISTRATION OF FORECLOSING MORTGAGED PROPERTY AND VACANT PROPERTY
SECTION:
4-15-1: Purpose And Intent
4-15-2: Definitions
4-15-3: Applicability And Jurisdiction
4-15-4: Establishment Of A Registry
4-15-5: Inspection And Registration Of Real Property Under Foreclosure
4-15-6: Inspection And Registration Of Real Property That Is Not Subject To A
Mortgage In Foreclosure
4-15-7: Maintenance Requirements
4-15-8: Security Requirements
4-15-9: Provisions Supplemental
4-15-10: Public Nuisance
4-15-11: Additional Authority
4-15-12: Opposing, Obstructing Enforcement Officer; Penalty
4-15-13: Penalties
4-15-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose and intent of the Board of Trustees to establish a process to
address the deterioration, crime, and decline in value of Village neighborhoods
caused by property with foreclosing or foreclosed mortgages located within the
Village, and to identify, regulate, limit and reduce the number of these
properties located within the Village. It has been determined that Owner-
occupied structures are generally better maintained when compared to vacant
structures, even with a diligent off-site property Owner. Vacant structures or
structures owned by individuals who are economically strained and unable to
meet their mortgage obligations are often not properly or diligently
maintained, which contribute to blight, declined property values, and have a
negative impact on social perception of the residential areas where they are
located. It is the Board of Trustees’ further intent to establish a
registration program as a mechanism to help protect neighborhoods from becoming
blighted through the lack of adequate maintenance of properties that are in
Foreclosure or Foreclosed, and to provide a mechanism to avert foreclosure
actions through timely intervention, education, or counseling of property
Owners. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning.
              That the mortgagor has not complied with the terms of the mortgage on the
DEFAULT:      property, or the promissory note, or other evidence of the debt, referred to in
              the mortgage.
ENFORCEMENT   Any law enforcement officer, building official, zoning inspector, code enforcement
OFFICER:      officer, fire inspector, building inspector, or other person authorized by the
              Village to enforce the applicable code(s).
              Any condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would
              lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions
              may include, but are not limited to: overgrown and/or dead vegetation; past due
              Utility notices and/or disconnected Utilities; accumulation of trash junk or
EVIDENCE OF   debris; abandoned vehicles, auto parts and/or materials; the absence of
VACANCY:      furnishings and/or personal items consistent with habitation or occupancy; the
              presence of an unsanitary, stagnant swimming pool; the accumulation of newspapers,
              circulars, flyers and/or mail; statements by neighbors, passers-by, delivery
              agents or government agents; and/or the presence of boards over doors, windows or
              other openings in violation of applicable code.
              The legal process by which a Mortgagee, or other lien holder, terminates or
FORECLOSURE   attempts to terminate a property Owner’s equitable right of redemption to obtain
OR            legal and equitable title to the Real Property pledged as security for a debt or
FORECLOSURE   the Real Property subject to the lien. The legal process is not concluded until
ACTION:       the property obtained by the Mortgagee, lien holder, or their designee, by
              certificate of title, or any other means, is sold to a non-related bona fide
              purchaser in an arm’s length transaction to satisfy the debt or lien.
              The creditor, including but not limited to, trustees; mortgage servicing
              companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or employee of the
MORTGAGEE:    creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor’s rights,
              interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement; or any other person or
              entity with the legal right to foreclose on the Real Property, excluding
              governmental entities as the assignee or owner.
              Every person, entity, or Mortgagee, who alone or severally with others, has legal
              or equitable title to any Real Property as defined by this Chapter; has legal
OWNER:        care, charge, or control of any such property; is in possession or control of any
              such property; and/or is vested with possession or control of any such property.
              The Property Manager shall not be considered the Owner.
PROPERTY      Any party designated by the Owner as responsible for inspecting, maintaining and
MANAGER:      securing the property as required in this Chapter.
REAL          Any residential or commercial land and/or buildings, leasehold improvements and
PROPERTY:     anything affixed to the land, or portion thereof identified by a property parcel
              identification number, located in the Village limits.
              (a)   Any Real Property located in the Village, whether vacant or occupied, that
              is encumbered by a mortgage subject to an ongoing Foreclosure Action by the
              Mortgagee or Trustee, has been the subject of a Foreclosure Action by a Mortgagee
              or Trustee and a Judgement has been entered, or has been the subject of a
              Foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the beneficiary of a mortgage
REGISTRABLE   involved in the Foreclosure and any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of
PROPERTY:     foreclosure/sale. The designation of a “foreclosure” property as “registrable”
              shall remain in place until such time as the property is sold to a non-related
              bona fide purchaser in an arm’s length transaction or the Foreclosure Action has
              been dismissed; or
              (b)   Any property that is vacant for more than thirty (30) days or any
              cancellation of Utility or Service, whichever occurs first.
              A web-based electronic database of searchable Real Property records, used by the
REGISTRY:     Village to allow Mortgagees and Owners the opportunity to register properties and
              pay applicable fees as required in this Chapter.
              Six (6) months from the date of the first action that requires registration, as
SEMI-ANNUAL   determined by the Village, or its designee, and every subsequent six (6) months.
REGISTRATION: The date of the initial registration may be different than the date of the first
              action that required registration.
              Any utility and/or service that is essential for a building to be habitable and/or
UTILITIES AND perform a service necessary to comply with all Village codes. This includes, but
SERVICES:     is not limited to, electrical, gas, water, sewer, lawn maintenance, pool
              maintenance, and snow removal.
VACANT:       Any parcel of land in the Village that contains any building or structure that is
              not lawfully occupied. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
 
4-15-3: APPLICABILITY AND JURISDICTION:
This Chapter applies to Foreclosing, Foreclosed, and Vacant property within the
Village. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-4: ESTABLISHMENT OF A REGISTRY:
The Village, or its designee, shall establish a registry cataloging each
Registrable Property within the Village, containing the information required by
this Chapter. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-5: INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY UNDER FORECLOSURE:
   A.   Any Mortgagee who holds a mortgage on Real Property located within the
Village shall perform an inspection of the property upon default by the
mortgagor as evidenced by the filing of a Foreclosure Action.
   B.   Property inspected pursuant to subsection (a) above that remains in
Foreclosure shall be inspected every thirty (30) days by the Mortgagee or
Mortgagee’s designee. If an inspection shows a change in the property’s
occupancy status the Mortgagee shall, within ten (10) days of that inspection,
update the occupancy status of the property registration.
   C.   Within ten (10) days of the date any Mortgagee files a Foreclosure
Action, the Mortgagee shall register the Real Property with the Village
Registry, and, at the time of registration, indicate whether the property is
Vacant, and if so shall designate in writing a Property Manager to inspect,
maintain, and secure the Real Property subject to the mortgage under a
Foreclosure Action when legally possible. A separate registration is required
for each property under a Foreclosure Action, regardless of whether it is
occupied or vacant.
   D.   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the Mortgagee, the mailing address of the Mortgagee, e-mail
address, telephone number and name of the Property Manager and said person’s
address, e-mail address, and telephone number.
   E.   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable Semi-Annual Registration fee of three hundred twenty-five dollars
($325.00) for each property. Subsequent non-refundable Semi-Annual renewal
registrations of properties and fees in the amount of three hundred twenty-five
dollars ($325.00) are due within ten (10) days of the expiration of the
previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the costs of: (1)
registration and registration enforcement, (2) code enforcement and mitigation
related to Defaulted properties, (3) post-closing counseling and Foreclosure
intervention limited to Owner-occupied persons in Default, which may not
include cash and mortgage modification assistance, and (4) for any related
purposes as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this Chapter. Said fees
shall be deposited to a special account in the Village’s Department dedicated
to the cost of implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance, and fulfilling
the purpose and intent of this Chapter. None of the funds provided for in this
section shall be utilized for the legal defense of Foreclosure Actions.
   F.   If the mortgage and/or servicing on a Registrable Property is sold or
transferred, the new Mortgagee is subject to all the terms of this Chapter.
Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new Mortgagee shall register the
property or update the existing registration. The previous Mortgagee(s) will
not be released from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees,
fines, and penalties accrued during that Mortgagee’s involvement with the
Registrable Property.
   G.   If the Mortgagee sells or transfers the Registrable Property in a non-
arm’s length transaction to a related entity or person, the transferee is
subject to all the terms of this Chapter. Within ten (10) days of the transfer,
the transferee shall register the property or update the existing registration.
Any and all previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties, regardless of who the
Mortgagee was at the time registration was required, including, but not limited
to, unregistered periods during the Foreclosure process, are the responsibility
of the transferee and are due and payable with the updated registration. The
previous Mortgagee will not be released from the responsibility of paying all
previous unpaid fees, fines, and penalties accrued during that Mortgagee’s
involvement with the Foreclosed Property.
   H.   If the Foreclosing or Foreclosed Property is not registered, or the
registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of when the registration
or renewal is required pursuant to this section, a late fee equivalent to ten
percent (10%) of the Semi-Annual Registration fee shall be charged for every
thirty-day period (30), or portion thereof, the property is not registered and
shall be due and payable with the registration.
   I.   This section shall also apply to properties that have been the subject
of a foreclosure sale where title is transferred to the Mortgagee as well as
any properties transferred to the Mortgagee under a deed in lieu of foreclosure
or by any other legal means.
   J.   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the Semi-
Annual Registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the property remains Registrable Property.
   K.   Failure of the Mortgagee and/or property Owner of record to properly
register or to modify the registration to reflect a change of circumstances as
required by this ordinance is a violation of this Chapter and shall be subject
to enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the Village.
   L.   If any property is in violation of this Chapter the Village may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and/or place a lien on the
property for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost
incurred to the property into compliance.
   M.   Registration of foreclosure property does not alleviate the Mortgagee
and/or Owner from obtaining all required licenses, permits and inspections
required by applicable code or State Statutes. Acquisition of required
licenses, permits and inspections or registration of rental property does not
alleviate the requirement for the property to be registered under this section.
Mortgagee and/or Owner is expected to update the status of the property in the
event of a Mortgagee managed rental. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-6: INSPECTION AND REGISTRATION OF REAL PROPERTY THAT IS NOT SUBJECT TO A
MORTGAGE IN FORECLOSURE:
   A.   Any Owner of Vacant property located within the Village shall within
ten (10) days after the property becomes Vacant, register the Real Property
with the Village Registry.
   B.   Initial registration pursuant to this section shall contain at a
minimum the name of the Owner, the mailing address of the Owner, e-mail
address, and telephone number of the Owner, and if applicable, the name and
telephone number of the Property Manager and said person’s address, e-mail
address, and telephone number.
   C.   At the time of initial registration each registrant shall pay a non-
refundable Semi-Annual Registration fee of three hundred twenty-five dollars
($325.00) for each Vacant property. Subsequent non-refundable Semi-Annual
renewal registrations of Vacant properties and fees in the amount of three
hundred twenty-five dollars ($325.00) are due within ten (10) days of the
expiration of the previous registration. Said fees shall be used to offset the
costs of: (1) registration and registration enforcement, (2) code enforcement
and mitigation related to Vacant properties, and (3) for any related purposes
as may be adopted in the policy set forth in this Chapter. Said fees shall be
deposited to a special account in the Village’s Department dedicated to the
cost of implementation and enforcement of this Ordinance, and fulfilling the
purpose and intent of this Chapter.
   D.   If the property is sold or transferred, the new Owner is subject to all
the terms of this Chapter. Within ten (10) days of the transfer, the new Owner
shall register the Vacant property. The previous Owner(s) will not be released
from the responsibility of paying all previous unpaid fees, fines, and
penalties accrued during that Owner’s involvement with the Vacant property.
   E.   If the Vacant property is not registered, or either the registration
fee or the Semi-Annual Registration fee is not paid within thirty (30) days of
when the registration or Semi-Annual Registration is required pursuant to this
section, a late fee shall be equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the Semi-Annual
Registration fee shall be charged for every thirty (30) day period, or portion
thereof, the property is not registered and shall be due and payable with the
registration. This section shall apply to the initial registration and
registrations required by subsequent Owners of the Vacant property.
   F.   Properties subject to this section shall remain subject to the Semi-
Annual Registration requirement, and the inspection, security, and maintenance
standards of this section as long as the property is Vacant.
   G.   Failure of the Owner to properly register or to modify the registration
to reflect a change of circumstances as required by this ordinance is a
violation of this Chapter and shall be subject to enforcement by any of the
enforcement means available to the Village.
   H.   If any property is in violation of this Chapter the Village may take
the necessary action to ensure compliance with and place a lien on the property
for the cost of the outstanding obligation and any additional cost incurred to
the property into compliance.
   I.   Properties registered as a result of this section are not required to
be registered again pursuant to the Foreclosure mortgage property section.
(Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-7: MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Properties subject to this chapter shall be kept free of weeds,
overgrown brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, any
accumulation of newspaper circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by
federal, state or local law, discarded personal items including, but not
limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material,
or any other items that give the appearance that the property is abandoned.
   B.   Registrable Property shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar
markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches
the color of the exterior structure.
   C.   Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping, of Registrable
Property shall be maintained in accordance with the applicable code(s) at the
time registration is required.
   D.   Registrable yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative
rock or bark or artificial turf/sod. Acceptable maintenance of yards and/or
landscape shall not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt or similar
material.
   E.   Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, watering, irrigation,
cutting and mowing of required ground cover or landscape and removal of all
trimmings.
   F.   Pools and spas of shall be maintained so the water remains free and
clear of pollutants and debris and shall comply with the regulations set forth
in the applicable code(s).
   G.   Failure of the Mortgagee, Owner, and transferees to properly maintain
the property as required by this Chapter may result in a violation of the
applicable code(s) and issuance of a citation or notice of violation in
accordance with the applicable code of the Village. Pursuant to a finding and
determination by the Village Sheriff, Magistrate or a court of competent
jurisdiction, the Village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance
with this section.
   H.   In addition to the above, the property is required to be maintained in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the Village. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-
2021)
4-15-8: SECURITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Properties subject to these Sections shall be maintained in a secure
manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons.
   B.   A “secure manner” shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and
locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow
a child to access the interior of the property or structure. Broken windows,
doors, gates, and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access
the interior of the property or structure must be repaired. Broken windows
shall be secured by re-glazing of the window.
   C.   If a property is Registrable, and the property has become vacant or
blighted, a Property Manager shall be designated by the Mortgagee and/or Owner
to perform the work necessary to bring the property into compliance with the
applicable code(s), and the Property Manager must perform regular inspections
to verify compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, and any other
applicable laws.
   D.   In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in
accordance with the applicable code(s) of the Village.
   E.   When a property subject to this Chapter becomes Vacant, it shall be
posted with the name and twenty-four (24) hour contact telephone number of the
Property Manager. The Property Manager shall be available to be contacted by
the Village Monday through Friday between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., legal
holidays excepted. The sign shall be placed in a window facing the street and
shall be visible from the street. The posting shall be no less than eighteen
(18) inches by twenty-four (24) inches and shall be of a font that is legible
from a distance of forty-five (45) feet. The posting shall contain the
following language with supporting information:
   THIS PROPERTY IS MANAGED BY _________________________________.
   AND IS INSPECTED ON A REGULAR BASIS.
   THE PROPERTY MANAGER CAN BE CONTACTED
   BY TELEPHONE AT _____________________________________________.
   OR BY EMAIL AT ________________________________________________.
   F.   The posting required in subsection (e) above shall be placed on the
interior of a window facing the street to the front of the property so that it
is visible from the street, or secured to the exterior of the building/
structure facing the street to the front of the property so that it is visible
from the street or if no such area exists, on a stake of sufficient size to
support the posting in a location that is at all times visible from the street
to the front of the property but not readily accessible to vandals. Exterior
posting shall be constructed of and printed with weather-resistant materials.
   G.   Failure of the Mortgagee and/or property Owner of record to properly
inspect and secure a property subject to this Chapter, and post and maintain
the signage noted in this section, is a violation and shall be subject to
enforcement by any of the enforcement means available to the Village. The
Village may take the necessary action to ensure compliance with this section,
and recover costs and expenses in support thereof. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-9: PROVISIONS SUPPLEMENTAL:
The provisions of this Chapter are cumulative with and in addition to other
available remedies. Nothing contained in this Chapter shall prohibit the
Village from collecting on fees, fines, and penalties in any lawful manner; or
enforcing its codes by any other means, including, but not limited to,
injunction, abatement, or as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. (Ord.
2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-10: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
All Registrable Property is at risk of being a public nuisance and if vacant or
blighted can constitute a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to
the police power is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, welfare,
and safety of the residents of the Village. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-11: ADDITIONAL AUTHORITY:
   A.   If the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that a property
subject to the provisions of this Chapter is posing a serious threat to the
public health, safety, and welfare, the code Enforcement Officer may
temporarily secure the property at the expense of the Mortgagee or Owner, and
may bring the violations before the code enforcement, Board of Trustees or
special magistrate as soon as possible to address the conditions of the
property. Nothing herein shall limit the Village from abating any nuisance or
unsafe condition by any other legal means available to it.
   B.   The Sheriff, code enforcement, Board of Trustees or special magistrate
shall have the authority to require the Mortgagee or Owner affected by this
section, to implement additional maintenance and/or security measures
including, but not limited to, securing any and all doors, windows or other
openings, employment of an on-site security guard or other measures as may be
reasonably required to help prevent further decline of the property.
   C.   If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a
serious threat to the public health, safety, and welfare, then the Sheriff,
code enforcement, Board of Trustees or special magistrate may direct the
Village to abate the violations and charge the Mortgagee or Owner with the cost
of the abatement.
   D.   If the Mortgagee or Owner does not reimburse the Village for the cost
of temporarily securing the property, or of any abatement directed by the
Sheriff, code enforcement officer, code enforcement, Board of Trustees or
special magistrate, within thirty (30) days of the Village sending the
Mortgagee or Owner the invoice then the Village may lien the property with such
cost, along with an administrative fee as determined in the Village’s fee
ordinance to recover the administrative personnel services. In addition to
filing a lien the Village may pursue financial penalties against the Mortgagee
or Owner.
   E.   The Village may contract with an entity to implement this Chapter, and,
if so, any reference to the Enforcement Officer herein shall include the entity
the Village contract with for that purpose. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-12: OPPOSING, OBSTRUCTING ENFORCEMENT OFFICER; PENALTY:
Whoever opposes obstructs or resists any Enforcement Officer or any person
authorized by the enforcement office in the discharge of duties as provided in
this chapter shall be punishable as provided in the applicable code(s) or a
court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
4-15-13: PENALTIES:
Unless otherwise provided for in this Chapter, a violation of this Chapter is
declared unlawful. (Ord. 2021-32, 12-21-2021)
CHAPTER 16
TELECOMMUNICATION FACILITIES AND TOWERS
SECTION:
4-16-1 Purpose
4-16-2 Definitions
4-16-3 Exclusions
4-16-4 Restrictions On Construction
4-16-5 Height Limitations
4-16-6 Setbacks
4-16-7 Location Preference; Other Requirements
4-16-8 Tower Required Submittals
4-16-9 Removal Of Abandoned Antennas And Towers
4-16-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of telecommunication facilities and towers. The goals of this chapter are to:
a) protect residential areas and land uses and commercial areas and land uses
from potential adverse impacts of telecommunications facilities and towers; b)
minimize the total number of telecommunications facilities and towers
throughout the community; c) strongly encourage the joint use of new and
existing tower sites as a primary option rather than construction of additional
single use towers; d) encourage users of telecommunications facilities and
towers to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse
impact on the community is minimal; e) encourage users of telecommunications
facilities and towers to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse
visual impact of the telecommunications facilities and towers through careful
design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques; f)
enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide
such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently; g)
consider the public health and safety with respect to telecommunications
facilities and towers; and h) avoid potential damages to adjacent properties
from tower failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures.
The village of Minooka shall give due consideration to the village's
comprehensive plan, zoning map, existing land uses, and environmentally
sensitive areas in approving sites for the location of telecommunications
facilities and towers. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-2: DEFINITIONS:
ANTENNA: A device, dish or array used to transmit or receive telecommunications
signals.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY: Any commercial facility, excepting governmental
agencies, established for the purpose of providing wireless voice, data and
image transmission within a designated service area. A "telecommunications
facility" consists of one or more antennas attached to a support structure
together with related equipment for buildings.
TOWER: A structure and any support thereto such as a self-supporting mast,
pole, lattice tower, guy tower, or monopole tower, constructed as a
freestanding structure or in association with a building, other permanent
structure or equipment on which one or more antennas is located. The term
"tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common carrier towers and cellular telephone towers. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-3: EXCLUSIONS:
   A.   Governmental agencies are excluded telecommunications facilities and
tower restrictions as stated in this chapter.
   B.   Satellite antennas as defined in section
4-12-1 of this title. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-4: RESTRICTIONS ON CONSTRUCTION:
Telecommunications facilities and towers essential to the operation of the
exchange are required to be in the interest of public convenience and
necessity, and only permitted as conditional permitted uses on property with an
M1 and M2 zoning classification.
No new telecommunications facilities and towers shall be constructed or erected
within the corporate limits of the village except as conditional permitted uses
on property with an M1 or M2 zoning classification, upon passage, approval and
publication of this chapter as required by law. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-5: HEIGHT LIMITATIONS:
   A.   Height of a tower is the distance from the base of the tower to the top
of the structure.
   B.   Freestanding or guyed tower shall be limited to a height not exceeding
two hundred feet (200').
   C.   Tower and/or antenna mounted on a building or structure other than a
freestanding or guyed communications tower must not extend more than thirty
feet (30') above the highest part of the structure. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-6: SETBACKS:
   A.   A tower must have a minimum setback distance of five hundred feet
(500') from any residential zoning district boundary or land use.
   B.   A tower must have a minimum setback distance of two hundred fifty feet
(250') from any commercial zoning district boundary or land use.
   C.   A tower must otherwise comply with the setbacks in the M1 and M2
districts. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-7: LOCATION PREFERENCE; OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Order Of Preference: The order of preference for locating new
telecommunication facilities and towers shall be as follows:
      1.   First Preference: Use of such facilities by the village of Minooka
and placement of antennas and towers on property owned by the village of
Minooka and which comply with the requirements of this chapter including:
         a.   The facilities will not interfere with the purpose for which the
village owned property is intended;
         b.   The facilities will have no significant adverse impact on
surrounding private property;
         c.   The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance
and commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the
use of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The village
shall establish fees after considering comparable rates in other cities,
potential expenses, risks to the village, and other appropriate factors;
         d.   The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond,
or other security acceptable to the village to cover the costs of removing the
facilities increased by twenty five percent (25%) to account for contingencies
and inflation;
         e.   The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who
have a higher priority as discussed in this chapter;
         f.   Unless otherwise agreed, the applicant must agree that upon the
occurrence of issues affecting public health, safety, or welfare, and following
reasonable notice, the village may require the applicant to remove the
facilities at the applicant's expense;
         g.   The applicant must reimburse the village for any related costs,
such as attorney expenses, which the village incurs because of the presence of
the applicant's facilities;
         h.   The applicant must obtain all necessary land use approvals; and
         i.   The applicant must cooperate with the village's objective to
promote collocations and thus limit the number of cell sites requested, or
camouflage the site.
      2.   Second Preference Location; Other Public Agencies: The order of
preference after village usage shall be as follows:
         a.   Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire, and
ambulance services, which are not part of the village and private entities with
a public safety agreement with the village;
         b.   Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to
public safety except parks and schools;
         c.   Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication
services including cellular, personal communication services (PCS), radio and
television services, specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized
mobilized radio (ESMR), data internet, paging, and similar services that are
marketed to the general public.
      3.   Other Preference Locations: The order of preference after placement
on publicly owned property shall be as follows:
         a.   Place telecommunications facilities on appropriate rights of way
and existing structures, such as buildings, towers, water towers, and
smokestacks located in the M1 or M2 manufacturing districts that do not adjoin
or adversely impact residential or commercial areas and otherwise satisfy the
setback requirements;
         b.   Place antennas and towers in districts zoned M1 and M2 which do
not adjoin residential and commercial districts and in locations that otherwise
satisfy the setback requirements;
         c.   Place antennas and towers in districts zoned M1 and M2 in
locations that otherwise satisfy the setback requirements.
   B.   Application Requirements: The following requirements shall apply for
all applications:
      1.   An applicant that wishes to locate a new telecommunications facility
or tower shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the
proposed communications facilities on a government facility, a private
institutional structure, or other appropriate existing structures within an M1
or M2 zone in compliance with the requirements in this chapter, and that due to
valid considerations including physical constraints, and economic or
technological feasibility, no appropriate location is available.
      2.   Applicants are required to demonstrate by providing proof of
certified mailings or other reasonable means: a) that they have contacted the
owners of reasonably suitable structures which are within a one-fourth (1/4)
mile radius of the site proposed and which from a location standpoint could
provide part of a network for transmission of signals; b) have asked for
permission to install the antenna on those structures; and c) were denied for
reasons other than economic feasibility.
      3.   The information submitted by the applicant shall include: a) a map
of the area to be served by the tower or antenna, b) its relationship to other
cell sites in the applicant's network, and c) an evaluation of existing
buildings taller than thirty five feet (35') within one-fourth (1/4) mile of
the proposed tower or antenna which from a location standpoint could provide
part of a network to provide transmission of signals.
   C.   Aesthetics: Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject
to any applicable standards of the federal aviation administration, be painted
a neutral color or such shades as are appropriate and compatible with the
surrounding environment, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness.
      2.   At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, be screened with live plantings and include
evergreen vegetation with a minimum height of six feet (6'), at the time of
planting, placed densely as to form a screen, subject to the village's approval
and sufficient to reduce the visual obtrusiveness of said structures.
Landscaping shall be compatible with other nearby landscaping and shall be kept
healthy and well maintained.
      3.   If a telecommunications facility is installed on a structure other
than a tower, the telecommunications facility and supporting electrical and
mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or
closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make
the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
      4.   Fencing for equipment enclosures must be of residential quality such
as wood privacy fencing or if chainlink is used, must be screened with
evergreen vegetation that will reach a height of six feet (6') within one year
of its planting.
   D.   Lighting: Towers and telecommunications facilities shall not be
artificially lighted, unless required by the federal aviation administration or
other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting alternatives
and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views.
   E.   State Or Federal Requirements: All towers and telecommunications
facilities must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the federal
aviation administration, the federal communications commission, and any other
agency of the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and telecommunications facilities. If such standards and regulations are
changed, then the owners of the towers and telecommunications facilities
governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and telecommunications
facilities into compliance with such revised standards and regulations, within
six (6) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless
a different compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling state or federal
agency. Failure to bring towers and telecommunications facilities into
compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds
for the removal of the tower or telecommunications facilities at the owner's
expense.
   F.   Building Codes; Safety Standards: To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower and telecommunications facility shall ensure that
it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable state or
local building codes and the applicable standards for towers and
telecommunications facilities that are published by the Electronic Industries
Association And Building Codes, as amended from time to time, whichever is more
stringent. If, upon inspection, the village of Minooka concludes that a tower
or telecommunications facility fails to comply with such codes and standards
and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being
provided to the owner of the tower or telecommunications facility, the owner
shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower or telecommunications facility
into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower or
telecommunications facility into compliance within said thirty (30) days shall
constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or telecommunications facility
at the owner's expense. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
4-16-8: TOWER REQUIRED SUBMITTALS:
In addition to any information required for applications for conditional
permitted uses pursuant to section
5-11-9 of this code, applicants for a conditional permitted use for a tower
shall submit the following information:
   A.   A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and height of
the proposed tower or telecommunications facility, on site land uses and
zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to other
municipalities), master plan classification of the site and all properties
within the applicable separation distances set forth in this chapter, adjacent
roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation
drawings of the proposed tower or telecommunications facility and any other
structures, topography, parking, and other information deemed by the zoning
administrator or his or her designee to be necessary to assess compliance with
this chapter.
   B.   Legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel or subdivision
or survey plat (if applicable).
   C.   The setback distance between the proposed tower or telecommunications
facility and the nearest residential unit and boundary for residential zoning
district, and the nearest commercial use and boundary for commercial zoning
district.
   D.   The separation distance from other towers shall be shown on an updated
site plan or map. The applicant shall also identify the type of construction of
the existing tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if
known.
   E.   A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
   F.   Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the method of
camouflage and illumination.
   G.   A description of compliance with this chapter and all applicable
federal, state, or local laws.
   H.   A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether construction of
the tower will accommodate collocation of additional antennas for future users.
   I.   Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network for the
tower(s) described in the application and other cellular sites owned or
operated by the applicant in the municipality.
   J.   One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antenna
including description of design characteristics and materials.
   K.   A report from a structural engineer showing the tower antenna capacity
by type and number, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand
winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA222 (latest revisions) standards.
   L.   Written authorization from the property owner for the application.
   M.   Evidence that a valid FCC license for the proposed activity has been
issued.
   N.   Additional information required by the building and zoning officer for
determination that all applicable zoning regulations are met. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-
23-2015)
4-16-9: REMOVAL OF ABANDONED ANTENNAS AND TOWERS:
   A.   "Abandonment" shall be defined as follows: 1) to cease operation for a
period of sixty (60) or more consecutive days; or 2) to reduce the effective
radiated power of an antenna by seventy five percent (75%) for sixty (60) or
more consecutive days; or 3) to relocate an antenna at a point less than eighty
percent (80%) of the height of an antenna support structure; or 4) to reduce
the number of transmissions from an antenna by seventy five percent (75%) for
sixty (60) or more consecutive days.
   B.   Any telecommunications facility or tower that is abandoned as defined
herein shall be removed within one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of
notice from the village of Minooka notifying the owner of such abandonment.
Failure to remove an abandoned telecommunications facility or tower within said
one hundred eighty (180) days shall be grounds for the village to cause removal
of the tower or telecommunications facility at the owner's expense. If there
are two (2) or more users of a single tower or telecommunications facility,
then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the
tower or telecommunications facility.
   C.   The owner of any approved telecommunications facility or tower shall
submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to
the village to cover the costs of removing the facilities increased by twenty
five percent (25%) to account for contingencies and inflation in the event said
owner is unable or unwilling to remove an abandoned telecommunications facility
or tower in conformance with the provisions hereof. The village of Minooka will
have the right, at intervals no more often than every three (3) years, to
require that the bond amount be increased to reflect changes in the Chicago
metropolitan area consumer price index (all consumers) during the prior three
(3) year period. (Ord. 2015-18, 6-23-2015)
CHAPTER 17
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION
SECTION:
4-17-1 Purpose And Intent
4-17-2 Definitions
4-17-3 Applicability
4-17-4 Responsibility For Administration
4-17-5 Ultimate Responsibility
4-17-6 Discharge Prohibitions
4-17-7 Suspension Of MS4 Access
4-17-8 Industrial Or Construction Activity Discharges
4-17-9 Monitoring Of Discharges
4-17-10 Requirement To Prevent, Control, And Reduce Stormwater Pollutants By
The Use Of Best Management Practices
4-17-11 Watercourse Protection
4-17-12 Notification Of Spills
4-17-13 Enforcement
4-17-14 Appeal Of Notice Of Violation
4-17-15 Enforcement Measures After Appeal
4-17-16 Cost Abatement Of The Violation
4-17-17 Injunctive Relief
4-17-18 Compensatory Action
4-17-19 Violations Deemed A Public Nuisance
4-17-20 Penalties
4-17-21 Severability
4-17-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the health, safety, and general
welfare of the citizens of Minooka through the regulation of nonstormwater
discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable as
required by federal and state law. This chapter establishes methods for
controlling the introduction of pollutants into the municipal separate storm
sewer system (MS4) in order to comply with requirements of the national
pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit process. The objectives
of this chapter are:
   A.   To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the MS4 by stormwater
discharges by any user.
   B.   To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4.
   C.   To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance,
monitoring, and enforcement procedures necessary to ensure compliance with this
chapter. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following shall mean:
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY: The superintendent of public works or his
representatives (SPW).
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs): Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to
stormwater, receiving waters, or stormwater conveyance systems. BMPs also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
CLEAN WATER ACT: The federal water pollution control act (33 USC section 1251
et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES construction permits. These
include construction projects resulting in land disturbance of five (5) acres
or more. Beginning in March 2003, NPDES stormwater phase II permits will be
required for construction projects resulting in land disturbance of one acre or
more. Such activities include, but are not limited to, clearing and grubbing,
grading, excavating, and demolition.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any material, including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
ILLEGAL DISCHARGE: Any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the storm
drain system, except as exempted in section
4-17-6 of this chapter.
ILLICIT CONNECTIONS: An illicit connection defined as either of the following:
a) any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface which allows
an illegal discharge to enter the storm drain system including, but not limited
to, any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge including sewage,
process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system and any
connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and sinks, regardless
of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or
approved by the village, or b) any drain or conveyance connected from a
commercial or industrial land use to the storm drain system that has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized
enforcement agency.
INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY: Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined
in 40 CFR section 122.26(b)(14).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE
PERMIT: A permit issued by the EPA (or by a state under authority delegated
pursuant to 33 USC section 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants
to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an
individual, group, or general area wide basis.
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE: Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not
composed entirely of stormwater.
PERSON: Any individual, association, organization, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the owner or
as the owner's agent.
POLLUTANT: Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other
automotive fluids; nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to
pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and
particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or offensive matter of any
kind.
PREMISES: Any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether
improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips.
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM: Publicly owned facilities by which stormwater is
collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited to, any roads with
drainage systems, municipal streets, gutters, curbs, inlets, piped storm
drains, pumping facilities, retention and detention basins, natural and
humanmade or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage
structures.
STORMWATER: Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water
from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation.
STORMWATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN: A document which describes the best
management practices and activities to be implemented by a person or business
to identify sources of pollution or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to stormwater, stormwater conveyance
systems, and/or receiving waters to the maximum extent practicable.
WASTEWATER: Any water or other liquid, other than uncontaminated stormwater,
discharged from a facility. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-3: APPLICABILITY:
This chapter shall apply to all water entering the storm drain system generated
on any developed and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by an
authorized enforcement agency. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-4: RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION:
The superintendent of public works shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
authorized enforcement agency may be delegated in writing by the superintendent
of public works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or
in the employ of the agency. Hereinafter, the superintendent of public works or
his/her designee is referred to as the "SPW". (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-5: ULTIMATE RESPONSIBILITY:
The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this chapter are
minimum standards; therefore this chapter does not intend or imply that
compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination,
pollution, or unauthorized discharge of pollutants. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-6: DISCHARGE PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   Prohibition Of Illegal Discharges: No person shall discharge or cause
to be discharged into the municipal storm drain system or watercourses any
materials, including, but not limited to, pollutants or waters containing any
pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality
standards, other than stormwater.
   The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the
storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows:
      1.   The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions
established by this chapter:
         a.   Water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape
irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater,
groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater,
foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering
systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs,
noncommercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows,
swimming pools (of dechlorinated - typically less than 1 ppm chlorine),
firefighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants.
         b.   Discharges specified in writing by the authorized enforcement
agency as being necessary to protect public health and safety.
         c.   Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal
notification to the public works department prior to the time of the test.
      2.   The prohibition shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge
permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the
discharger and administered under the authority of the federal environmental
protection agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all
requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and
regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any
discharge to the storm drain system.
   B.   Prohibition Of Illicit Connections:
      1.   The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit
connections to the storm drain system is prohibited.
      2.   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      3.   A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the
person connects a line conveying sewage to the MS4, or allows such a connection
to continue. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-7: SUSPENSION OF MS4 ACCESS:
   A.   Suspension Due To Illicit Discharges In Emergency Situations: The SPW
may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such
suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which
presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or
to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United
States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an
emergency, the village may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or
minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize
danger to persons.
   B.   Suspension Due To The Detection Of Illicit Discharge: Any person
discharging to the MS4 in violation of this chapter may have their MS4 access
terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The
village will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access.
The violator may petition the village for a reconsideration and hearing.
   A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises
terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the SPW.
(Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-8: INDUSTRIAL OR CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITY DISCHARGES:
Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater
discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of
compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the SPW
prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-9: MONITORING OF DISCHARGES:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies to all facilities that have
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including
construction activity.
   B.   Access To Facilities:
      1.   The representatives of the SPW shall be permitted to enter and
inspect facilities subject to regulation under this chapter as often as may be
necessary to determine compliance with this chapter. If a discharger has
security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance
before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary
arrangements to allow access to representatives of the SPW.
      2.   Facility operators shall allow the representations of the SPW ready
access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling,
examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an
NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional
duties as defined by state and federal law.
      3.   The representatives of the SPW shall have the right to set up on any
permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the
authorized enforcement agency to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
facility's stormwater discharge.
      4.   The representatives of the SPW have the right to require the
discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's
sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe
and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All
devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to
ensure their accuracy.
      5.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the
operator at the written or oral request of the representatives of the SPW and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
operator.
      6.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the representatives of the SPW
access to a permitted facility is a violation of a stormwater discharge permit
and of this chapter. A person who is the operator of a facility with an NPDES
permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits an
offense if the person denies the representatives of the SPW reasonable access
to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized
or required by this chapter.
      7.   If the representatives of the SPW have been refused access to any
part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety,
and welfare of the community, then the authorized enforcement agency may seek
issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord.
2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-10: REQUIREMENT TO PREVENT, CONTROL, AND REDUCE STORMWATER POLLUTANTS BY
THE USE OF BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES:
The village will adopt requirements identifying best management practices for
any activity, operation, or facility which may cause or contribute to pollution
or contamination of stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S.
The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall
provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge
of prohibited materials or other wastes into the municipal storm drain system
or watercourses through the use of these structural and nonstructural BMPs.
Further, any person responsible for a property or premises, which is, or may
be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said
person's expense, additional structural and nonstructural BMPs to prevent the
further discharge of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system.
Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing
the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent
practicable, shall be deemed in compliance with the provisions of this section.
These BMPs shall be part of a stormwater pollution prevent plan (SWPPP) as
necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. (Ord. 2016-14,
3-22-2016)
4-17-11: WATERCOURSE PROTECTION:
Every person owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such
person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within
the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles
that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water
through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain
existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so
that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical
integrity of the watercourse. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-12: NOTIFICATION OF SPILLS:
Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible
for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a
facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of
materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants
discharging into stormwater, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S.,
said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery,
containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of
hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response
agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a
release of nonhazardous materials, said person shall notify the authorized
enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next
business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written
notice addressed and mailed to the SPW within three (3) business days of the
notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or
industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall
also retain an on site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to
prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three (3)
years. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-13: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Notice Of Violation: Whenever the SPW finds that a person has violated
a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the authorized
enforcement agency may order compliance by written notice of violation to the
responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation:
      1.   The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
      2.   The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
      3.   That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and
desist;
      4.   The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; and
      5.   Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
   B.   The Implementation Of Source Control Or Treatment BMPs: If abatement of
a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice
shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be
completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work will be done by
a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall
be charged to the violator. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-14: APPEAL OF NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the
SPW. The notice of appeal must be submitted in writing to the village president
within five (5) days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the
appeal before the village board shall take place at the next regularly
scheduled meeting of the village board from the date of receipt of the notice
of appeal. The decision of the village board shall be final. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-
22-2016)
4-17-15: ENFORCEMENT MEASURES AFTER APPEAL:
If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth
in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within seven (7)
days of the decision of the village board upholding the decision of the SPW,
then representatives of the SPW shall enter upon the subject private property
and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the
violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person,
owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow the
village or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes
set forth above. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-16: COST ABATEMENT OF THE VIOLATION:
Within fifteen (15) days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the
property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative
costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of
the assessment within seven (7) days. If the amount due is not paid within a
timely manner as determined by the decision of the municipal authority or by
the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become
a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the
property for the amount of the assessment.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become liable
to the village by reason of such violation. The liability shall be paid within
one year of the first day following discovery of the violation. (Ord. 2016-14,
3-22-2016)
4-17-17: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply
with any of the requirements of this chapter. If a person has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this chapter, the SPW may petition for a
preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities
which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform
abatement or remediation of the violation. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-18: COMPENSATORY ACTION:
In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this
chapter, the village may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory
actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops,
creek cleanup, etc. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-19: VIOLATIONS DEEMED A PUBLIC NUISANCE:
In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition
caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and
deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's
expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the
cessation of such nuisance may be taken. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-20: PENALTIES:
Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this
chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine of not
more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned for not more than
six (6) months. Each day the violation continues shall be considered a separate
offense. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
4-17-21: SEVERABILITY:
The provisions of this chapter are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this
chapter. (Ord. 2016-14, 3-22-2016)
CHAPTER 18
FATS, OILS AND GREASES
SECTION:
4-18-1 Title
4-18-2 Definitions
4-18-3 Enforcement
4-18-4 Applications And Permits
4-18-5 Notices And Orders
4-18-6 Authority To Enter Premises
4-18-7 Inspections And Testing
4-18-8 Credentials
4-18-9 Requirements For Existing Facilities
4-18-10 New Construction, Change Of Use, And Remodeled Facilities
4-18-11 Registration
4-18-12 Permits, Procedures, Inspections, And Fees
4-18-13 Discharge Limits
4-18-14 System Maintenance
4-18-15 Maintenance Records
4-18-16 Registered Grease Recovery System Required
4-18-17 Technology Required
4-18-18 Prohibited Discharge
4-18-19 High Temperature Dishwasher Discharge
4-18-20 Dumpsters/Dumpster Pads
4-18-21 Passive Exterior Device (PED) Requirements
4-18-22 Active Interior Recovery Device Requirements
4-18-23 Alternative Methods And Treatment Agents
4-18-24 Penalty
4-18-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as VILLAGE OF MINOOKA
SANITARY SEWER FATS, OILS, AND GREASES (FOG) ORDINANCE. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-
2019)
4-18-2: DEFINITIONS:
ACTIVE INTERIOR RECOVERY DEVICE (AIRD): An active automatic separator and
remover of grease, fats and oils from effluent or wastewater discharge that
cleans itself of accumulated grease, fats and oils at least once every twenty
four (24) hours, utilizing an electromechanical apparatus to accomplish
removal.
CLEAN-OUT: A pipe that extends from the ground surface to the interior of the
passive exterior device (PED), or other grease recovery system device, so as to
allow access, maintenance, and inspection of the interior of the device.
CONTROL MANHOLE: A manhole structure, located downstream of a grease recovery
system, designed and constructed to provide access to a sewer pipe or sewer
main for sampling and metering commercial wastes discharged to a public sewer.
For existing FOG producing facilities, where no control manhole exists or has
been installed, the control manhole shall be at the nearest downstream manhole
in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected.
DRAINAGE FIXTURE UNIT (DFU): A value used to determine the required drainage
capacity from the fixtures and their service systems as defined in the Illinois
Plumbing Code.
EFFLUENT TEE-PIPE: A tee-shaped pipe extending from the ground surface below
grade into the PED to a depth allowing recovery of water located under the
layer of fats, oils, and/or greases to be discharged.
EXTERIOR GREASE TRAP: A grease trap, located outside of the exterior walls of
the building or structure, which contains baffles sufficient to allow a proper
separation of grease from water.
FOG: Fats, oils, and greases.
FOG PRODUCING FACILITY: A food processing, food sales, or food service
establishment, as hereinafter defined.
FOOD: Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage or
ingredient used or intended for use, or for sale, barter, or exchange, in whole
or part for human consumption.
FOOD PROCESSING ESTABLISHMENT: A commercial establishment in which food is
manufactured or packaged for human consumption. The term does not include a
food service establishment, retail food store, or commissary.
FOOD SALES ESTABLISHMENT: A retail and wholesale grocery store(s); retail
seafood store(s); food processing plant(s); bakeries; confectionaries; fruit,
nuts, and vegetable store(s), and places of business; and, similar
establishments, mobile or permanent, engaged in the sale of food primarily for
consumption off premises.
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT: Any establishment for the preparation and serving
of meals, lunches, short orders, sandwiches, frozen desserts or other edible
products. The term includes: restaurants, coffee shops, cafeterias, short order
cafes, luncheonettes, taverns, lunchrooms, places which manufacture retail
sandwiches, soda fountains, institutional cafeterias, catering establishments,
food vending vehicles and operations connected therewith, and similar
facilities by whatever named called or by whomever operated.
GREASE-LADEN WASTE: Effluent discharge that is produced from food processing,
food preparation or other commercial source where grease, fats and oils enter
automatic dishwasher pre-rinse station, sinks or other appurtenances.
GREASE RECOVERY SYSTEM: A system of interceptors, separators, traps, or grease
recovery devices, which prevents free floating grease, fats and oils from
entering the sewage system by recovering and removing these substances from
water.
GREASE TRAP: An interceptor, separator, or recovery vehicle that prevents free-
floating grease, fats and oil from entering the sewage disposal system. Also
includes a passive interceptor whose rated flow exceeds fifty (50) gallons per
minute or minimum storage capacity of five hundred (500) gallons or more and
which is located outside the building.
HAULER: A waste disposal firm, licensed by the Illinois Department of
Agriculture, that hauls and disposes of fats, oils, and greases wastes as
described in this chapter.
MANIFEST 1. See 415 ILCS 5/22.30(d) and (e). 1: A log or document record of the
hauler name, address, and State license/permit number; and, the volume, date of
removal and disposal destination of pumped materials or wastes from a grease
trap or other interceptor device.
NEWLY CONSTRUCTED: Any new FOG producing facility that has not been issued a
final Certificate of Occupancy by the Village or Municipal building official as
of the effective date of this chapter.
PASSIVE EXTERIOR DEVICE (PED): An oil/water separating container that requires
pumping and is housed outside a building or structure. A passive interceptor
with no moving parts with a rated flow of greater than fifty (50) gallons per
minute.
PASSIVE INTERIOR DEVICE (PID): An oil/water separating container that requires
normal manual cleaning, by pumping or bailing, and is housed inside a building
or structure. A passive interceptor with no moving parts with a rated flow of
fifty (50) gallons per minute or less that serves as fixture trap and is
located inside a building.
PREFERRED WASTE HAULER: A hauler that has the demonstrated capability to
maintain required records, to discharge waste according to all applicable rules
and regulations, and is fully licensed to haul FOG waste.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): May sometimes be known or referred to as
a sewage treatment plant or wastewater reclamation facility or plant.
PUMP-AND-RETURN METHOD: The method of decanting or discharging of removed waste
back into the grease recovery system from which waste was removed or to any
other grease recovery system or sanitary sewer connection.
REMODELED: Any facility that requires a building permit to make planned changes
to an existing or a new FOG producing facility.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any FOG producing facility that requires an
industrial wastewater discharge permit, issued by the local POTW pursuant to
applicable Federal and State laws and regulations.
SLUDGE: Any material or solids, either organic or inorganic, that has settled
to the bottom of the grease trap.
SOLIDS TRANSFER/GREASE RECOVERY DEVICE: An active automatic pretreatment
device, which macerates coarse solids and separates/recovers free floating
grease, fats and oils from effluent. The device cleans itself of accumulated
grease, fats and oils at least once every twenty four (24) hours, utilizing
electromechanical apparatus to accomplish recovery and removal.
TWENTY FIVE PERCENT RULE (25 PERCENT RULE): All grease traps and/or grease
interceptors (GI) shall be cleaned based on the twenty five percent (25%) rule.
   For example: If the total depth (TD) of the PED is forty inches (40"), the
maximum allowable depth (d) of floatable grease and settled sludge equals forty
inches (40") multiplied by 0.25 or d = TD x 0.25 = 10 inches. Therefore, the
maximum allowable depth of floatable grease and sludge of the vessel should not
exceed ten inches (10").
USER: Any FOG producing facility, its owner(s) or operator(s), or their agent
(s), that contribute to the Village wastewater collection system.
VILLAGE: The Village of Minooka, Illinois. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-3: ENFORCEMENT:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall enforce all
of the provisions of this chapter, and shall act on any questions relating to
the design or construction of grease recovery systems or devices, except as may
otherwise be specifically provided by statute, or Federal or State regulation
(s). (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-4: APPLICATIONS AND PERMITS:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall receive
applications and issue installation permits for the siting and installation of
grease recovery systems or devices, for all food processing, food sales, and
food service establishments as defined herein. The Superintendent of Public
Works, or his or her designee, shall also review building plans, review grease
recovery system(s) design plans, inspect the premises for which such
installation permit(s) have been issued, and enforce compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-5: NOTICES AND ORDERS:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, shall issue all
notices or orders necessary to insure compliance with the requirements of this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-6: AUTHORITY TO ENTER PREMISES:
The Superintendent of Public Works, or his or her designee, after
identification, shall have the authority to enter any property at any
reasonable time to inspect for sanitation purposes and compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-7: INSPECTIONS AND TESTING:
   A.   Annual Inspections: The Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
designee shall make or conduct an annual inspection and such other or
additional inspections as the Superintendent of Public Works may deem
necessary, of each FOG producing facility to evaluate and enforce compliance
with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Newly Constructed Or Remodeled FOG Producing Facilities, And Grease
Recovery System Replacement, Inspections: The Superintendent of Public Works or
his or her designee, shall make or conduct those inspections deemed necessary
by the Superintendent of Public Works to assure compliance with installation
permits issued. These inspections shall, at a minimum, consist of an initial or
in-progress construction or installation site inspection, and a final
inspection following completion of the permitted installation.
   C.   Follow-Up Inspections: A user charged with a Notice of Ordinance
Violation (NOV), issued by the Superintendent of Public Works or his or her
designee, shall be inspected at any time within thirty (30) days of the date of
NOV issuance. Subsequent re-inspection(s) may occur at any time for as long as
the user is non-compliant under the original NOV.
   D.   Demand Inspections: Any time a sanitary sewer overflow (SSO) or
blockage occurs at or downstream of a FOG producing facility, a demand
inspection shall be made or conducted by the Superintendent of Public Works, or
his or her designee. If the user or FOG producing facility is found to be in
violation of any provision of this chapter, and that violation(s) caused or
resulted in the SSO or blockage, the user shall be responsible for the payment
of the demand inspection fee, as well as the labor, equipment, and material
cost(s) to correct the SSO or blockage. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-8: CREDENTIALS:
Village of Minooka employees and authorized agent(s) or representative(s),
shall carry proper credentials of their respective office for the purpose of
inspecting any grease recovery system or device, or carrying out any other
duties or responsibilities, in the performance of his/her duties under this
chapter. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-9: REQUIREMENTS FOR EXISTING FACILITIES:
Every existing user shall have a grease recovery system. An existing user,
serviced by a grease recovery system, that is non-compliant with the technical
or design standards of this chapter, shall be permitted to continue discharging
to the Village wastewater collection system provided that the user's FOG
discharge, as measured at the control manhole, does not exceed the Village
daily maximum discharge limit(s), as set forth in section
4-18-13 of this chapter, and is otherwise in compliance with the current
Village general sewer use ordinance. The Superintendent of Public Works may
include conditions, restrictions, or performance standards on any existing non-
compliant grease recovery system to minimize the risk of discharge(s) exceeding
maximum pollutant discharge standards. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-10: NEW CONSTRUCTION, CHANGE OF USE, AND REMODELED FACILITIES:
Every newly constructed or remodeled food processing, food sales, and food
service establishment(s) (FOG producing facilities) or user(s) that discharge
water or wastes to a Village sanitary sewer or to a Village wastewater
reclamation facility shall be required to install, operate, clean and maintain
a grease recovery system of appropriate size and design to achieve compliance
with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing Code. Each FOG producing facility
shall have a control manhole installed and located at a point downstream of the
grease recovery system. No person shall construct or install a grease recovery
system without the prior approval of the Superintendent of Public Works and
issuance of an installation permit. Such approval shall include both the
approval of a plan for the proposed grease recovery system construction or
installation, and permission to conduct the work required. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-
2019)
4-18-11: REGISTRATION:
Each user shall register its grease recovery system with the Superintendent of
Public Works. Registration information shall include name, address, and
telephone number(s) of owner(s) and on-site manager(s), if different; a scale
sketch/drawing of the location of the grease recovery system on the FOG
producing facility premises; location of the access manhole (and control
manhole, if different); the components, design, and size/capacity of the grease
recovery system; and such other information as may be applicable. (Ord. 2019-
07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-12: PERMITS, PROCEDURES, INSPECTIONS, AND FEES:
   A.   Non-Transferable: Installation permits issued under this chapter are
not transferable.
   B.   Installation Permits: An installation permit shall be required for all
newly constructed FOG producing facilities, all remodeled FOG producing
facilities, and for the replacement of any existing grease recovery system. An
installation permit shall be valid for a three hundred sixty five (365) day
period following issuance.
   C.   Repairs: Repairs to a grease recovery system do not require an
installation permit. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-13: DISCHARGE LIMITS:
The discharge from each grease recovery system, as measured from the control
manhole, shall not exceed the Village maximum discharge limit(s) as set forth
below.
   Village of Minooka wastewater maximum discharge limit(s):
 
Fats, oils, and greases 100 mg/L
pH                      5.5 to 9.5
Temperature             Does not exceed 150°F
 
(Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-14: SYSTEM MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: All grease recovery systems, both existing and new, shall be
maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, and in good working order, so that
any discharge therefrom, as measured from the control manhole, does not exceed
the Village daily maximum discharge limit(s).
   B.   Maintenance Responsibility: The owner(s), or the owner(s) and any
designated agent(s) shall be responsible for the maintenance of the grease
recovery system for a FOG producing facility at all times. All costs and
expenses relating thereto shall be the responsibility of the owner(s).
   C.   Maintenance Requirements:
      1.   All users shall maintain any grease recovery system so that the
fats, oils, and grease discharge therefrom, as measured from/at the control
manhole, does not exceed the Village daily maximum discharge limit(s).
      2.   All grease traps, and all other grease recovery systems, shall have
all floating material removed at a minimum of ninety (90) days.
      3.   All grease traps, and all other grease recovery systems, shall be
completely pumped out semi-annually, or when the contents of the trap exceed
the twenty five percent (25%) rule. Semi-annual maintenance, and maintenance
due to exceeding the twenty five percent (25%) rule, shall include the complete
recovery of all contents, including floating materials, wastewater and bottom
sludge and solids. The frequency of maintenance may be increased to comply with
the Village daily maximum discharge limit(s) or the manufacturer's
recommendation. The frequency of removal shall be as often as necessary to
prevent overflows of fats, oils, and greases entering into the Village
wastewater collection system.
      4.   The Pump-and-Return Method of decanting or discharging of removed
waste back into the grease recovery system is prohibited.
      5.   Any removal and hauling of fats, oils, and greases shall be
performed by a waste disposal or rendering firm licensed by the State of
Illinois.
      6.   If any grease recovery system discharge wastes fail to meet the
Village daily maximum limit(s), the Superintendent of Public Works is
authorized to demand or order the user to repair, replace, or upgrade its
grease removal system, at the sole expense of user. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-15: MAINTENANCE RECORDS:
Each user, at each FOG producing facility, shall maintain an accurate and
complete record of all cleaning(s) or maintenance of its FOG producing facility
grease recovery system. The following records shall be kept on-site at the FOG
producing facility.
   A.   Haulers: The hauler shall provide the user, at the time of service, a
manifest conforming to all State statutes and regulations 1. See 415 ILCS 5/
22.30(e).1, and the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Manifest(s): The removal of grease recovery system contents shall be
recorded on a manifest that identifies the pumping, hauling and disposing of
the wastes.
   C.   Manifest Information: Each manifest shall contain the following
information, and such other information as may be required by statute:
      1.   User information, including name, address, the volume or weight of
waste pumped from each grease recovery system, and date and time of the
pumping.
      2.   Hauler information, including company name, address, State license/
permit number, and disposal/receiving facility location information;
      3.   Receiving facility information, including the facility name and
address, date and time of receiving, and EPD number.
   D.   Manifest/Maintenance Log: The owner(s) of each FOG producing facility
shall maintain, and keep available on the premises, a continuous log of
manifests (and other similar record(s)) regarding each cleaning or maintenance
of the grease recovery system for the previous twenty four (24) months. The log
shall be kept on the FOG producing facility premises in a location where the
log is available for inspection or review by the Superintendent of Public Works
or his or her designees.
   E.   Preferred Waste Hauler: The owner may employ a preferred waste hauler
approved by the Village. The preferred waste hauler would provide the Village
with the required manifest and maintenance information for the owner, which
would allow the owner to be compliant with maintaining maintenance records.
(Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-16: REGISTERED GREASE RECOVERY SYSTEM REQUIRED:
A registered grease recovery system(s) shall be operated and maintained, or
installed, in each FOG producing facility that discharges into the Village
wastewater collection system. Each FOG producing facility shall have a control
manhole. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-17: TECHNOLOGY REQUIRED:
An approved grease recovery system shall consist of one or a combination of the
following methods:
   A.   Passive technology that is an approved exterior grease trap.
   B.   Active technology including:
      1.   An approved grease recovery device; or
      2.   An approved solids transfer/grease transfer device. (Ord. 2019-07,
2-26-2019)
4-18-18: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE:
   A.   Waste that does not contain grease, fats or oils and that otherwise
does not require grease separation treatment shall not be discharged into the
grease recovery system.
   B.   Wastewater from dishwasher machines or wastewater that otherwise
exceeds one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) shall not be introduced
into any grease recovery device.
   C.   Food-waste grinders shall not discharge into the building drainage
system through a grease trap or grease recovery device. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-
2019)
4-18-19: HIGH TEMPERATURE DISHWASHER DISCHARGE:
Wastewater that exceeds one hundred fifty degrees Fahrenheit (150°F) is
prohibited from being discharged into the Village wastewater collection system.
(Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-20: DUMPSTERS/DUMPSTER PADS:
   A.   Dumpsters/dumpster pads may be allowed to connect to the wastewater
collection system under the following conditions:
      1.   The dumpster/dumpster pad is covered and constructed to protect the
drainage connection from stormwater runoff; and
      2.   The drain is connected to an exterior grease trap of at least one
thousand (1,000) gallons, which will be maintained by the user in the method
prescribed by this section for other exterior grease traps. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-
26-2019)
4-18-21: PASSIVE EXTERIOR DEVICE (PED) REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Review: Each PED, or other grease recovery system device design
including size, type and location shall be reviewed and approved by the
Superintendent of Public Works in substantial conformity to a grease trap
detail as follows:
      1.   Shall be sized and engineered based upon the anticipated load and/or
conditions of actual use.
      2.   Shall be constructed of sound, durable material, not subject to
excessive corrosion or decay, and shall be water and gas tight if PEDs are of
precast or poured-in-place concrete.
      3.   Shall be traffic-worthy with accessibility to both the influent and
effluent tee pipes.
      4.   Shall contain baffles sufficient to allow a proper separation of
grease from water.
      5.   Shall be a minimum of five hundred (500) gallons and a maximum of
three thousand (3,000) gallons in size. Multiple PEDs, or other approved grease
recovery devices, are allowed.
   B.   PID Credit: Passive interior devices (PIDs). PID volume shall be
credited towards the total PED capacity.
   C.   Sizing Of PEDs: All PEDs shall have a grease retention capacity in
accordance with the Illinois Plumbing Code.
   D.   Inlet Chamber: The inlet chamber of the vessel shall incorporate an
open sanitary-tee, which extends equal to or greater than twelve inches (12")
below the water surface.
   E.   Outlet Chamber: The outlet chamber of the vessel shall incorporate an
open sanitary-tee that extends two-thirds (2/3) below the water surface.
F.   Sanitary-Tees: The sanitary-tees (both inlet and outlet) shall not be
capped, but opened, to allow visual inspection of the waste stream.
   G.   Exemptions To Sizing PEDs: Food service establishments that serve
eighteen (18) or fewer meals per day, or serve only continental breakfast, may
be granted an exemption from the sizing requirements for PEDs. (Ord. 2019-07,
2-26-2019)
4-18-22: ACTIVE INTERIOR RECOVERY DEVICE REQUIREMENTS:
AIRDs may be allowed in lieu of PEDs or other approved grease recovery system
devices in accordance with the following conditions:
   A.   The method of food preparation involves and/or creates little or no
discharge of grease; or
   B.   A technically logistical reason exists as to why an exterior grease
trap cannot be installed (i.e., conflicts with existing utilities, elevation
disparities or location on a second floor).
   C.   The installation or use of all grease recovery devices must be approved
by the Superintendent of Public Works.
   D.   Grease recovery devices shall receive all grease-laden waste discharge
from the major point sources. A floor drain shall not be considered a major
point source.
   E.   Grease recovery devices shall be sized based upon the anticipated load
and/or conditions of actual use and manufacturer's recommendation. (Ord. 2019-
07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-23: ALTERNATIVE METHODS AND TREATMENT AGENTS:
   A.   Alternative Technology/Methods: Engineered alternative technology or
methods may be permitted, provided the technology or method meets the minimum
performance standards set forth in the Illinois Plumbing Code.
   B.   Biological Or Chemical Treatment Agents: The use of biological or
chemical agents that dissolve grease to permit it to be discharged into the
sanitary sewer is not permitted. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
4-18-24: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2019-07, 2-26-2019)
CHAPTER 19
SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT ORDINANCE
SECTION:
4-19-1: General Provisions
4-19-1-1: Purpose And Policy
4-19-1-2: Administration
4-19-1-3: Jurisdiction
4-19-1-4: Abbreviations
4-19-1-5: Funding
4-19-1-6: Definitions
4-19-2: General Sewer Use Requirements
4-19-2-1: Information Required From All Users
4-19-2-2: Structures And Equipment Required For Sewer Use
4-19-2-3: Grease Separation
4-19-3: General Discharge Requirements
4-19-3-1: Applicability
4-19-3-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
4-19-3-3: National Categorical Pretreatment Standards
4-19-3-4: State Limits
4-19-3-5: Local Limits
4-19-3-6: Village's Right Of Revision
4-19-3-7: Dilution Prohibited
4-19-4: General Discharge Compliance
4-19-4-1: Applicability
4-19-4-2: Pretreatment Facilities
4-19-4-3: Additional Pretreatment Measures
4-19-4-4: Spill/Slug Control Plan
4-19-4-5: Monitoring Requirements
4-19-4-6: Analytical Requirements
4-19-4-7: Protection Of Village Sampling And Flow Metering Equipment From
Damage
4-19-4-8: Closure Plan
4-19-5: Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirements and Application
4-19-5-1: Wastewater Information And Analysis
4-19-5-2: Authority And Requirements
4-19-5-3: Existing Connections
4-19-5-4: New Connections
4-19-5-5: Permit Application Contents
4-19-5-6: Individual And General Application Signatories And Certification
4-19-5-7: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions
4-19-6: Wastewater Discharge Permit Issuance Process
4-19-6-1: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration
4-19-6-2: Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents
4-19-6-3: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
4-19-6-4: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
4-19-6-5: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer
4-19-6-6: Individual And General Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation
4-19-6-7: Wastewater Discharge Permit Re-Issuance
4-19-6-8: Regulation Of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions
4-19-7: Reporting Requirements
4-19-7-1: Pretreatment Requirements For Non-Categorical Users
4-19-7-2: Pretreatment Requirements For Categorical Industrial Users
4-19-7-3: Periodic Compliance Reports/Self-Monitoring Reports
4-19-7-4: Authorized Representative Change Notification
4-19-7-5: Reports Of Changed Conditions
4-19-7-6: Reports Of Potential Problems
4-19-7-7: Notice Of Violation/Repeat Sampling And Reporting
4-19-7-8: Notification Of The Discharge Of Hazardous Waste
4-19-7-9: Report Submittal Due Dates
4-19-8: Compliance Monitoring
4-19-8-1: Right Of Entry: Inspection And Sampling
4-19-8-2: Record Keeping
4-19-8-3: Search Warrants
4-19-9: Confidential Information
4-19-9-1: Submitting Confidential Information
4-19-10: Publication of Users in Significant Noncompliance
4-19-11: Administrative Enforcement Remedies
4-19-11-1: Notice Of Violation
4-19-11-2: Compliance Agreements
4-19-11-3: Show Cause Order
4-19-11-4: Compliance Orders
4-19-11-5: Cease And Desist Orders
4-19-11-6: Emergency Suspensions
4-19-11-7: Termination Of Discharge
4-19-12: Penalties and Judicial Enforcement Remedies
4-19-12-1: Ordinance Violations
4-19-12-2: Recovery Of Costs Incurred
4-19-12-3: Administrative Fines
4-19-12-4: Injunctive Relief
4-19-12-5: Civil Penalties
4-19-12-6: Additional Remedies
4-19-12-7: Remedies Nonexclusive
4-19-13: Supplemental Enforcement Action
4-19-13-1: Performance Bonds
4-19-13-2: Liability Insurance
4-19-13-3: Payment For Outstanding Fees And Penalties
4-19-13-4: Water Supply Severance
4-19-13-5: Public Nuisances
4-19-13-6: Contractor Listing
4-19-14: Affirmative Defenses to Discharge Violations
4-19-14-1: Upset
4-19-14-2: Prohibited Discharge Standards
4-19-14-3: Bypass
4-19-15: Miscellaneous Fees
4-19-15-1: Pretreatment Charges And Fees
4-19-15-2: Measurement Of Industrial Waste Flow And Strength
4-19-16: Miscellaneous Provisions
4-19-16-1: Severability
4-19-16-2: Conflict
4-19-16-3: Offenses Under Previous Ordinances
4-19-1: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
4-19-1-1: PURPOSE AND POLICY:
This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for Users of the POTW for the
Village of Minooka and enables the Village to comply with all applicable State
and Federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code [USC]
section 1219 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (Title 40 CFR
Part 403). The objectives of this Ordinance are:
   A.   To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the POTW that will
interfere with its operation;
   B.   To prevent the introduction of Pollutants into the POTW that will Pass
Through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW;
   C.   To protect both POTW personnel who may be affected by air, Wastewater,
and Biosolids in the course of their employment and the general public;
   D.   To improve opportunities to reduce Wastewater and reclaim Biosolids and
effluent from the POTW;
   E.   To enable the Village to comply with its NPDES permit conditions,
Biosolids use and disposal requirements, and any other Federal or State laws to
which the POTW is subject; and
   F.   To provide for fees for equitable distribution of the cost of
operation, maintenance, and improvement of the POTW.
This chapter shall apply to all users of the POTW and provides for the
enforcement of general requirements for users. The ordinance authorizes the
issuance of individual wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring,
compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review
procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for
the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the programs established
herein.
It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharge to the POTW, without
having first complied with the terms of this chapter. At minimum, all users are
subject to the Prohibited Discharge Standards in Section
4-19-3-2, Change Notification in Section
4-19-7-4, and Hazardous Waste Notification in Section
4-19-7-8 if applicable. Spill/Slug Control Planning may also be necessary for
some Users as identified in Section
4-19-4-4. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-1-2: ADMINISTRATION:
Except as otherwise provided herein, the Pretreatment Coordinator, and/or the
individual delegated by the Coordinator, or the President of the Village of
Minooka as such, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the Coordinator,
and/or the individual delegated by the Coordinator or the President of the
Village of Minooka, may be authorized by the Village or Coordinator to other
Village personnel or other Duly Authorized Agent(s) of the Village. (Ord. 2020-
33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-1-3: JURISDICTION:
This section shall apply to the village and to persons outside the village who
are, by contract or agreement with the village, Users of the POTW. (Ord. 2020-
33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-1-4: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the
designated meanings:
BOD   Biochemical Oxygen Demand
BMP   Best Management Practices
BMR   Baseline Monitoring Report
CFR   Code of Federal Regulations
CIU   Categorical Industrial User
COD   Chemical Oxygen Demand
DNQ   Detected Not Quantifiable
FOG   Fats, Oils, and Grease (interchangeable with Oil and Grease)
FSE   Food Service Establishment
GI    Grease Interceptor
gpd   Gallons per day
IEPA  Illinois Environmental Protection Agency
IU    Industrial User
MDL   Method Detection Limit
mg/l  Milligrams per liter
ND    Not Detected
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NSCIU Non-Significant Categorical Industrial User
NSRU  Non-Significant Regulated User
NUA   Non-Uniform Allocation
POTW  Publicly Owned Treatment Works
PQL   Practical Quantification Limit
PSES  Pretreatment Standards for Existing Sources
PSNS  Pretreatment Standards for New Sources
ppm   Parts per million (assumed equivalent to mg/l for water)
RCRA  Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIU   Significant Industrial User
SNC   Significant Noncompliance
SSC   Spill/Slug Control
SWDA  Solid Waste Disposal Act
TSS   Total Suspended Solids
USC   United States Code
USEPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
WWTP  Wastewater Treatment Plant
 
(Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-1-5: FUNDING:
It is the intent of the village to recover all costs associated with the
pretreatment program in an equitable manner from all users within the program.
(Ord. 2020- 33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-1-6: DEFINITIONS:
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and
phrases, as used in this Ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter
designated.
ACT or CLEAN    The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as
WATER ACT or    amended, 33 USC § 1219 et seq.
FEDERAL ACT:
APPROVAL        Regional Administrator of USEPA Region 5.
AUTHORITY:
                Of the User:
                A.   If the User is a corporation:
                   1.   The President, secretary, treasurer, or a Vice-President of the corporation
                in charge of a principal business function, or any other Person who performs similar
                policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or
                   2.   The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities
                provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the
                operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of
                making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other
                comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with
                environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are
                established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for
AUTHORIZED      individual Wastewater Permit requirements; and where authority to sign documents has
REPRESENTATIVE: been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures.
                B.   If the User is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or
                proprietor, respectively.
                C.   If the User is a Federal, State, or local governmental facility: a director or
                highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of
                the activities of the government facility, or their designee.
                D.   The individuals described in situations A through C may designate a Duly
                Authorized Representative. The designation must be in writing, and the authorized
                representative described in situations A through C must designate an individual or
                position responsible for the overall operation or environmental matters of the
                facility from which the Discharge of concern originates. The written designation of
                the individual or position as the Duly Authorized Representative must be submitted to
                the Village.
BATCH           A single planned or scheduled release of a known volume accumulated on site over a
DISCHARGE:      period of time containing one or more Pollutants.
                Schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
BEST MANAGEMENT management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section
PRACTICE (BMP): 4-19-3-2 (40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b)). BMPs include treatment requirements, operating
                procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage, or leaks, Biosolids
                or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BIOCHEMICAL     The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
OXYGEN DEMAND   standard laboratory procedures approved in 40 CFR 136 for five (5) days at twenty
(BOD):          (20) degrees Celsius, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L).
BIOSOLIDS:      The nutrient-rich organic materials resulting from the treatment of Sewage Sludge.
                The part of the lowest piping of a drainage system in a building which receives
BUILDING DRAIN  Discharge and Wastewater and conveys it to the Building Sewer, or other approved
PIPE:           point of Discharge. The building drain ends five (5) feet (1.5 meters) outside the
                inner face of the building wall. Discharge of stormwater runoff to the building drain
                or sanitary sewer is prohibited.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the Building Drain to the Public Sewer or other place of disposal.
BYPASS:         The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a User's treatment or
                Pretreatment facility.
CATEGORICAL     An Industrial User subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical
INDUSTRIAL USER Standard. A CIU is also considered to be a Significant Industrial User unless
(CIU):          designated otherwise.
CATEGORICAL     Any regulation containing Pollutant Discharge limits promulgated by USEPA in
PRETREATMENT    accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC § 1317) which apply to a
STANDARD or     specific category of Users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
CATEGORICAL     405-471.
STANDARD:
COMBINED WASTE  The formula set forth in 40 CFR Section 403.6(e).
STREAM FORMULA:
COMPOSITE       A sample of Wastewater composed of two or more discrete samples collected based on a
SAMPLE:         flow-proportional or time-proportional method.
CONTROL         The Village of Minooka.
AUTHORITY:
                Water which does not come into contact with process or other waste and is used to
COOLING WATER:  remove heat from an Industrial Process by conduction or any other non-contact means
                to which the only Pollutant added is heat.
COORDINATOR:    See Pretreatment Coordinator.
DAILY MAXIMUM:  The arithmetic average of Pollutant amounts of all effluent samples collected during
                a calendar day.
                The maximum allowable Pollutant Discharge limit during a calendar day. If Daily
                Maximum Limits are expressed in terms of a concentration, the daily Pollutant
                Discharge is the arithmetic average of the Pollutant concentration derived from all
DAILY MAXIMUM   measurements taken that day. The Daily Maximum Limit is intended to represent the
LIMIT:          average concentration of an entire calendar day of Wastewater Discharge. Where Daily
                Maximum Limits are expressed in units of mass, the daily Pollutant Discharge is the
                total mass Discharged over the course of a calendar day. The Local Limits for BOD,
                TSS, ammonia-nitrogen (as N), cadmium, chromium, copper, lead, mercury, nickel,
                phosphorus (as P), silver, and zinc are considered Daily Maximum Limits.
DIRECTOR:       Superintendent of Public Works of the Village of Minooka.
DISCHARGE:      See Indirect Discharge.
DISCHARGE       A document issued to a User which specifies the requirements for Discharge to the
PERMIT:         POTW or the requirements for zero Discharge of Wastewater to the POTW as appropriate.
ENVIRONMENTAL   The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water
PROTECTION      Management Division Director, the Regional Administrator, or other duly authorized
AGENCY or       official of said agency.
USEPA:
EXISTING        Any source of Discharge that is not a New Source.
SOURCE:
FATS, OILS, AND Any hydrocarbons, fatty acids, soaps, fats, waxes, oils, and any other material that
GREASE (FOG):   is extracted by a solvent in a method approved in 40 CFR 136.
FLOATABLE OIL:  FOG in a state such that it will separate by gravity from Wastewater by treatment in
                an approved Pretreatment facility.
FLOW:           Movement of a volume of liquid per unit of time.
GARBAGE:        Solid wastes from domestic and commercial preparation, cooking, and dispensing of
                food and from the commercial handling, storage, and sale of produce or food.
GRAB SAMPLE:    A sample which is taken from a wastestream on a one-time basis without regard to the
                flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes.
HAULED WASTE:   Wastewater that is removed from the facility which it was created in a container
                meant for vehicular transport for disposal elsewhere.
INDIRECT
DISCHARGE or    The introduction of one or more Pollutants from any non-domestic source.
DISCHARGE:
INDUSTRIAL      Work performed to produce wholesale goods or services, often referred to in this
PROCESS:        document as "process".
INDUSTRIAL
(SOURCE, USER   A Non-Residential User that performs an Industrial Process. See definition of User.
(IU)):
INDUSTRIAL      A byproduct of an Industrial Process. See also Industrial Wastewater.
WASTE:
INDUSTRIAL      A combination of liquid and water carried wastes Discharged from any Industrial User,
(WASTE STREAM,  including the Wastewater from Pretreatment facilities and polluted Cooling Water.
WASTEWATER):
                The maximum concentration of a Pollutant allowed to be Discharged at any time,
INSTANTANEOUS   determined from the analysis of any grab sample collected, independent of flow rate
LIMIT:          and the duration of the sampling event. The Local Limits for chromium (VI), cyanide,
                FOG, pH, Phenols, and volatile organic compounds are considered Instantaneous Limits.
                A Discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a Discharge or Discharges by other
                sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations, or its
                Biosolids processes, use, or disposal; or is a cause of, and therefore is
                contributory to, a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit (including
                an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation) or of the prevention of
INTERFERENCE or Wastewater or Biosolids use, reuse, or disposal by the POTW in accordance with the
INTERFERE:      following statutory provisions and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more
                stringent State or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid
                Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) (including Title II, more commonly referred to as the
                Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including State regulations
                contained in any state Biosolids or Sludge management plan prepared pursuant to
                subtitle D of the SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, and the
                Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
                A limit on discharges of a specific Pollutant developed and enforced by the Village
LOCAL LIMIT:    upon Users or facilities to implement the general and specific Discharge prohibitions
                listed in 40 CFR 403.5(a)(1) and (b).
                Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological
MEDICAL WASTE:  wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially
                contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes.
MILLIGRAMS PER  A unit of the concentration of water or Wastewater constituent representing 0.001
LITER or mg/L:  grams of the constituent in one (1) liter of water.
MONTHLY         The sum of the concentrations of all daily Discharges measured during a calendar
AVERAGE:        month divided by the number of daily Discharges measured during that month.
MONTHLY AVERAGE The highest allowable Monthly Average for a calendar month.
LIMIT:
NATIONAL
CATEGORICAL
PRETREATMENT    Any regulation containing Pollutant Discharge limits promulgated by the USEPA in
STANDARD or     accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 USC 1317) which apply to a
CATEGORICAL     specific category of Users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts
PRETREATMENT    405-471.
STANDARD or
CATEGORICAL
STANDARD:
NATIONAL        The national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating,
POLLUTANT       monitoring, and enforcing permits from point sources to waters of the United States,
DISCHARGE       and imposing and enforcing Pretreatment Requirements, under sections 307, 402, 318
ELIMINATION     and 405 of the Act.
SYSTEM (NPDES):
NATIONAL
POLLUTANT
DISCHARGE
ELIMINATION     A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the CWA, or Section 12(f) of the Act.
SYSTEM PERMIT
or NPDES
PERMIT:
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or ground
                water.
                A.   Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may
                be) a Discharge of Pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the
                publication of proposed Pretreatment Standards under Section 307 (c) of the Clean
                Water Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter
                promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that one of the following is
                true:
                   1.   The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site
                on which no other source is located;
                   2.   The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the
                process or production equipment that causes the Discharge of Pollutants at an
                Existing Source; or
                   3.   The production or Wastewater-generating processes of the building, structure,
                facility, or installations are substantially independent of an Existing Source at the
                same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such
                as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and
                the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity
                as the Existing Source should be considered.
                B.   Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results in a
                modification rather than a New Source if the construction does not create a new
NEW SOURCE:     building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of parts (A)(1)
                or (A)(2) above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to the existing process or
                production equipment.
                C.   Construction of a New Source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if
                the owner or operator has done one of the following:
                   1.   Begun or caused one of the following to begin as part of a continuous onsite
                construction program:
                      a.   Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or
                      b.   Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or
                removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
                placement, assembly, or installation of New Source facilities or equipment; or
                   2.   Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities
                or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time.
                Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without
                substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do
                not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph.
                   3.   New Sources shall install and have in operating condition and shall "start-
                up" all pollution control equipment required to meet applicable Pretreatment
                Standards before beginning to Discharge. Within the shortest feasible time (not to
                exceed ninety (90) days), New Sources shall meet all applicable standards.
NON-CONTACT     Water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material,
COOLING WATER:  intermediate product, waste product, or finished product.
                Any partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock
NON-RESIDENTIAL company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity or their legal
(SOURCE, USER): representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all Federal, state, and
                local governmental entities. See definition of User.
NON-SIGNIFICANT
CATEGORICAL     See definition of Significant Industrial User.
INDUSTRIAL USER
(NSCIU):
NON-SIGNIFICANT A source of indirect discharge from a non-residential source that is regulated
REGULATED USER  through a discharge permit issued by the village's pretreatment program that the
(NSRU):         Coordinator deems as having the potential to Interfere with the intent of this
                chapter, but is not classified as an SIU.
OWNER:          The Person which holds fee simple title to the real property upon which a User's
                facility is located.
                The Discharge of one or more Pollutants that exits the POTW into waters of the United
                States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with Discharge
PASS THROUGH:   or Discharges from other Users, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
                POTW's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
                violation.
                Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
PERSON:         joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity;
                or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all
                Federal, state, and local governmental entities.
                A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, calculated by taking the base
pH:             10 logarithm of the reciprocal of the hydrogen ion concentration, expressed in
                standard units.
                A substance or energy that, when introduced into the environment, has undesired
                effects or adversely affects the usefulness of a resource, which includes any of the
                following, but is not limited to: paints, varnishes, solvents, oil and other
                automotive fluids, yard wastes, floatables, dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
POLLUTANT:      residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sludge, biosolids, munitions, medical
                wastes, chemical wastes, hazardous wastes, biological materials, pesticides,
                herbicides, fertilizers, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment,
                rock, sand, cellar dirt, or municipal or agricultural waste, industrial waste,
                bacteria, viruses, noxious matter, and certain characteristics of Wastewater, such as
                pH, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxiVillage, odor.
PPM:            Parts per million and is equivalent to milligrams per liter when water is the
                solvent.
                The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the
                alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful
                state prior to, or in lieu of, discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
PRETREATMENT:   into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or
                biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the
                concentrations of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment
                standard.
PRETREATMENT    The Person designated by the Village of Minooka who is charged with certain duties
COORDINATOR or  and responsibilities by this chapter. The term also means a Duly Authorized
COORDINATOR:    Representative of the Coordinator.
PRETREATMENT    Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user,
REQUIREMENTS:   other than a pretreatment standard.
PRETREATMENT    Prohibitive discharge standards, local limits, State of Illinois Pretreatment
STANDARDS:      Standards, or categorical pretreatment standards.
PROHIBITED
DISCHARGE       Absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances. These prohibitions
STANDARDS or    appear in Section
PROHIBITED      4-19-3-2 of this chapter and 40 CFR 403.5.
DISCHARGES:
PROPERLY        The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been
SHREDDED        shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow
GARBAGE:        conditions normally prevailing in Public Sewers, with no particle greater than one-
                half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
                A Sewer provided by or subject to the jurisdiction of the village. It shall also
PUBLIC SEWER:   include sewers within or outside the village boundaries that serve one or more
                persons and ultimately discharge into the POTW, even though those Sewers may not have
                been constructed with Village funds.
                A "treatment works", as defined by Section 212 of the Act, (33 USC Section 1292)
PUBLICLY-OWNED  owned by the Village of Minooka. This definition includes any devices and systems
TREATMENT WORKS used in the collection, transportation, storage, treatment, recycling, reclamation
(POTW):         and discharge of Sewage or Industrial Wastes of a liquid nature to the WWTP
                regardless of ownership.
                Any single family or multi-family dwelling unit designed primarily as a place of
RESIDENTIAL     human habitation which Discharges only domestic Wastewater to the POTW. If a
(SOURCE or      residential user operates a business out of his/her dwelling, at the discretion of
USER):          the Coordinator, the introduction of Pollutants into the POTW originating from the
                operation of the business may be subject to regulation under this chapter.
                A pipe or conduit designed and/or intended to carry wastewater from residences,
SANITARY SEWER: commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, and to which stormwater,
                surface water, ground water and unpolluted non-contact cooling water are not
                intentionally admitted.
SEWER:          A pipe or conduit for conveying sewage or any other waste liquids, including storm,
                surface, and ground water drainage.
SEWAGE:         See definition of Wastewater.
SHALL/MAY:      “Shall” is mandatory; “May” is permissive.
                A User of the POTW (except as provided by paragraphs (C) and (D)) who:
                A.   Is subject to any Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or
                B.   A User that:
                   1.   Has an average process Wastewater Discharge flow of twenty-five thousand
                (25,000) gallons per day or more per work day (excluding sanitary, non-contact
                cooling water, and boiler blow-down wastewater); or
                   2.   Has a Discharge flow of process Wastewater that makes up five percent (5%) or
                more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the WWTP; or
                   3.   Is designated as such by the village on the basis that it has a reasonable
                potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any
                pretreatment standard or requirement.
                C.   The village may determine that a user subject to categorical pretreatment
                standards is an NSCIU rather than an SIU on a finding that the User never Discharges
                more than one hundred (100) gallons per day (gpd) of total Categorical wastewater
SIGNIFICANT     (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling water, and boiler blowdown wastewater,
INDUSTRIAL USER unless specifically included in the pretreatment standard) and the following
(SIU):          conditions are met:
                   1.   The user, prior to the village's finding, has consistently complied with all
                applicable categorical pretreatment standards and requirements;
                   2.   The user annually submits the certification statement required in Section
                4-19-7-3 [see 40 CFR 403.12(q)], together with any additional information necessary
                to support the certification statement; and
                   3.   The user never discharges any untreated concentrated wastewater, ie
                wastewater with pollutant concentrations above the subject category's discharge
                limits.
                D.   Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subpart B above has no
                reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating
                any pretreatment standard or requirement, the village may at any time, on its own
                initiative or in response to a petition received from a User and in accordance with
                procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a
                Significant Industrial User.
SLUDGE or       Solid, semisolid, or liquid untreated residue generated during the treatment of Non-
SEWAGE SLUDGE:  Residential Sewage in a POTW.
                Any non-routine or episodic discharge of liquid waste, including but not limited to
                an accidental spill or a non-customary batch discharge, at a flow rate or containing
SLUG or SLUG    a pollutant concentration that could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge
LOAD:           standards in Section
                4-19-3-2 of this chapter or has a reasonable potential to cause Interference or pass
                through or in any other way violate the POTW's regulations, local limits, or permit
                conditions.
STORM SEWER:    A sewer that carries rain water, snow melt, and surface drainage but excludes sewage
                and industrial wastes other than unpolluted cooling water.
STORMWATER:     Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and
                resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt.
T:              As in "Cyanide-T", means total or the sum of the amounts of a substance in all phases
                and species.
TAP:            The connection to the sewer main through the use of a factory "wye" or "tee", a
                saddle connection, an Inserta tee ©, or other plumber connection (i.e. hammer tap).
TOTAL SUSPENDED Total suspended matter, expressed in milligrams per liter, that either floats on the
SOLIDS (TSS) or surface of, or is in suspension in, water, Wastewater, or other liquids and is
SUSPENDED       removable by laboratory filtration, under standard laboratory procedures approved in
SOLIDS:         40 CFR 136.
TOTAL TOXIC     The summation of all quantifiable values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter for
ORGANICS:       the toxic organics specified in the applicable 40 CFR 405-471 categorical regulation.
UNPOLLUTED      Water having a quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or
WATER:          water that would not cause violation of receiving Water Quality Standards and would
                not be benefited by Discharge to and treatment by the POTW.
                An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance
                with pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
UPSET:          industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
                operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment
                facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
USEPA:          See Environmental Protection Agency.
                Any person, excluding residential sources, that contributes, causes or permits the
USER:           source of indirect discharge into the POTW, or such Persons or sources that are
                prohibited from Discharging specific Pollutants or waste streams to the POTW.
VILLAGE:        The Village of Minooka or the Village Council of Minooka.
                The combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residential dwellings,
WASTEWATER:     commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions,
                whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW.
WASTEWATER
DISCHARGE       The document or documents issued to a user by the village pursuant to Section
PERMIT or       4-19-6 of this chapter.
DISCHARGE
PERMIT:
WASTEWATER
TREATMENT PLANT The portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage
or TREATMENT    and industrial waste.
PLANT or WWTP:
WATER QUALITY   Standards defined in the Water Quality Standards of Illinois, Section 302 of Illinois
STANDARDS:      Administrative Code 35.
                All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs,
WATERS OF THE   reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems, and all other bodies or
STATE OF        accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or
ILLINOIS:       private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State of
                Illinois or any portion thereof. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
 
4-19-2: GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS:
4-19-2-1: INFORMATION REQUIRED FROM ALL USERS:
   A.   Initial Survey: The initial survey is a document that collects
information about a user's potential to discharge pollutants to the POTW.
      1.   The user shall have a minimum of fourteen (14) days after the
postmarked date on the envelope, or the date which the initial survey was hand-
delivered to the user, to fully complete and submit the initial survey back to
the village.
      2.   An initial survey shall be completed by all users and submitted to
the village in order to ensure that said users of the POTW adhere to and comply
with the restrictions and prohibitions pertaining to pretreatment standards of
wastes discharged into the POTW, spill and slug control of raw materials,
intermediates, and waste, and to facilitate the village's investigation of
apparent or suspected violations thereof. The requirements of the initial
survey are as follows:
         a.   All existing and new users required by the Pretreatment
Coordinator shall complete and submit an initial survey on a paper or web-based
form provided by the village when requested by the village.
         b.   All users seeking to establish a new account for water and/or
sanitary sewer service in an existing location from the village or to establish
a new connection to the POTW shall submit a completed initial survey with the
village as a condition to the establishment of such new water/sanitary sewer
service account or connection to the POTW.
         c.   All users that fail to complete and submit to the village an
initial survey shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
all of the applicable penalties thereof, including not limited to the
revocation of all permits and approvals previously granted to the user in
question for the discharge of sewage or wastewater into the POTW.
   B.   Affirmation to Initial Survey:
      1.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may determine, based on building,
zoning, and occupant usage, whether a user shall be required to file an
affirmation of survey with the annual business license renewal. The user's
status will be determined by the Coordinator after review of the initial
survey.
      2.   Any user which previously filed an initial survey and the
information remains true, complete, and correct in all respects may be required
to submit a statement that the information remains current.
         a.   The statement shall be filed with the Pretreatment Coordinator
not later than January 31 of the year in which it is required.
         b.   All users that fail to submit an affirmation of survey with the
village when required shall be in violation of the provisions of this chapter
and shall be subject to all of the applicable penalties thereof, including but
not limited to the revocation of all permits and approvals previously granted
to the user in question for the Discharge of Sewage or Wastewater into the
POTW.
   C.   Reports of Changed Conditions: Any user that makes any changes
determined to be substantial as defined in Section
4-19-7-5 shall report said changes as required in Section
4-19-7-5 prior to making any of the changes. The user shall be required to
submit an updated survey as a result of changed conditions.
   D.   Additional Wastewater Survey Information:
      1.   After review of the initial survey completed per this section, all
users that the Pretreatment Coordinator has determined to have the potential to
be defined as either an SIU or a NSRU shall be required to complete and submit
a more detailed wastewater survey on a form provided by the village.
      A description of processes, water usage, wastewater characteristics, or a
site plan for the facility showing locations of processes and points of
discharge into the building sewer may be required to be submitted. The
wastewater survey shall contain a statement affirming the truth, completeness,
and correctness of information submitted signed by an authorized representative
of the user.
      This information will be evaluated by the Coordinator to determine if an
individual wastewater discharge permit is required.
      2.   Periodic Updates of Wastewater Survey Information. The information
provided in the wastewater survey shall be revised and/or updated for the
following conditions:
         a.   A report of changed conditions is filed as required in Section
4-19-7-5;
         b.   An application for a wastewater discharge permit is required to
be filed per Section
4-19-5 and Section
4-19-6 of this chapter;
         c.   A renewal application for a Wastewater Discharge Permit is
required to be filed as a result of a re-issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit per Section
4-19-6-7; or
         d.   At any other time the Pretreatment Coordinator may require,
provided a user shall not be required to update wastewater survey information
more than once per twelve (12) month period unless one of the conditions set
forth in subsections
4-19-2-1 D.2.a. through c. apply.
      3.   In addition to the Wastewater Survey required above, a User which
has the potential to be classified as a CIU shall be required to complete a
category-specific survey that identifies sub-processes and processes performed
at the site in order to define which sub-processes and processes are regulated
by an USEPA Effluent Guideline category. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-2-2: STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT REQUIRED FOR SEWER USE:
   A.   Upon determination by the village, a user may be required to install
any of the following structures or facilities, supplemented by plans,
specifications, and other information considered necessary in the judgment of
the Coordinator. Such structures and facilities shall be installed and
maintained at all times at the user's sole cost and expense. Monitoring
facilities, flow metering devices, sampling equipment, and documentation of the
frequency of sampling, sampling methods, and analysis of samples shall be
subject, at all reasonable times, to inspection by the village.
      1.   Monitoring Manhole. All Users Are required to install a monitoring
manhole for each separate discharge in the building sewer in accordance with
the plans and specifications approved by the village. Each manhole shall be
situated on the user's premises in an easement dedicated to the village.
      The monitoring manhole shall be located on the Building Sewer at a point
where there are no changes in grade or alignment for at least fifteen (15) pipe
diameters upstream and downstream from the manhole. The slope of the pipe shall
not exceed one percent (1%) (one (1) foot per one hundred (100) feet) through
the manhole and for a distance of fifteen (15) pipe diameters upstream and
fifteen (15) pipe diameters downstream from the manhole.
      The monitoring manhole shall be installed upstream of the Village Sewer
at a distance approved by the Village.
      There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring manhole to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The manhole shall be
installed and maintained by the owner and/or user at its sole cost and expense
and shall be safe and accessible to the village at all times. The failure of a
user to keep its monitoring manhole in good working order shall not be grounds
for the user to claim that sample results are not representative of its
discharge.
         a.   All Users are required to install a monitoring manhole for each
separate discharge of a building sewer into the public sewer with the plans and
specifications approved by the village.
         b.   In the event that a suitable sampling facility does not exist at
an existing building:
            (1)   If the user is classified as an SIU or an NSRU, the User
shall install a monitoring manhole or sampling chamber for use as the local
limits regulatory sampling location along the building sewer, in accordance
with plans and specifications approved by the village. A sampling chamber may
be required to be installed within the building.
            (2)   If the User is classified as a CIU, the User shall install a
monitoring manhole or sampling chamber for use as the regulatory sampling
location of the categorically regulated discharge in the building sewer in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village. This sampling
chamber may be required to be installed within the building and may be in
addition to an end-of-pipe manhole.
            (3)   Under certain circumstances, at the discretion and approval
of the Coordinator, the user may be permitted to construct a monitoring point
within the user's facility to serve either as an end-of-process monitoring
point or an end-of-pipe monitoring point. A monitoring point within the
building shall be accessible to the village for necessary sampling and
observation.
            (4)   Under certain circumstances and at the discretion of the
Coordinator, the village may consider the monitoring manhole location to be
either the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer from the point at
which the building sewer is connected or the point of process wastewater
discharge if accessible by the village.
         c.   The failure of a user to maintain its monitoring manhole in good
working order shall not be grounds for a user to assert that the sample results
are unrepresentative of its discharge.
         d.   Where such a monitoring manhole location would be impractical or
cause extreme hardship on the user, the village may permit the monitoring
manhole to be constructed in the public right of way provided the monitoring
manhole is located so that it shall not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles. If a monitoring manhole is located in a parking lot, permanent
barricades shall be placed around the monitoring manhole to prevent vehicles
from driving or parking over the monitoring manhole cover.
         e.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may determine sub-classes of
business that do not require the installation of a monitoring manhole;
provided, however, monitoring manholes shall be required in zoned business or
industrial parks.
         f.   If the User is one tenant in a multi-tenant building, the User
shall either install a monitoring manhole particular to their discharge or
perform a village-approved sampling study to determine the pollutant loading
from all other users contributing to the building monitoring manhole. The
approval to proceed with the initial sampling study does not absolve the user
from the requirement to install a monitoring manhole. The Coordinator may waive
the requirement to install a monitoring manhole contingent upon the quality and
conclusions of the sampling study. Once the waiver is granted, alternative
Pollutant limits shall be calculated using the Combined Wastestream Formula
methodology for the User to which the waiver was granted.
      2.   Liquid Quantity Measurements. All Significant Industrial Users and
Users subject to Wastewater surcharges may be required to install an open
channel flow measuring device in the monitoring manhole. When required, the
sampling chamber shall contain a Palmer-Bowlus, Parshall flume, or equivalent,
unless a weir or similar device is approved by the Village.
      The village may, at its option, based on the water usage and/or waste
loadings, require the user to install a device with a recording and totalizing
register for measurement of the liquid quantity. The device shall include a
recorder, suitable to display at a minimum seven (7) calendar days of flow at a
time. The equipment required to indicate, record, and totalize the flow shall
be located in a warm dry location and be accessible to the village for reading.
This equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at the user's sole
cost and expense. The user shall complete installation of the flow measurement
device and secondary flow measuring device based on the installation schedule
approved for such device by the village.
      The User shall be required to calibrate and maintain the flow metering
equipment in accordance with the manufacturer's recommended procedures and
frequencies. Users who operate flow measuring devices shall submit the
procedure for operation and maintenance to the Pretreatment Coordinator. The
user shall further document operations and maintenance in a log which shall be
available for inspection by authorized agents of the village. At a minimum, the
user shall submit a semi-annual calibration report performed by an outside
representative by the deadline defined in the user's discharge permit. The user
may be required to submit flow records to the Pretreatment Coordinator monthly.
      3.   Sampling Equipment. The Village may, at its option, based on water
usage and/or waste loadings or when the waste loads cannot be accurately
evaluated by timed composite samples, require the user to install sampling
equipment. This equipment shall be installed and maintained by the user at the
user's sole cost and expense.
      Users shall submit the procedure for operations and maintenance of the
sampling equipment to the Pretreatment Coordinator. The User shall further
document operations and maintenance in a log which shall be available for
inspection by authorized agents of the village. At minimum, the user shall
submit a semi-annual report confirming the accurate operation of the equipment
performed by an outside representative by the deadline defined in the
wastewater discharge permit.
      The failure of a user to maintain its sampling equipment in good working
order shall not be grounds for a user to assert that the sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
      4.   Garbage Grinders. Garbage is required to be properly shredded in
order to be approved to be discharged to the public sewer. Wastes classified as
properly shredded garbage contain all particles being carried freely under the
flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater
than one-half inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension. The installation and
operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths
horsepower (0.76 hp metric) or greater shall be subject to review and approval
of the Building Department. Garbage grinders are prohibited to be connected to
a grease interceptor.
      5.   FOG and/or Sand Interceptors. Interceptors shall be provided in
facilities connected to the Public Sewer where it is determined that they are
necessary for the proper handling Wastewater that contains excessive amounts of
FOG or sand, except that such interceptors shall not be required for
residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity
approved by the building department and shall be so located to be easily
accessible for cleaning and inspection. FOG and sand interceptors used for
petroleum grease and oils may be located inside the building. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at
its sole cost and expense. (Ord. 2020- 33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-2-3: GREASE SEPARATION:
The Coordinator may require Users, specifically any User which Discharges FOG,
or any derivative of fat, oil, or grease, into the POTW to comply with the
following requirements. Inspections of Users will determine the potential for
adverse impact to the POTW. Facilities determined to have the potential to
adversely impact the POTW will be subject to the requirements found in Chapter
18. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3: GENERAL DISCHARGE REQUIREMENTS:
4-19-3-1: APPLICABILITY:
It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause pollutants to be discharged to the
POTW without having first complied with the terms of this chapter.
All Users shall meet the most stringent applicable requirements and limitations
at all times either as set forth in this chapter, in a Wastewater Discharge
Permit, Federal Pretreatment Standards as established by 40 CFR 403, or State
of Illinois standards as codified in 35 Ill. Adm. Code 307. A User shall
provide the necessary Wastewater treatment to achieve compliance with all
National Categorical Pretreatment Standards and requirements within the time
limitations as specified by the Federal Pretreatment Regulations and with any
other pretreatment standards and requirements, including local limits, by
applicable deadlines.
Wastewater sampling methods and analytical reports submitted to the Village to
demonstrate compliance with this section must comply with Section
4-19-4 of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
The following general prohibitions apply to all Users of a POTW whether or not
they are subject to a Categorical Pretreatment Standard or any other National,
State, or local Pretreatment Standard:
   A.   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly to the POTW, any pollutant or wastewater contaminant which will pass
through, cause interference with, inhibition of, or upset to the operation of
the POTW;
   B.   No user shall introduce, or cause to be introduced, either directly or
indirectly, any of the following described pollutants, substances or wastewater
into the POTW:
      1.   Pollutants which are or may be sufficient, either alone or by
interaction, to cause a safety hazard, fire, explosion, or be injurious in any
other way to the facilities or personnel of the village, or to the operation of
the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup
flashpoint of less than 140°F (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR
261.21;
      2.   Wastewater having a pH which is outside the village local limit for
pH or having any other corrosive property capable of causing structural damage
or hazard to the POTW or Village personnel;
      3.   Any solid, solid waste, or viscous substance in amounts which shall
or may cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW or other Interference to the
operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to: waste cooking oil,
grease, grease interceptor wastes, garbage with particles greater than one-half
(1/2-inch) in any direction, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones,
hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders,
sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains or hops, paper, wood, plastics, residues from
gas, tar or asphalt, residues from refining or processing of fuel or
lubricating oils, mud or glass grinding or polishing waste, fatty acids or
esters of fatty acids, or any material which can be disposed of as trash;
      4.   Pollutants, including biological and chemical oxygen demanding
pollutants, released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration (including any slug load), either singly or by interaction with
other pollutants which may interfere with, inhibit, or upset the POTW;
      5.   Wastewater having a temperature which could inhibit biological
activity in the POTW treatment plant, but in no case Wastewater which causes
the temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds 40° C. (104° F.);
      6.   Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference, pass-through, or upset the
POTW;
      7.   Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems for village personnel or which necessitates the village taking
special measures to counteract and/or alleviate the impact of the pollutant(s);
      8.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the POTW;
      9.   Material jetted from building sewers, unless approved by the
Coordinator. Approval would require sampling of the wastestream generated by
sewer jetting for pollutants determined by the Coordinator;
      10.   Wastewater containing noxious or malodorous solids, liquids, or
gases, which either singly or by their interaction with other wastes, are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life, or to Interfere with,
inhibit or Upset any operation of POTW, including but not limited to,
prevention of entry into public sewer for their maintenance and repair;
      11.   Substances with objectionable color which is not removed in the
treatment processes, such as, but not limited to: dye waste, ink waste and
vegetable tanning solutions;
      12.   Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes, except in
accordance with village, state, and Federal statutes, laws, regulations, and
rules governing such discharges;
      13.   Unpolluted water including, but not limited to, uncontaminated non-
contact cooling water, storm-water, surface and ground-waters, subsurface
drainage, roof run-off, spill contaminant area run-off, footing drains or
construction drainage except as specifically permitted by the Pretreatment
Coordinator;
      14.   Biosolids, sludge, screenings, or other residues from the
pretreatment of non-residential wastewater;
      15.   Wastewater containing any organism, including viruses, considered
pathogenic and/or detrimental to WWTP process organisms other than those
discharged by direct excrement and any other medical wastes including, but not
limited to, isolation wastes, infectious agents human blood and blood products,
sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes potentially
contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes;
      16.   Any Wastewater causing the WWTP effluent to fail a toxicity test;
      17.   Wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, aqueous
firefighting foam, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in any
part of the POTW that result in interference, upset, or is shown to inhibit the
nitrification process or pass through to the receiving waters. Such prohibited
wastes shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that may result in a
potential to discharge to the POTW;
      18.   Wastewater or wastes containing iron pickling wastes or
concentrated plating solutions whether neutralized or not;
      19.   Leachate or remediation wastewater, except at discharge points
designated by the Pretreatment Coordinator (40 CFR 403.5(b)(8));
      20.   Unusual concentrations or solutions of inert suspended solids (such
as, but not limited to Fullers earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to sodium chloride and sodium
sulfate);
      21.   Any gasoline, kerosene, naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, carbides,
hydrides, stoddard solvents, sulfides, epoxides, esters, amines, polynuclear
aromatic hydrocarbons, pyridines, new and used motor oils, or antifreeze,
except at concentrations which do not exceed levels of such substances which
are routinely present in the normal wastewater discharge and do not otherwise
violate any section of this chapter or the conditions of a wastewater discharge
permit or special agreement;
      22.   Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs) in any detectable concentrations;
      23.   Substances that inhibit the use of ultra-violet light for
disinfection purposes;
      24.   Pollutants which are not amenable to treatment or reduction by the
WWTP processes employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the POTW effluent cannot meet the requirements of its NPDES Permit;
      25.   Pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction:
         a.   Injure, interfere with, or upset WWTP processes or POTW
facilities;
         b.   Constitute a hazard to humans or animals;
         c.   Exceed limitations set forth in the Act;
         d.   May cause the WWTP to violate of its NPDES permit, the receiving
stream water quality standards, or general effluent Discharge standards;
         e.   May cause the WWTP effluent or Biosolids to be unsuitable for
reclamation and re-use, or Interfere with the reclamation processes; or
         f.   Cause the Village to be in Noncompliance with any Biosolids use
or disposal regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act, or any
regulations affecting Biosolids use or disposal developed pursuant to the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act, Solids Waste Disposal Act, Toxic
Substance Control Act, or any state or local standards applicable to any
biosolids management methods either being used or considered by the village.
   C.   Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall
not be processed or stored in such manner that could result in their discharge
to the POTW. All users with prohibited wastes described in this section or
those that have hazardous wastes shall develop and implement a Spill/Slug
Control (SSC) Plan consistent with the requirements in Section
4-19-4-4. The Pretreatment Coordinator may also determine that a SSC Plan is
required for liquids and solids not previously described in plans based on an
evaluation of a site potential to cause spills or slug loads to be introduced
to the POTW.
   D.   Discharge of Unpolluted Drainage into Storm Sewers or Natural Outlets:
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers
as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved
by the village. Industrial cooling waters or unpolluted process waters may be
discharged, upon approval of the IEPA, to a storm sewer or natural outlet.
   E.   Discharge of Unpolluted Waters Upon Adjacent Property or Public Streets
or Ways Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge in such
manner as to cause such waters to overflow onto adjacent property or to be
discharged upon any public street or public way, any stormwater, surface water,
ground water, roof runoff, or subsurface drainage, including the use of a sump
pump for such purpose.
   Any Person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a misdemeanor and the Coordinator may assess a
fine of at least one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day and/or be
incarcerated in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for not to exceed
six (6) months. A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during
or on which such person, firm, or corporation violates the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3-3: NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS:
All Users subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards, promulgated
by the USEPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, currently
discharging or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall comply with all
pretreatment standards and requirements. Limits in categorical pretreatment
standards apply to the discharge from the process regulated by the standard or
as otherwise specified by the standard. The National Categorical Pretreatment
Standards set forth in 40 CFR Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405 - 471, are
hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter.
   A.   Where a Categorical Pretreatment Standard is expressed only in terms of
either the mass or the concentration of a Pollutant in Wastewater, the
Coordinator may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits, unless
specifically restricted by the Standard, in accordance with parts E and F below
in this section.
   The calculated equivalent limitations are deemed pretreatment standards.
Users shall be required to comply with the equivalent limitations in place of
the promulgated categorical standards from which the equivalent limitations
were derived. An alternative pretreatment limit shall not be used if the
alternative limit is below the analytical detection limit for any of the
regulated pollutants.
   B.   When the limits in a categorical pretreatment standard are expressed
only in terms of mass of pollutant per unit of production, the Coordinator may
convert the limits to equivalent limitations expressed as either mass of
pollutant discharged per day or effluent concentration for purposes of
calculating effluent limitations applicable to individual users.
   The Coordinator calculating equivalent mass-per-day limitations shall
calculate such limitations by multiplying the limits in the standard by the
user's average rate of production. This average rate of production shall be
based on a reasonable measure of the user's actual long-term daily production
during a representative year and not based on design production capacity. For
new sources, actual production shall be estimated using projected production.
   The Coordinator shall calculate such limitations by dividing the mass
limitations by the average daily flow rate of the user's regulated process
wastewater. The average daily flow rate shall be based upon a reasonable
measure of the user's actual long-term average flow rate, such as the average
daily flow rate during the representative year.
   C.   When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed
with wastewater not regulated by the same standard prior to any pretreatment,
the Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the Combined Waste Stream
Formula set forth in 40 CFR 403.6(e), provided that the applicable categorical
regulation allows the Wastewaters to be mixed and the User can supply the
information necessary to allow issuance of an alternative limit.
   D.   A user may request an adjustment to a categorical pretreatment standard
to account for pollutant loadings in the user's intake water (a net/gross
adjustment) in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
   E.   When a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of
pollutant concentrations, a user may request that the village convert the
limits to equivalent mass limits. The determination to convert concentration
limits to mass limits is within the discretion of the Coordinator. The Village
may establish equivalent mass limits only if the User meets all the conditions
set forth in parts 1.a. through 1.e. below.
      1.   To be eligible for equivalent mass limits, the User must:
         a.   Employ, or demonstrate that it will employ, water conservation
methods and technologies that substantially reduce water during the term of its
Wastewater Discharge Permit;
         b.   Currently use control and treatment technologies adequate to
achieve compliance with the applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard, and
not have used dilution as a substitute for treatment;
         c.   Provide sufficient information to establish the facility's actual
average daily flow rate for all wastestreams, based on data from a continuous
effluent flow monitoring device, as well as the facility's long-term average
production rate. Both the actual average daily flow rate and the long-term
average production rate must be representative of current operating conditions;
         d.   Not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels
that vary so significantly that equivalent mass limits are not appropriate to
control the discharge; and
         e.   Have consistently complied with all applicable categorical
pretreatment standards during the period prior to the user's request for
equivalent mass limits.
      2.   A User subject to equivalent mass limits must:
         a.   Maintain and effectively operate control and treatment
technologies adequate to achieve compliance with the equivalent mass limits;
         b.   Continue to record the facility's flow rates through the use of a
continuous effluent flow monitoring device;
         c.   Continue to record the facility's production rates and notify the
Coordinator whenever production rates are expected to vary by more than twenty
percent (20%) from its baseline production rates determined in paragraph 1.c.
of this Section. Upon notification of a revised baseline production rate, the
Coordinator will reassess the equivalent mass limit and revise the limit as
necessary to reflect revised baseline production rates at the facility; and
         d.   Continue to employ the same or comparable water conservation
methods and technologies as those implemented pursuant to paragraph 1(a) of
this Section so long as it Discharges under an equivalent mass limit.
      3.   When developing equivalent mass limits, the Coordinator:
         a.   Shall calculate the equivalent mass limit by multiplying the
actual average daily flow rate of the regulated process(es) of the user by the
concentration-based daily maximum and monthly average standard for the
applicable categorical pretreatment standard and the appropriate unit
conversion factor;
         b.   Shall reassess the equivalent mass limit and recalculate the
limit necessary to reflect changed conditions at the facility upon notification
of a revised production rate from the User; and
         c.   May retain the same equivalent mass limit in subsequent
Wastewater Discharge Permit terms if the User's actual average daily flow rate
was reduced solely as a result of the implementation of water conservation
methods and technologies, and the actual average daily flow rates used in the
original calculation of the equivalent mass limit were not based on the use of
dilution as a substitute for treatment pursuant to Section
4-19-3-7. The user must also be in compliance with Section
4-19-14-3 regarding the prohibition of Bypass.
   F.   The Pretreatment Coordinator may convert the mass limits of the
Categorical Pretreatment Standards of 40 CFR Parts 414, 419, and 455 to
concentration limits for purposes of calculating limitations applicable to
individual Users. The conversion is at the discretion of the Coordinator.
   G.   Once included in its wastewater discharge permit, the user must comply
with the equivalent limitations developed in this section in lieu of the
promulgated categorical pretreatment standards from which the equivalent
limitations were derived.
   H.   Many categorical pretreatment standards specify one limit for
calculating maximum daily discharge limitations and a second limit for
calculating maximum monthly average, or four (4)-day average, limitations.
Where such Standards are being applied, the same production or flow figure
shall be used in calculating both the average and the maximum equivalent
limitations.
   I.   Any user operating under a wastewater discharge permit incorporating
equivalent mass or concentration limits calculated from a production-based
standard shall notify the Coordinator within two (2) business days after the
User has a reasonable basis to know that the production level will
significantly change within the next calendar month. Any User which fails to
timely notify the Coordinator of such anticipated change will be required to
meet the mass or concentration limits in its wastewater discharge permit that
were based on the original estimate of the long term average production rate.
   J.   A User may request a variance from USEPA based on fundamentally
different factors. The request must comply with the procedural and substantive
provisions in 40 CFR 403.13.
   All users that are subject to national categorical pretreatment standards
are required to file reports as required Sections
4-19-7-2 and
4-19-7-3, signed by an authorized representative. Such reports shall include
all information that the Coordinator deems necessary to make compliance
determinations. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3-4: STATE LIMITS:
All users are subject to state water quality standards and requirements as set
forth in 35 Ill. Adm. Code 307 and any future amendments or revisions to 35
Ill. Adm. Code 307. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3-5: LOCAL LIMITS:
   A.   The Coordinator is authorized to establish Local Limits pursuant to 40
CFR 403.5(c).
   B.   The following Pollutant limits are established to protect against Pass
Through and Interference. No Person shall Discharge Wastewater containing in
excess of the following Local Limits.
Pollutant Local Limit Concentration (mg/L)
          Daily Maximum Limit Instantaneous Limit
Pollutant               Local Limit Concentration (mg/L)
                        Daily Maximum Limit Instantaneous Limit
Ammonia-Nitrogen (As N) 150                  
BOD                     2,000                
FOG (Food Origin)                          200
FOG (Mineral/Petroleum)                    100
Mercury                 0.0005               
pH                                         5.0 - 9.5
Phosphorus (As P)       25                   
TSS                     2,000                
 
   The above limits apply at the point where Wastewater is Discharged to the
POTW. All concentrations of metallic substances are for total metal unless
otherwise indicated. FOG shall be measured as defined in 40 CFR 136 Table 1B
Parameter 41.
   C.   If deemed appropriate by the Coordinator, and if POTW capacity and
loading allows, alternative limits may be developed for permitted Users using
the Non-Uniform Allocation methodology presented in the United States
Environmental Protection Agency's "Local Limits Development Guidance" (July,
2004). These Non-Uniform Allocation (NUA) Limits shall be written into the
Permit issued to the User and shall operate in place of the Local Limit for the
aforementioned Pollutants described in division (C) above.
   D.   Best Management Practices (BMP): The Coordinator may develop BMPs by
Ordinance or in individual Wastewater Discharge Permits to implement Local
Limits and the requirements contained in Section
4-19-3-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3-6: VILLAGE'S RIGHT OF REVISION:
   A.   The village reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in
wastewater discharge permits, more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the POTW consistent with the purpose of this chapter. The
specific limitations on discharges are derived from the maximum allowable
industrial loading (MAIL) calculation. The MAILs are allocated only to those
users, at the village's discretion, that contribute the regulated pollutant.
All remaining users are held to either the background concentration or slightly
higher than background but lower than the specific discharge limit. In no case
shall the sum of allocations exceed the MAIL.
   B.   The village will maintain a reserve of the maximum allowable headworks
pollutant loading for each pollutant for new industries or increase of
pollutant loading from existing industries. The Village will recalculate the
maximum concentrations from time to time using site specific data and will
consider revisions to State and Federal regulations that may impact the
calculations. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-3-7: DILUTION PROHIBITED:
No user shall increase the use of potable or process water or in any other way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate
treatment in order to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or
requirement except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable
pretreatment standard. The Coordinator may impose mass limitations on users who
are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements,
or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. (Ord.
2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4: GENERAL DISCHARGE COMPLIANCE:
4-19-4-1: APPLICABILITY:
If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be discharged, to
the POTW which contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated
in Section
4-19-3-2, or which are in violation of the standards for pretreatment provided
in 40 CFR 403, and any amendments thereto, or which in the judgment of the
Village may have a deleterious effect upon the POTW or receiving waters, or
which otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the
Pretreatment Coordinator may reject the wastes, require pretreatment to an
acceptable condition for discharge to the POTW, or require control over the
quantities or rates of discharge. If the Coordinator permits the pretreatment
or equalization of wastewater flows, the design and installation of the
facilities and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Coordinator and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes,
ordinances, and laws.
Each user that discharges wastewater to the POTW shall provide wastewater
treatment and best management practices as required to comply with this chapter
and shall comply with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and
the prohibitions set forth in Section
4-19-5 of this chapter within the time limitations specified by USEPA, the
State, or the Pretreatment Coordinator, whichever is more stringent. (Ord.
2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4-2: PRETREATMENT FACILITIES:
Any pretreatment facility(s) necessary for compliance shall be provided and
shall be properly maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective
operation by the user at the user's sole cost and expense. Detailed plans and
specifications describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the Coordinator for review and approval prior to the construction
and operation of such facilities. The review of such plans and specifications
shall in no way relieve the User from the responsibility of modifying such
facilities as necessary to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
All Users are required to comply with IEPA permitting requirements. A User
shall file an IEPA application for a construction-operating permit prior to
construction or significant modification of a Pretreatment system that has been
signed-off by the Village and obtain either a permit from the IEPA or a letter
indicating no permit is needed prior to the village connection and/or
wastewater discharge permit(s) being issued. No sources of non-residential
wastewater shall be discharged to the POTW until all permitting requirements
have been satisfied. All pretreatment facilities designated by the Coordinator
shall be under the control and direction of an IEPA-certified wastewater
operator even if the User is not issued an IEPA operating permit.
Any subsequent proposed modification, alteration, or change to the pretreatment
facilities or method of operation shall be submitted to the village and IEPA
for review and approval prior to the user's initiation of the changes. Users
shall obtain all necessary additional construction-operating permits from IEPA
and the Village for the changes prior to making said modification, alteration,
or change. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4-3: ADDITIONAL PRETREATMENT MEASURES:
The village may require the additional pretreatment measures set forth below.
The village reserves the right to make unannounced inspections of any
additional pretreatment measures during normal business hours whether or not
the user has been issued an individual or general wastewater discharge permit.
   A.   Whenever deemed Necessary, the coordinator may require a user to
restrict its discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain
wastewater be discharged only into specific public sewers, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial
waste streams, and make other such actions as may be necessary to protect the
POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   The Coordinator may require any user discharging into the POTW to
install and maintain, on its property and at its sole cost and expense, a
suitable storage and flow-control facility to ensure equalization of flow. This
device shall be approved by the Coordinator. The village may issue an
individual or general wastewater discharge permit solely for flow equalization.
   C.   The Coordinator may require a user discharging to the POTW to install
and maintain facilities to limit the amount of FOG and sand entering the POTW
through the procedures outlined in Section
4-19-2-2.
   D.   The Coordinator may require a user with the potential to discharge
flammable substances to the POTW to install and maintain, on its property and
at its own cost and expense, a combustible gas detection meter. This meter
shall be approved by the Coordinator.
   E.   The village retains the right to negotiate a surcharge with a user
discharging high strength waste, the dollar amount to be determined based on
the strength, character and volume of the waste.
While performing the necessary work on private properties, the Coordinator,
duly authorized employees of the Village, consultants retained by the Village,
the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency, and the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the user, and the user shall be held harmless for injury to or
death of the village employees, and the village shall indemnify the user
against liability claims and demands for personal injury or property damage
asserted against the user, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the user to maintain safe conditions. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4-4: SPILL/SLUG CONTROL PLAN:
   A.   A User shall develop, implement and maintain a SSC Plan if the User
has:
      1.   Chemicals (raw materials, chemical intermediates, wastes to be
recycled, final products, or utility chemicals) that total or exceed two
hundred fifty (250) gallons or five (5) 55-gallon drums at or on its site;
      2.   Prohibited Discharge Materials as defined in Section
4-19-3-2 at or on its site; or
      3.   Hazardous Waste as defined in Section
4-19-7-8 at or on its site; or
      4.   Been defined by the Pretreatment Coordinator to have a need to
control slug discharges.
      Any user that meets the above criteria shall develop and implement a SSC
Plan regardless of whether or not that user is regulated by a wastewater
discharge permit.
   B.   The SSC Plan which is required to be submitted to the village shall
address, at a minimum, the following:
      1.   Specifics of SSC Plan:
         a.   Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch
discharges;
         b.   Description of stored chemicals, including quantity, type, and
number of storage containers;
         c.   Site diagram showing location of all tanks holding greater than
or equal to two hundred and fifty (250) gallons or areas containing five (5)
fifty-five (55)-gallon drums or more of raw materials, prohibited wastes,
hazardous wastes, wastes to be recycled, or final product;
         d.   Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or Slug
Discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not limited to, routine
inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of
materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff,
measures specific to slug Discharge control, worker training, building of
containment structures or equipment, inventory of spill response equipment,
measures for containing toxic organic Pollutants, including solvents, and
measures and equipment for emergency response. Building containment structures
or production equipment changes are considered procedures to prevent adverse
spills. If containment structures are connected to the POTW, a shut-off valve
is required and shall be left in a closed position;
         e.   Location of Notice/Signs posted in conspicuous places advising
employees in English, and the language of common use at the facility, whom to
call in the event of a spill, accidental Discharge of prohibited materials,
Slug Discharge, or a Bypass of any part of a Pretreatment system; and
         f.   Emergency telephone number(s) (twenty-four (24)-hour) off-site
and backup telephone number(s) and other contact information (e.g. address,
email address, etc.) for responsible site staff. Once a SSC Plan has been filed
with the Village, any change in such information should be submitted within
five (5) work days after revision.
      2.   Notification Procedure. The SSC Plan shall contain procedures for
immediately notifying the Pretreatment Coordinator of any accidental or Slug
Discharge, as required by Section
4-19-7-6 of this chapter;
      3.   Documentation. The SSC Plan shall contain a sample of the
documentation maintained at the site that:
         a.   Ensures that all employees who are in a position to cause,
discover, or observe such Discharge are advised of the emergency notification
procedures and the training is documented with the date and time of training
and the employee's signature; and
         b.   Verifies inspection and maintenance procedures to prevent adverse
impacts and confirm that said procedures are being performed on a regular
basis. At minimum, logs are required to verify valves in containment
structures, if present, are closed.
   C.   The SSC Plan shall be submitted to the Coordinator when the plan is
required in a wastewater discharge permit. Review of an SSC Plan by the village
shall not relieve the user from the responsibility to modify the user's
facility or SSC Plan as necessary to meet all requirements of this chapter.
Review by the Village does not constitute an approval of the SSC Plan and the
village and its duly authorized agent(s) are not responsible for the actions of
the user and any impacts the user may cause as a result of a spill or slug
load.
   D.   At least once every two (2) years the Coordinator shall require each
SIU (including CIUs) to evaluate the need to revise its SSC Plan. The
Coordinator may require any user to submit, at a frequency less than two (2)
years, such SSC Plan or require modification of an existing SSC Plan based on
changes that have occurred at the site or in response to an incident that had
the potential to impact the POTW.
   In alternate years, the Coordinator shall evaluate whether each NSRU is
required to file a revision to its SSC Plan based on changes that have occurred
at the site or in response to an incident that had the potential to impact the
POTW.
   E.   All SSC Plans shall be implemented by the user whether or not they have
been reviewed by the village. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4-5: MONITORING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Flow Monitoring: All permitted users are required to monitor flow of
potable water and/or wastewater at frequency stated in the user's wastewater
discharge permit. All other users are required to flow monitor upon the request
of the village.
      1.   Metered water supply may be used to determine Wastewater flow if it
is substantiated to the Village that the metered water supply and Wastewater
quantities are approximately the same, or where an adjustment agreed to by the
Pretreatment Coordinator is made in the metered water supply to determine
Wastewater flow and is documented through the use of sub-meters and/or
production records. In the event that the Wastewater flow cannot be
substantiated at any regulated location, the user shall be required to install
flow monitoring consistent with Section
4-19-2-2.
         a.   In the event the Village, or surrounding area, should suffer from
a water shortage, the Village Board of Minooka shall have the authority to
suspend the provisions of the paragraph above in order to encourage water
conservation. In the event that the President of the Village of Minooka
determines and declares that such water shortage exists to such an extent and
degree as to constitute an emergency, then the Village President shall have the
authority to suspend the provisions of the paragraph above, pending
ratification by the Village Board at its next regularly scheduled meeting
following the suspension by the Village President. In determining whether a
water shortage exists, the Village President and Village Board may consider
water shortages in the surrounding area in addition to the adequacy of the
supply of the Village Water System. In the event that a future water shortage
appears evident, the provisions of the paragraph above may also be suspended by
the Village President or Village Board prior to the existence of an emergency.
      2.   Under authorization from the Village, users may be permitted to
install additional water meters on the exterior of the user's structure at the
user's sole cost and expense for the purpose of measuring water not Discharged
to the POTW. All users shall register with the Village and provide information
requested by the Village concerning the installation of additional water
meters. The Building Official shall have the right to inspect and regulate the
installation of additional water meters. The Wastewater volume Discharged to
the POTW shall be determined by subtracting the volume shown on the additional
water meter(s) from the total metered amount of water supplied to the premises.
   B.   Wastewater Discharge Sampling: All permitted users are required to
sample based on the monitoring frequency as stated in the user's wastewater
discharge permit. Other users are required to sample upon the request of the
village. A user shall pay the cost of sampling of its discharge and the cost of
analyses of its samples, whether or not the sampling and analyses are performed
by the user or by the village.
      1.   Sample Frequency
         a.   All SIUs (including CIUs) shall sample their effluent(s) for the
parameters specified in the user's wastewater discharge permit and report the
results to the coordinator at a minimum of at least twice per year or more
frequently as designated in the permit. The village shall have the right to
perform its own sampling for any pollutant at any time.
         b.   Any NSRUs with a wastewater discharge permit shall sample their
effluent and report the results to the coordinator in a manner consistent with
the requirements of the wastewater discharge permit.
         c.   The sampling frequency listed in a Wastewater Discharge Permit
may be modified by the Coordinator in the event that additional samples are
needed to demonstrate consistent compliance.
      2.   Sample Collection
         a.   Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements shall be
based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed
during the period covered by the report, based on data that is representative
of conditions occurring during the reporting period as defined in the
wastewater discharge permit.
         b.   Except as indicated in paragraph c. below, the user shall collect
wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques.
         c.   In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the
Coordinator may authorize the use of time proportional sampling, at minimum
collecting samples every fifteen (15) minutes during a twenty-four (24)-hour
workday, or a minimum of four (4) grab samples where the user demonstrates that
this will provide a representative sample of the wastewater being discharged. A
proportional number of samples shall be collected for wastewater discharges
less than twenty-four (24) hours.
         d.   One or more grab samples may be required by the Coordinator in
the event of an infrequent batch discharge or to show compliance with
pretreatment standards, including daily maximum pretreatment standards. The
Coordinator may also allow, during an infrequent batch discharge, multiple grab
samples to be collected and composited, as appropriate, to determine compliance
with daily maximum pretreatment standards. Grab samples may not be composited
to determine compliance with instantaneous local limits.
         e.   Samples for FOG, temperature, pH, cyanide, chromium (VI),
phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds shall be obtained using the
number of grab samples determined by the Coordinator to assess and assure
compliance with applicable pretreatment standards. Multiple grab samples that
are individually preserved as specified in 40 CFR 136 and appropriate USEPA
guidance that are collected during a twenty-four (24)-hour period must not be
composited and must be analyzed separately to determine compliance with
instantaneous local limits. However, results may be averaged to determine
compliance with the pollutant's respective daily maximum limit, when
applicable.
         f.   To determine compliance with daily maximum limits only, samples
for the following pollutants may be composited prior to the analysis as
follows:
            (1)   For, cyanide, chromium (VI), phenols, and sulfides: multiple
grab samples may be composited in the laboratory or in the field;
            (2)   For volatile organics and FOG: multiple grab samples may only
be composited in the laboratory.
         g.   Composite samples for other parameters unaffected by the
compositing procedures as documented in approved USEPA methodologies may be
authorized by the Coordinator, as appropriate. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4-6: ANALYTICAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted
as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the
Pollutant in question, or where the USEPA determines that the Part 136 sampling
and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the Pollutant in question,
sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or
any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the Coordinator or other parties approved by USEPA.
   B.   Analytical reports submitted to the Village must comply with the
following requirements:
      1.   The practical quantification limit (PQL) must be less than half of
the effluent limit for the Pollutant being analyzed;
      2.   The analysis method used, method detection limit (MDL), and the PQL
must be listed for each Pollutant analyzed;
      3.   Results which were not detected by the analysis must be reported as
“Not Detected,” or “ND,” or “<[MDL]”, or equal;
      4.   Results which were detected by the analysis at or above the MDL, but
the result was not quantifiable, must be reported as the concentration detected
and noted in the report as “Detected Not Quantifiable,” or “DNQ,” or using an
appropriate qualifier and footnote description; and
      5.   If a result is detected, it must be reported. Failure to report a
detected result constitutes significant noncompliance.
   C.   As the Coordinator deems necessary, a user may be required to analyze
for one or more pollutants not listed in the local limits or pretreatment
standards to satisfy the requirements of this chapter.
   Documentation of the frequency of sampling, sampling methods, and analysis
of samples shall be subject, at all reasonable times, to inspection by the
village. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-4-7: PROTECTION OF VILLAGE SAMPLING AND FLOW METERING EQUIPMENT FROM
DAMAGE:
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy,
or tamper with any structure, appurtenance, or equipment which is owned or
contracted by the village. Any person violating this provision shall be subject
to immediate arrest under charge of disorderly conduct. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-4-8: CLOSURE PLAN:
   A.   Any user meeting the requirements of Section
4-19-4-4 that decides to cease or terminate any operations which classify the
user as an SIU, for more than ninety (90) days, must file a written closure
plan with the village. The closure plan shall be submitted ten (10) work days
prior to the initiation of the plan and shall contain, at a minimum, the
following:
      1.   A description of each wastewater generating process that will cease
operations for more than ninety (90) consecutive days;
      2.   A description of how the facility will be closed and the extent of
operations during the closure period;
      3.   An inventory and estimate of the volume of all process wastewater,
chemicals, and hazardous waste on site. A description of the methods for
disposal, including procedures for removing, transporting, treating, storing,
or disposing of all waste and identifying all off-site waste management
facilities to be used;
      4.   A schedule of the closure activities indicating the time required to
complete each closure step; and
      5.   A schedule of additional monitoring to identify compliance with
pretreatment standards during the closure operations. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-5: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS AND APPLICATION:
4-19-5-1: WASTEWATER INFORMATION AND ANALYSIS:
A user shall submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
Wastewater within a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days of a written request
by the Coordinator. Information shall be submitted on a form provided by the
Village. The Pretreatment Coordinator may periodically require users to update
information on file with the Village. Information that may be required will be
consistent with the information identified in Section
4-19-2-1 and Section
4-19-3.
Users classified as CIUs shall complete and submit a Baseline Monitoring Report
with a Permit Application and also comply with the other requirements in
Section
4-19-7-2 of this chapter. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-5-2: AUTHORITY AND REQUIREMENTS:
The Coordinator may issue a user a wastewater discharge permit as follows:
   A.   Individual Wastewater Discharge Permits issued to SIUs (which includes
CIUs not identified as NSCIUs): No SIU, including any CIU, shall Discharge
Wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a Wastewater Discharge Permit
issued by the Village, except that an existing SIU that has filed a timely
application pursuant to Section
4-19-5-3 may continue to discharge for the time period specified herein.
   B.   General Wastewater Discharge Permits. At the discretion of the
Coordinator, the village may issue a general wastewater discharge permit to
control discharges from users to the POTW if the following conditions are true
of all facilities controlled by a general wastewater discharge permit:
      1.   Involve the same or substantially similar types of operations;
      2.   Discharge the same types of waste;
      3.   Require the same effluent limitations or Best Management Practices;
      4.   Require the same or similar monitoring and/or reporting
requirements; and
      5.   In the opinion of the Coordinator, are more appropriately controlled
under a general Wastewater Discharge Permit than under an individual Wastewater
Discharge Permit.
   C.   Other Wastewater Discharge Permits: The Coordinator may require other
users to obtain either individual or general Wastewater Discharge Permits, as
necessary, to carry out the purposes of this Ordinance. Such a Wastewater
Discharge Permit shall state that the holder of such a Permit issued under this
section is not classified as an SIU or CIU. A user with a Wastewater Discharge
Permit in this class may include but are not limited to:
      1.   Any user that has been determined to be a NSCIU as defined in
Section 19.106;
      2.   Any user that has been determined not to be an SIU as defined in
Section 19.106;
      3.   Any user subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards that
opts not to Discharge process waste. Such a user is designated a Zero Process
Wastewater Discharge CIU and shall be issued a Zero Process Wastewater
Discharge Permit;
      4.   Any user that is a non-Categorical Zero Process Wastewater
Discharger that the Coordinator determines shall be permitted;
      5.   Any Non-Significant Regulated users (NSRU) set forth below:
         a.   An NSRU that Discharges a process Wastewater flow greater than or
equal to 0.005 percent of the POTW's design dry-weather hydraulic capacity, or
five thousand (5,000) gallons per day, whichever is smaller;
         b.   An NSRU that Discharges more than or equal to 0.005 percent of
the design dry-weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW;
         c.   An NSRU that Discharges 0.005 percent of the maximum allowable
headworks loading for any Pollutant regulated by a Local Limit set forth in
Section
4-19-3-5; or
         d.   An NSRU that intermittently introduces any Batch Discharges that
would meet the criteria in 1, 2, or 3 above when Discharged or otherwise have
the potential to Discharge a Slug Load to the POTW;
      6.   Any user that has device(s) installed to remove oils, grease, sand,
or grit;
      7.   Any Food Service Establishments (FSE); and
      8.   Any user required to eliminate or control specified Pollutants from
its Wastewater through the development and implementation of a Best Management
Practice (BMP) Plan.
A scenario may arise that a user that is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards opts not to discharge categorical process waste, as
described in part 3 above, but the user is classified as significant. A
combination SIU Permit/Zero Process Wastewater Discharge Permit should be
issued in this case.
Any violation of the terms and conditions of an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and
subject the user to the sanctions set out in Sections
4-19-13 through
4-19-15 of this chapter. Obtaining an individual or general Wastewater
Discharge Permit does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all
Federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other
requirements of Federal, state, and local law. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-5-3: EXISTING CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Any existing SIU, including CIU, required to obtain a Wastewater
Discharge Permit that was Discharging Wastewater into the POTW prior to the
effective date of this chapter and wishes to continue such Discharges in the
future, shall, within sixty (60) calendar days after said date, apply to the
Coordinator for the appropriate Wastewater Discharge Permit in accordance with
Section
4-19-5-5 of this chapter, and shall not cause or allow Discharges to the POTW
to continue after one hundred twenty (120) calendar days of the effective date
of this chapter except in accordance with a Wastewater Discharge Permit issued
by the Coordinator.
   B.   Any existing non-SIU required to obtain an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit shall file an application within the time period
specified in a notification provided by the Coordinator.
   C.   General Permits for Food Service Establishments (FSE). FSE users shall
submit information required by the Village within the timeframe specified by
the Coordinator. FSE users complying with this requirement will be deemed to
have complied with the permit requirements during the implementation of this
program. The completed survey shall serve as the Wastewater Discharge Permit
Application for the FSE. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-5-4: NEW CONNECTIONS:
   A.   Any CIU proposing to begin or recommence a Discharge to the POTW must
obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of
such Discharge. An application, furnished by the Village, for this individual
Wastewater Discharge Permit, in accordance with Section
4-19-5-5 of this Ordinance, must be filed at least ninety (90) calendar days
prior to the date upon which any Discharge will begin or recommence.
   B.   Any non-CIU proposing to begin or recommence a Discharge to the POTW
that is required to obtain a Wastewater Discharge Permit must obtain such
Permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such Discharge, or operations
in the case of a Zero Process Wastewater Discharge CIU, in accordance with
Section
4-19-5-5 of this chapter. An application for a Wastewater Discharge Permit must
be filed at least sixty (60) calendar days prior to the date upon which any
Discharge or operations will begin or recommence. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-5-5: PERMIT APPLICATION CONTENTS:
   A.   Permit Application Requirement. All users required to obtain a
Wastewater Discharge Permit or Zero Process Wastewater Discharge Permit must
submit a Permit application. Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be
processed and will be returned to the user for completion and/or revision.
   B.   Individual Application Contents. The Coordinator may require all users
to submit as part of an application all or some of the following information:
      1.   All information required by Section
4-19-2-1 of this chapter;
      2.   Identifying information for the site including name, facility
address and contact information of the operator, owner, and authorized
representative;
      3.   Description of Operations:
         a.   A brief description of the nature of the activities, services,
production, and plant processes carried out by the user including information
concerning each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and a
general rate of production;
         b.   Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or
actual hours of operation;
         c.   Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum
per day) including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at
the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, Discharged
to the POTW;
      4.   Time and duration of discharges with an estimate of the average
daily and maximum flow;
      5.   Waste characteristics. Information showing the nature and
concentration of the discharge in relation to applicable pretreatment standards
and local limits;
         a.   Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other
streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out
in Section 2.2C (40 CFR 403.6(e));
         b.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the Pretreatment Standards or by
the Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process;
         c.   As the Coordinator deems necessary, a user may be required to
analyze for one or more pollutants not listed in the local limits or
pretreatment standards that can reasonably be expected to be in the user's
discharge;
      6.   Plans and Diagrams:
         a.   Site plans/floor plans that show the footprint of the building
with an outline of major equipment (similar to an emergency exit plan);
         b.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all building sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location and elevation, and all points of discharge;
         c.   A diagram showing the location for monitoring the discharge of
all wastewaters covered by the permit;
      7.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the applicant's facility.
      8.   Requests for a monitoring waiver for a Pollutant regulated as a
Categorical Pretreatment Pollutant neither present nor expected to be present
in the Discharge based on Section
4-19-5-5(D) below (40 CFR 403.12(e)(2)). Representative sampling and analysis
shall be required to substantiate the request;
      9.   Any other information and/or documentation as may be deemed
necessary by the Pretreatment Coordinator to evaluate and process the
Wastewater Discharge Permit application.
   C.   General Application Requirement for Food Service Establishments (FSE).
The Coordinator may require an FSE user to obtain a general Wastewater
Discharge Permit by submitting an application on a form provided by the Village
which is specific to FSE. The form may require, but is not limited to, contact
information, general business information, facility operation, kitchen
fixtures, FOG handling procedures, kitchen clean-up and water usage, grease
interceptor or alternatives used, and sampling locations. The Village may
require an FSE to comply with a BMP and the FSE shall submit documentation as
required by the Coordinator.
   D.   Categorical Monitoring Waivers:
      1.   Authority. The village may authorize a user subject to a categorical
pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a
categorical pretreatment standard if the user has demonstrated through sampling
and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected
to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from
intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the
user. This waiver is not available to users whose concentration standards are
derived from mass standards or production based standards. This waiver is
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   The monitoring waiver may only be authorized where a pollutant is
determined to be present solely due to wastewater discharged from the facility
provided that the wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical
pretreatment standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater.
         b.   The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the
effective period of the wastewater discharge permit, but in no case longer than
five (5) years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the
waiver can be granted for each subsequently issued wastewater discharge permit.
         c.   The monitoring waiver is non-transferable to a new owner or
operator.
         d.   This provision does not supersede certification processes and
requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as
otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard.
         e.   All applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of
Pretreatment Standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule
still apply.
      2.   Waiver Application Requirements
         a.   In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the
user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process
wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is
representative of all wastewater from all processes.
         b.   The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance
with Section
4-19-5-6 and include the certification statement in Section
4-19-5-6.
         c.   Non-detectable sample results may be used only as a demonstration
that a Pollutant is not present if the USEPA approved method from 40 CFR Part
136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that Pollutant was used in the
analysis.
      Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be
returned to the user for revision.
      3.   Documentation and Record Retention for CIU Monitoring Waivers: Any
grant of the monitoring waiver by the Coordinator shall be included as a
condition in the user's Wastewater Discharge Permit. The reasons supporting the
waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver
shall be maintained by the Coordinator for three (3) years after expiration of
the waiver.
      4.   Monitor Waiver Requirements. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-5-6: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL APPLICATION SIGNATORIES AND CERTIFICATION:
   A.   All Wastewater Discharge Permit applications, user reports and
certification statements shall be signed by an Authorized Representative of the
user and contain the following certification statement:
   “I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were
prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed
to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system,
or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the
information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true,
accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for
submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and
imprisonment for knowing violations.”
   B.   If the designation of an authorized representative is no longer
accurate because a different person or position has responsibility for the
overall operation of the facility or overall responsibility for environmental
matters for the user, a new written authorization satisfying the requirements
of this section must be submitted to the Coordinator within thirty (30)
calendar days of the change. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-5-7: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DECISIONS:
The Coordinator will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require
additional information and/or documentation. Within thirty (30) calendar days
of receipt of a complete Wastewater Discharge Permit application, the
Coordinator will determine whether or not to issue a Wastewater Discharge
Permit. The Coordinator may deny any application for a Wastewater Discharge
Permit. If the Coordinator fails to act within ninety (90) calendar days, an
application for a Wastewater Discharge Permit shall be deemed to be denied.
4-19-6: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS:
4-19-6-1: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT DURATION:
An individual wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years from the effective date of the permit. An
individual wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than
five (5) years at the discretion of the Pretreatment Coordinator. Each
individual wastewater discharge permit shall indicate a specific date upon
which it will expire. A general wastewater discharge permit may contain a
specific date upon which it will expire. The village will identify in the
individual wastewater discharge permit whether or not the user is defined as an
SIU. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-6-2: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT CONTENTS:
A Wastewater Discharge Permit shall include such conditions as are deemed
reasonably necessary by the Coordinator to prevent Pass Through, Interference
or Upset, protect the quality of the water body receiving the WWTP effluent,
protect the health and safety of village personnel, facilitate wastewater,
effluent, and biosolids reduction, reuse, and recycling, and protect against
damage to the POTW.
   A.   Wastewater Discharge Permits shall contain:
      1.   A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration;
      2.   A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to the village in accordance with Section
4-19-6-5 of this chapter, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or
operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   Effluent limits, including best management practices, based on
applicable pretreatment standards;
      4.   Requirements for the development and implementation of a SSC Plan or
other special conditions including Best Management Practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine Discharges;
      5.   Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-
keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of
pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample
type based on Federal, state, and local law; and
      6.   A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance
schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that
required by applicable Federal, state, or local law.
   B.   A wastewater discharge permit may contain the process for seeking a
waiver from monitoring for a pollutant neither present nor expected to be
present in the discharge in accordance with Section
4-19-5-5 D. Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the Coordinator shall be
included as a condition of the user's permit.
   C.   Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to,
the following conditions:
      1.   Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      2.   Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed
to equalize, reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of Pollutants into
the POTW;
      3.   Requirements that govern, regulate, and/or restrict the use of
bypass of the pretreatment system conditions consistent with 40 CFR 403.17 and
Section
4-19-14-3 of this chapter;
      4.   Requirements for the development and implementation of an SSC Plan
or other special conditions including management practices necessary to
adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges;
      5.   Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce
the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      6.   Development and implementation of best management practices plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW;
      7.   The unit charge and/or schedule of strength fees for the management
of the wastewater discharged to the POTW;
      8.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment;
      9.   Requirements for the zero discharge of process waste regulated by a
National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or local standard;
      10.   Documentation of any monitoring waiver approved by the Coordinator
for categorically regulated pollutants found to be not present and requirements
to re-institute monitoring in the event that a waived pollutant is found to be
present or is expected to be present because of changes that occur in the
user's operation.
      11.   A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the user of responsibility for compliance with all applicable
federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become
effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and
      12.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Coordinator to ensure
compliance with this chapter, and state and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
   D.   General Wastewater Discharge Permits for Food Service Establishments.
If a general wastewater discharge permit for an FSE is issued, the general
Permit shall include grease interceptor requirements with operation and
maintenance requirements. All FSE shall implement a BMP plan in its operation
to minimize the Discharge of FOG to the POTW. Detailed requirements for BMP
plans shall be specified in the Permit. This may include, but is not limited
to:
      1.   Installation of drain screens;
      2.   Segregation and collection of waste cooking oil;
      3.   Disposal of food waste into the trash or garbage;
      4.   Employee training;
      5.   Record keeping requirements;
      6.   Notifications required; and
      7.   Kitchen signage.
      If the FSE has a waiver for some aspect of the program, that waiver will
be documented in an attachment to the general permit. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-6-3: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS:
Any person, including the user, may petition the Coordinator to reconsider the
terms of a wastewater discharge permit, a permit modification, or a permit
revocation within thirty (30) calendar days of notice of its issuance. The
following conditions apply to wastewater discharge permit appeals:
   A.   Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
   B.   In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for such objection, and
the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
   C.   The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
   D.   If the Coordinator fails to act within thirty (30) calendar days, a
request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge
permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered
final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
   E.   Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the
Circuit Court for Will County within sixty (60) calendar days. (Ord. 2020-33,
11-24-2020)
4-19-6-4: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT MODIFICATION:
   A.   The Coordinator may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good
cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
      1.   To incorporate any new or revised Federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
      2.   To address substantial alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
issuance of the wastewater discharge permit;
      3.   In the event a waived pollutant is found to be present, or is
expected to be present, because of changes that occur in the user's operations;
      4.   A change in the user or POTW that requires either a temporary or
permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge;
      5.   Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat
to the POTW, Village personnel, or the receiving waters;
      6.   Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge
permit;
      7.   Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting;
      8.   Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment
standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
      9.   To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge
permit; or
      10.   To reflect a transfer of either the facility ownership or operation
to either a new owner or operator as provided by Section
4-19-6-5.
   B.   The Coordinator will notify the user of the permit modification, and
the user may appeal the Coordinator's decision to modify the permit pursuant to
Section
4-19-6-3. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-6-5: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT TRANSFER:
A wastewater discharge permit shall not be transferred, assigned, or sold to a
new owner or new user in a different premise or to a new or different operation
in the same or different premise without the expressed written approval of the
Coordinator. If the premises are sold or otherwise transferred by the current
permitted user to a new owner or user who will maintain the operation in the
same premises, the permit held by the current permitted user and/or owner shall
be reissued by the village to the new owner and/or user as a temporary
wastewater discharge permit whether or not the current permitted user will
continue to operate the equipment at the site or the equipment is leased to
another user for its operation at the site of the current permitted user;
provided:
   A.   The new owner and/or user notified the village thirty (30) calendar
days in advance of the transaction; and
   B.   The new owner and/or user confirmed to the village, within five (5)
work days of the transaction, the completion of the date of the sale or
transfer or execution of an operating contract; and
   C.   The new owner and/or user shall apply for a new wastewater discharge
permit in accordance with this chapter within sixty (60) calendar days of the
ownership transaction date.
Failure to provide the sale/transfer notification defined in subsections A. and
B. above renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of said sale and/or
transfer date. It is further provided that the temporary wastewater discharge
permit shall only be effective for one hundred twenty (120) calendar days after
the date of sale or transfer. The village shall have the same remedies for
violation of temporary wastewater discharge permits as it has for violation of
other wastewater discharge permits. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-6-6: INDIVIDUAL AND GENERAL WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REVOCATION:
The Coordinator may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to timely notify the Coordinator of substantial changes to the
wastewater prior to the changed discharge;
   B.   Failure to provide prior notification to the Coordinator of changed
conditions pursuant to Section
4-19-7-4 and Section
4-19-7-5 of this chapter;
   C.   Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in
the Wastewater Discharge Permit application;
   D.   Falsifying self-monitoring reports and certification statements;
   E.   Tampering with monitoring equipment;
   F.   Refusing to allow the Coordinator and/or Duly Authorized Agents timely
access to the facility premises and records;
   G.   Failure to meet effluent limitations;
   H.   Failure to pay fines;
   I.   Failure to pay sewer charges;
   J.   Failure to meet compliance schedules;
   K.   Failure to complete a Wastewater survey or the Wastewater Discharge
Permit application;
   L.   Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business or
operation ownership of a permitted facility; or
   M.   Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms of
the Wastewater Discharge Permit or this chapter.
Wastewater Discharge Permits shall be voidable by the Coordinator upon
cessation of operations or transfer of business or operation ownership. Any
existing Wastewater Discharge Permit issued to a particular user is void upon
the issuance of a new Wastewater Discharge Permit to that user.
The Coordinator will notify the user of the Permit modification, and the user
may appeal the Coordinator's decision to modify the Permit pursuant to Section
4-19-6-3. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-6-7: WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT RE-ISSUANCE:
A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater
discharge permit re-issuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge
permit application, in accordance with Section
4-19-5-5 of this chapter, a minimum of ninety (90) calendar days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 2020-33,
11-24-2020)
4-19-6-8: REGULATION OF WASTE RECEIVED FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS:
   A.   If another municipality, or user(s) located within another
municipality, contributes Wastewater to the POTW, the village shall enter into
an intergovernmental agreement with the contributing municipality or an
agreement with the contributing users(s) regarding the discharge of wastewater
to the POTW.
   B.   The village shall request the following information from the
contributing municipality or users(s) at a frequency determined by the village:
      1.   A description of the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged
to the POTW by the contributing municipality or users(s);
      2.   An inventory of all users located within the contributing
municipality that are Discharging Wastewater to the POTW; and
      3.   Such other information as the Coordinator may deem necessary.
   C.   An intergovernmental agreement required by subsection A above, shall
contain the following conditions:
      1.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt an
Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Ordinance which is at least as stringent as
this chapter and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set
forth in Section
4-19-3 of this chapter for the area to be served by the village. The
requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as
necessary to reflect changes made to the village's ordinance or local limits.
The said agreement shall include a clause in the agreement that states the
users in the contributing municipality will abide by this chapter of the
village code.
      2.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit an updated
user inventory at a frequency determined by the village;
      3.   A provision specifying that pretreatment implementation activities,
including wastewater discharge permit issuance, inspection and sampling, and
enforcement, will be under the jurisdiction of the Coordinator;
      4.   A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the
Coordinator with access to all information and documentation that the
contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities;
      5.   Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing
municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges to the POTW;
      6.   Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's
Wastewater Discharge to the POTW;
      7.   A provision ensuring the Coordinator access to the facilities of
users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries
for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary
by the Coordinator; and
      8.   A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of
the inter-governmental agreement. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7: REPORTING REQUIREMENTS:
Each user shall comply with the reporting requirements within this chapter and
such user's wastewater discharge permit. Some reporting requirements may apply
to users that are not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord.
2020- 33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-1: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR NON-CATEGORICAL USERS:
Should the village find that a user, not subject to national categorical
pretreatment standards, does not meet pretreatment standards and/or
requirements applicable to its discharge, causes or contributes to a WWTP
interference or upset, causes pass through, or creates conditions which are
injurious to the POTW, including treatment processes, or pollutes the natural
waters within the village, its service areas, or the waters of the State of
Illinois, additional pretreatment and/or O&M shall be required of the user to
meet pretreatment standards and requirements. Such facilities as the village
may deem necessary for pretreatment of the wastewaters shall be furnished by
and at the expense of the user as a condition of the discharge of wastewater
into the POTW or to any natural water within the village service area.
   A.   Pretreatment Review: The Pretreatment Coordinator will require the user
to initiate a pretreatment review through a telephone call, letter, or
certified letter to the authorized representative of the user.
   B.   Pretreatment Initiation Meeting. A pretreatment initiation meeting
shall be held between the Coordinator and the user to discuss the problem and
the solution to said problem. If it is determined that changes in operation and
maintenance, plant modifications, and/or the installation of pretreatment
equipment shall occur to resolve noncompliance, a schedule shall be established
with events and completion deadlines agreeable to both parties to resolve the
noncompliance. If appropriate, a compliance agreement defining the agreed upon
schedule shall be sent from the village to the user. The user shall sign the
compliance agreement and return it to the Coordinator. If a schedule for
compliance acceptable to the Coordinator and the user cannot be established,
the matter will be referred for further enforcement action consistent with the
provisions of Section
4-19-11 as appropriate.
   C.   Progress Reports. Progress reports shall be filed by the user on a
schedule agreed to by the coordinator and the user concerning the completion of
major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment
standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major
components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and
conducting routine operation). In the progress report(s), the user shall
identify whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason
for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return
to the established compliance schedule.
   D.   Final Report. A final report shall be filed with the Coordinator by the
user within ninety (90) calendar days from the end of the compliance schedule
deadline to verify the success or failure or the entire schedule. The final
report will appropriate identify the steps being taken by the user to resolve
noncompliance. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-2: PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS FOR CATEGORICAL INDUSTRIAL USERS:
In the event that either the Village, a user or IEPA determines that the user
is regulated as a Categorical Industrial user by standards and requirements
promulgated by the IEPA in accordance with Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act,
the following reports are required to be filed by the user with the Village.
   A.   Baseline Monitoring Reports: Within either one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days after the effective date of a Categorical Pretreatment Standard,
or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR
403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing Categorical Industrial users
currently Discharging to or scheduled to Discharge to the POTW shall submit to
the Coordinator a report which contains the information listed below. At least
ninety (90) calendar days prior to commencement of its Discharge, New Sources
and sources that become CIUs subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable
categorical standard, shall submit to the Coordinator a report which contains
the information listed below. A New Source shall report the method of
Pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A New
Source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of
Pollutants to be Discharged.
   Users described above shall submit the information set forth below to the
Coordinator:
      1.   Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility,
including the name of the operator and owner.
      2.   Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits
held by or for the facility.
      3.   Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature,
average rate of production, (including each product produced by type, amount,
processes, and rate of production), and standard industrial classification
(SIC) codes of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description
should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of Discharge
to the POTW from the regulated processes.
      4.   Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process
streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). The Pretreatment Coordinator may
allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or
feasibility considerations.
      5.   Measurements of Pollutants.
         a.   The user shall identify the categorical pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process;
         b.   The user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis
identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the
categorical pretreatment standard or by the Coordinator, of regulated
pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and
average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample
shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the categorical
pretreatment standard requires a best management practice or pollution
prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the
coordinator or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the
categorical pretreatment standard;
         c.   The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
complete the data necessary to comply with the requirements of this subsection.
A maximum of four (4) grab samples may be required to be used for pH, cyanide,
total phenols, oil and grease, sulfide, chromium (VI), and volatile organic
compounds.
         d.   Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment
facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process
if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated
wastewater prior to pretreatment, the user should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow the use of the combined wastestream formula
of 40 CFR 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with all pretreatment
standards. Similar methodology may be used to evaluate limits for users that
combine wastestreams after pretreatment but before monitoring, at the
discretion of the Coordinator. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit
has been calculated in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit
along with supporting data may be submitted to the USEPA or IEPA;
         e.   Sampling shall be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section
4-19-4-5 of this chapter and samples shall be analyzed in accordance with
procedures set out in Section
4-19-4-6 of this chapter. Where Sections
4-19-4-5 and
4-19-4-6 do not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, or where the Coordinator determines that the listed sampling and
analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling
and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any
other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures
suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the Coordinator;
         f.   The Coordinator may allow the submission of a baseline monitoring
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for industrial Pretreatment
measures;
         g.   The baseline monitoring report shall indicate the time, date and
place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected
Pollutant Discharges to the Village;
      6.   Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's
Authorized Representative (as defined in Section
4-19-1-6), and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether
pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional
pretreatment is required for the CIU to meet the pretreatment standards and
requirements; and
      7.   Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required to meet the pretreatment standards, the user will submit the shortest
schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or
O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard.
         a.   The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of
dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the
construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to
meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not
limited to: hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans,
executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation);
         b.   No increment referred to above shall exceed nine (9) calendar
months;
         c.   The user shall submit a progress report to the Coordinator no
later than fourteen (14) calendar days following each date in the schedule and
the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if
appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established
schedule;
         d.   In no event shall more than nine (9) calendar months elapse
between such progress reports to the Coordinator; and
         e.   All compliance schedule progress reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section
4-19-5-6 of this chapter.
         f.   Where the user's categorical pretreatment standard has been
modified by a removal allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream
formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)), and/or a Fundamentally Different Factors variance
(40 CFR 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by paragraph
(b) of this section, the information required by paragraphs A(6) and A(7) of
this section shall pertain to the modified limits.
         g.   If the Categorical Pretreatment Standard is modified by a removal
allowance (40 CFR 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (40 CFR 403.6(e)),
and/or a Fundamentally Different Factors variance (40 CFR 403.13) after the
user submits the report required by part A of this section, any necessary
amendments to the information requested by paragraphs A.6. and A(7) of this
section shall be submitted by the user to the pretreatment coordinator within
sixty (60) days after the modified limit is approved.
      8.   Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be signed and certified in accordance with Section
4-19-5-6 of this chapter.
   B.   Reports On Compliance With Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline:
Within ninety (90) calendar days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source
following commencement of the introduction of Wastewater into the POTW, any
user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to
the Coordinator a report containing the information described in Section
4-19-7-2(A) of this chapter. For users subject to equivalent mass or
concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR
403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-
term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of
production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the
user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance
reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 4-19-5-6 of
this chapter. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-3: PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORTS/SELF-MONITORING REPORTS:
   A.   Significant Industrial users (Including CIUs)
      1.   SIUs shall, at a frequency determined by the Coordinator but in no
case less than twice per year (on dates specified by the village in the
wastewater discharge permit, representing the first and second semi-annual
periods) submit a report to the village with a description of the nature,
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment
standards, and the measured or estimated average and daily flows for the
reporting period, in addition to any other reports required by the SIU's
Wastewater Discharge Permit. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and
certified in accordance with Section
4-19-5-6 of this chapter.
      2.   These reports shall be based on sampling and analysis performed in
the period covered by the report, and performed in accordance with the
techniques described in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. All wastewater
samples must be representative of the user's discharge and comply with the
requirements of Section
4-19-4-5 and Section
4-19-4-6.
      3.   All sampling and analysis may be performed by the village in lieu of
the significant industrial user at the discretion of the Coordinator. In such
cases, the village will issue an attachment to the wastewater discharge permit
that specifies the village will perform sampling and analysis semi-annually at
minimum. The significant industrial user shall reimburse the village for all
costs and expenses incurred for such sampling and analysis in a manner
acceptable to the village.
      4.   In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a
Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the user
must submit documentation required by the Coordinator or the Pretreatment
Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      5.   If a SIU subject to the reporting requirements in this section
monitors any Pollutant more frequently than required by the Coordinator, using
the procedures prescribed in Section
4-19-4-5 and Section
4-19-4-6 of this Ordinance, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
   B.   Categorical Industrial users
      1.   Where the Village has imposed mass limitations on a CIU as provided
for by 40 CFR 403.6(c), the report required by Section
4-19-7-3 A.1. shall indicate the mass of Pollutants regulated by the
Pretreatment Standards in the Discharge from the CIU.
      2.   For a CIU subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits
established by the Village in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6
(c), the report required by paragraph A.1. of this section shall contain a
reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other CIUs
subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed only in terms of
allowable Pollutant Discharge per unit of production (or other measure of
operation), the report required by Section
4-19-7-3 A.1. shall include the user's actual average production rate for the
reporting period.
      3.   In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance with a
Best Management Practice (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative, the CIU
must submit documentation required by the Coordinator or the pretreatment
standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user.
      4.   Upon approval of a monitoring waiver for pollutants found to be not
present and revision of the user's permit by the Coordinator, the CIU must
certify on each periodic report with the statement in Section
4-19-5-6, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream
due to activities of the user with the following statement:
      Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR
                   (specify applicable National Categorical Pretreatment
Standard part(s)), I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief,
there has been no increase in the level of the                          (list
the categorically regulated pollutant(s)) in the wastewaters due to the
activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report.
      5.   In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is
expected to be present because of changes that occur in the user's operations,
the user must immediately comply with the monitoring requirements of Section
4-19-7-3 A.1. or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the
Coordinator, and notify the Coordinator.
   C.   Non-Significant Categorical users
      1.   NSCIUs as defined in Section
4-19-1-6 shall annually (on dates specified in a wastewater discharge permit),
submit the following certification statement signed by an authorized
representative of the user. The certification must also accompany any
alternative report required by the village.
      Based on the inquiry of the Person or Persons directly responsible for
managing compliance with the Categorical Pretreatment Standards under 40 CFR
      , I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, that during the
period from                  ,                         to                     ,
                : [months, days, year]
         a.   The facility described as                                  
[facility name] met the definition of a non-significant categorical industrial
user as described in 19.106 of the Village of Minooka Code of Ordinances;
         b.   The facility complied with all applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements during this reporting period; and
         c.   The facility never discharged more than one hundred (100) gallons
of total categorical wastewater on any given day during this reporting period.
      This compliance certification is based on the following information:
                                                                                                            
   D.   Other Non-Significant Regulated users: Categorical Zero Process
Dischargers, Non-Categorical Zero Process Dischargers, Batch Dischargers, FSEs,
and any firms regulated by individual or general Wastewater Discharge Permit
requirements including but not limited to Best Management Practices shall
submit a periodic report at a frequency defined in the applicable Wastewater
Discharge Permit or at a frequency determined by the Coordinator.
   E.   All other users shall submit periodic reports as required by the
Coordinator: The reports may require sampling and analyses or some other
measure to determine compliance with an issued permit, pretreatment standards
and requirements, or the requirements of this chapter. The user must submit
documentation necessary to determine the compliance status of the user as
defined by the Coordinator or as identified in the wastewater discharge permit.
As the Coordinator deems necessary, a user may be required to analyze for one
or more pollutants not listed in the local limits or pretreatment standards.
(Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-4: AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE CHANGE NOTIFICATION:
Any significant industrial user that changes the authorized representative of
its company shall file a change notice with the Village within thirty (30)
calendar days of the effective date of the change. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-5: REPORTS OF CHANGED CONDITIONS:
Each user must notify the Coordinator of any planned substantial changes to the
user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of
its wastewater at least thirty (30) calendar days before the change. Immediate
shutdowns or deletions of products are required to be noticed within five (5)
work days of determination.
   A.   The Coordinator may require the user to submit such information as may
be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission
of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section
4-19-5-5 of this chapter.
   B.   The Coordinator may issue or modify an existing Wastewater Discharge
Permit under Section
4-19-6-2 and Section
4-19-6-4 of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated
changed conditions.
   C.   For purposes of this requirement, substantial changes include, but are
not limited to, flow increases of twenty percent twenty percent (20%) or
greater, the addition or deletion of a shift, the discharge of any previously
unreported pollutants including changes to the listed or characteristic
hazardous wastes for which the user has submitted initial notification under
Section
4-19-7-8, introduction of a pollutant for which a monitoring waiver had been
obtained, the addition of a new process regardless of waste discharge or lack
of discharge, shutdown of a process, or addition or deletion of a product.
   D.   SIUs and CIUs are required to notify the Coordinator of any changes at
its facility affecting the potential for a slug discharge. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-
24-2020)
4-19-7-6: REPORTS OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS:
   A.   Initial Accidental Discharge Notification. In the case of any
discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of
a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load
that may cause potential problems for the POTW, any user shall immediately
telephone (within fifteen (15) minutes of gaining knowledge of the discharge),
and notify the Coordinator of the incident. If this notification cannot be made
to the POTW staff during routine business hours, the user shall notify the
Minooka Police Department at (815) 741-3177. This notification shall include
the name of the caller, location of the discharge, physical state of discharge,
chemical composition, concentration and volume, if known, date and time of
discharge as well as duration of the discharge, and corrective actions taken by
the user. The notification shall include what Federal, state and local entities
have also been, or will be, notified by the user.
   B.   The user shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with all applicable regulations upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
includes the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails.
   C.   Written Accidental Discharge Notification: Within five (5) business
days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the
Coordinator, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the
discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future
occurrences.
   D.   Such notifications shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the
POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall
such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability
which may be imposed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-7: NOTICE OF VIOLATION/REPEAT SAMPLING AND REPORTING:
   A.   If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must
notify the Coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the
violation. It is acceptable for a consultant acting on behalf of the user to
provide notification to the village. Failure to notify the Coordinator shall be
considered significant noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter and
shall be subject to the enforcement responses and penalties listed herein.
   B.   The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the
results of the repeat analysis to the Coordinator within thirty (30) calendar
days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to
resample if the village monitors at the user's facility at least once a month,
or if the village samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user
receives the results of this sampling. If the village performed the sampling
and analysis in lieu of the user, the village will perform the repeat sampling
and analysis unless it notifies the user of the violation and requires the user
to perform the repeat sampling and analysis. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-7-8: NOTIFICATION OF THE DISCHARGE OF HAZARDOUS WASTE:
   A.   Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.12 (P) any user who commences the Discharge of
hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the USEPA Regional Waste Management
Division Director, and State hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any
Discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would
be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the
name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the USEPA
hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous discharge, batch
discharge, or other). If the user discharges more than one hundred (100)
kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also
shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known
and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All
notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty (180)
calendar days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this
subsection need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under Section
4-19-7-5 of this chapter. The notification requirement in this subsection does
not apply to pollutants already reported by CIUs under the self-monitoring
requirements of Section
4-19-7-2 A., Section
4-19-7-2 B., and Section
4-19-7-3 B. of this chapter.
   B.   Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of Section
4-19-7-8 A., above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more
than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of
more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar
month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR
261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months
during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous
waste do not require additional notification.
   C.   In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA
identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any
additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the
Coordinator, the USEPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and
state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substances within
ninety (90) calendar days of the effective date of such regulations.
   D.   In the case of any notification made under this subsection, the user
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
   E.   This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit issued hereunder, or any applicable Federal or state law. (Ord. 2020-33,
11-24-2020)
4-19-7-9: REPORT SUBMITTAL DUE DATES:
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked.
For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility
serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report
shall govern. In order to meet deadlines, reports may be faxed or emailed on
the due date to the village. If submitted electronically on the due date, the
original of the fax or email is required to be mailed to the village postmarked
within one (1) work day of the transmission. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-8: COMPLIANCE MONITORING:
4-19-8-1: RIGHT OF ENTRY: INSPECTION AND SAMPLING:
The Pretreatment Coordinator and his designee(s), Duly Authorized Agents of the
Village, the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency (IEPA), and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency, hereafter referred to as "the above-
named entities", shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to
determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this chapter
and any individual or general wastewater discharge permit or order issued
hereunder. Users shall allow the above-named entities ready access to all parts
of the premises for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, analyses, records examination and copying, and the performance of any
additional duties.
   A.   Where a user has security measures in force which require proper
identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall
make necessary arrangements so that, upon presentation of suitable
identification, the above-named entities will be permitted to enter without
delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
   B.   The village shall be permitted to take photographs or videos as needed
to compile sufficient information from inspections. Such photographs and video
files shall be kept confidential upon request of the user.
   C.   The above-named entities shall have the right to set up on the user's
property or require installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling and/or metering of the user's operations, inspect the premises for
leaks or stoppages, or to place dye in the sanitary pipe as to ascertain
whether or not said sanitary pipe is draining into the proper POTW.
   D.   The village may install monitoring equipment as necessary. The village
retains the ability to maintain the sampling and monitoring equipment installed
by the village at all times, and the user shall provide a safe and proper
operating condition at its own cost and expense. All devices used to measure
Wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at the manufacturer's
recommended frequency to ensure their accuracy.
   E.   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user
at the written or verbal request of the Coordinator and shall not be replaced.
The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
   F.   If necessary, the user shall provide a knowledgeable guide to assist
with the inspectors' purpose on site by providing all necessary information.
   G.   Unreasonable delays in allowing the above-named entities access to the
user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter.
   H.   In the event that a suitable sampling facility does not exist, pursuant
to Section
4-19-2-2, the "sampling facility" shall be considered to be the more feasible
location of the following locations based on the sampling conditions and
assurance of compliance: the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to
the point at which the building sewer is connected or the most effective point
of access to wastewater discharge prior to connection to the public sewer, even
if the wastewater discharge at that point does not contain all wastewater from
the user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-8-2: RECORD KEEPING:
Both the village and users subject to the reporting requirements of this
chapter shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all
records of information in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(o). (Ord. 2020-33, 11-
24-2020)
4-19-8-3: SEARCH WARRANTS:
If any of the above-named entities have been refused access to a building,
structure, or property, or any part thereof of the user, and is able to
demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this
chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine
inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this chapter
or any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the
overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the above-
named entity may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Circuit Court of
Will, Grundy, or Kendall Counties. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-9: CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
4-19-9-1: SUBMITTING CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION:
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, individual or general wastewater discharge
permits, and monitoring programs, and the Pretreatment Coordinator inspection
and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction,
unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Coordinator and Village Attorney, that such information is
exempt from the Illinois Freedom of Information Act, as amended, as
information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as
trade secrets. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of
the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing
a report that such information is exempt from the Illinois Freedom of
Information Act, as amended, the portions of a report which are exempt from the
Illinois Freedom of Information Act shall not be made available for inspection
by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to
governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or Pretreatment
Program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the Person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data"
as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information
and will be available to the public without restriction. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-10: PUBLICATION OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE:
The Pretreatment Coordinator shall publish annually, in a newspaper of general
circulation that provides meaningful public notice within the jurisdiction
served by the POTW, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12)
months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment
standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall be
applicable to all SIUs and CIUs (or any other user that violates paragraphs C.,
D. or H. of this section and shall mean:
   A.   Chronic violations of Wastewater Discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty-six percent sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the
measurements taken for the same pollutant during a six-month period exceed (by
any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement as defined in
Section
4-19-1 of this chapter, including instantaneous limits;
   B.   Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of wastewater measurements taken for
each pollutant during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the
numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits,
as defined by Section
4-19-1 of this chapter multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS,
FOG, and 1.2 for all other Pollutants except pH);
   C.   The six-month timeframe used to determine chronic and TRC SNC status is
assessed on a rolling-quarter basis. A user is evaluated at the end of a
calendar quarter and the six-month period is comprised of the current quarter
and the previous quarter. All sampling results must be used when determining
SNC status, including both compliance samples taken by the village and self-
monitoring samples taken by the user in compliance with USEPA Methods.
   D.   Any other discharge violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement
as defined by Section
4-19-1 of this chapter (daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit,
or narrative standard) that the Coordinator determines has caused, alone or in
combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public;
   E.   Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to
the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the Coordinator's exercise
of his or her emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge;
   F.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in an individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, a compliance schedule, administrative order, or enforcement
compliance schedule for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
   G.   Failure to provide within forty-five (45) calendar days after the due
date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on
compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-
monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules;
   H.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
   I.   Any other violation(s), which may include a violation of Best
Management Practices, that the Coordinator determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. (Ord. 2020-33,
11-24-2020)
4-19-11: ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
4-19-11-1: NOTICE OF VIOLATION:
   A.   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge
permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement, the Pretreatment Coordinator may serve upon that user a written
NOV. The user shall respond to the NOV by the deadline defined therein, which
shall be a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days from the postmarked date.
      1.   The user's response shall include an explanation of the violation
and a plan for the satisfactory correction of the cause of the violation and
prevention of future violations with specific required actions. The response in
no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or
after receipt of the NOV.
   B.   An NOV may include a fee to recover the cost of generating the NOV. The
user receiving the NOV shall remit payment of the cost recovery fee to the
Village by the deadline defined therein, which shall be a minimum of thirty
(30) calendar days from the postmarked date.
   C.   An NOV may include one or more penalties, as outlined in Section 12 of
this chapter.
   D.   Issuance of an NOV shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-11-2: COMPLIANCE AGREEMENTS:
The Coordinator may enter into Compliance Agreements, (i.e. "consent orders",
assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for Noncompliance). Such documents will
include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the Noncompliance
within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the
same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections
4-19-11-4 and
4-19-11-5 of this chapter and shall be judicially enforceable. (Ord. 2020-33,
11-24-2020)
4-19-11-3: SHOW CAUSE ORDER:
The Coordinator may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear for a
hearing before representatives of the village and show cause why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken against the user. Notice of such hearing
shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the hearing, the
proposed enforcement action to be taken, the reasons for such action, and a
request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not
be taken against the user. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally
or by certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) work days
prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized
representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-
24-2020)
4-19-11-4: COMPLIANCE ORDERS:
When the Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Coordinator
may issue an order to the user directing that the user comply with this
chapter, the wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any
other pretreatment standard or requirement within a specified time. If the user
does not comply within the time provided, sanitary sewer service may be
discontinued by the village. Compliance orders may contain other requirements
to address the noncompliance, including the installation of adequate treatment
facilities, devices, or related appurtenances, additional self-monitoring, and
management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged
to the POTW. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance
established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance
order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.
A user may petition the Coordinator to reconsider a decision to discontinue
sanitary sewer service by submitting a petition within thirty (30) calendar
days of the discontinuation of sanitary sewer service to the Coordinator
indicating the user's objections to the discontinuation. If the Coordinator
fails to act within thirty (30) calendar days, the request for reconsideration
shall be deemed denied. Denial of a request for reconsideration shall be
considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review.
Parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative decision must do so
by filing a complaint with the Circuit Court of Will County within sixty (60)
calendar days. An appeal of discontinuation does not bar against or prevent the
village and coordinator from taking other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-
33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-11-5: CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS:
When the Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the
user's past violations are likely to recur, the Coordinator may issue an order
to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing
the user to:
   A.   Immediately comply with all requirements; and
   B.   Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge of wastewater.
   Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-
24-2020)
4-19-11-6: EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS:
The Coordinator may immediately suspend a user's discharge of wastewater
whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge
of wastewater which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or
substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Coordinator
may also immediately suspend a user's discharge of wastewater that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an
endangerment to the environment.
   A.   Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately
stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a user's failure to
immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Coordinator may
take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance,
disconnection, or blocking of the building sewer connection, to prevent or
minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any
individuals. The Coordinator may allow the user to recommence its discharge
when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Coordinator that the
period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in
section
4-19-11-7 of this chapter are initiated against the user.
   B.   A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge of
wastewater presenting imminent endangerment as identified by the Coordinator
shall submit a detailed written statement signed by the authorized
representative of the user, describing the causes of the harmful contribution
and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Coordinator
prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections
4-19-11-3 or
4-19-11-7 of this chapter.
   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to
any emergency suspension under this section. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-11-7: TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE:
In addition to the provisions in Section
4-19-11-6 of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is
subject to termination of its wastewater discharge:
   A.   Violation of one (1) or more wastewater discharge permit conditions;
   B.   Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and
characteristics of its discharge;
   C.   Failure to report substantial changes in operations or wastewater
volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
   D.   Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
   E.   Violation of one (1) or more of the pretreatment standards in Section
4-19-3 of this chapter.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge of
wastewater and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section
4-19-11-3 of this chapter why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise
of this option by the Coordinator shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-12: PENALTIES AND JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES:
4-19-12-1: ORDINANCE VIOLATIONS:
Any user who violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to
escalating enforcement actions and penalties in addition to an administrative
cost recovery fee. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-12-2: RECOVERY OF COSTS INCURRED:
   A.   Any person or user violating any of the provisions of this chapter, or
who causes damage to or impairs the POTW, shall be liable to the Village for
all expenses, costs, losses, and damages caused directly or indirectly by such
violation. The village may invoice costs and expenses including, but not
limited to, sampling and analyses associated with the investigation, mitigating
impact to the POTW, preparing the administrative enforcement actions such as
notices and orders, investigative and/or correction actions, and review of
response(s) from the user. The village shall invoice the user for the costs and
expenses incurred by the village for any and all cleaning, repair, replacement,
or other investigative and/or corrective action(s) as a response to the
violation. Any user that does not pay to the village all such assessed costs
and expenses shall constitute a violation of this chapter enforceable under the
provisions of Section
4-19-11 of this chapter.
   B.   Liens. If any user refuses to remedy a violation of the provisions of
this chapter and said violations are remedied by the village, a notice of lien
for the cost and expenses incurred shall be recorded in accordance with state
and local law. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-12-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FINES:
   A.   When the Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or
continues to violate, any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the Coordinator may fine such user in an
amount not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) and/or be
incarcerated in a penal institution other than a penitentiary for not to exceed
six (6) months (65 ILCS 5/1-2-1). Such fines shall be assessed on a per-
violation, per-day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average
discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of
violation.
   B.   Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after fifteen (15) calendar
days of the date due, be assessed an additional penalty of ten percent (10%) of
the unpaid balance. If the unpaid balance is not paid within forty-five (45)
days after the rendition of the invoice, enforcement actions shall be
escalated, as appropriate. A lien against the user's property shall be sought
for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties.
   C.   Users desiring reconsideration of such fines must file a written
request for the Coordinator to reconsider the fine along with full payment of
the fine amount within thirty (30) calendar days of being notified of the fine.
Where a request has merit, the Coordinator may convene a hearing on the matter.
In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any
interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user.
   D.   Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-
24-2020)
4-19-12-4: INJUNCTIVE RELIEF:
When the Coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate,
any provision of this chapter, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Village
Attorney may petition the Circuit Court of Will County for the issuance of a
temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels
the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other
requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The Coordinator
may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable
relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental
remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-12-5: CIVIL PENALTIES:
   A.   A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this
chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to
the village for a maximum civil penalty of one thousand dollars ($1,000) per
violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average
discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation.
   B.   The Coordinator may recover costs, including but not limited to, filing
fees, witness fees, attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated
with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and
the cost of any actual damages incurred by the Village.
   C.   In determining the amount of fines and/or civil liability, the court or
judicial administrator shall take into account all relevant circumstances,
including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the
magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through
the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of
the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
   D.   Issuing a notice of local chapter violation or the filing a suit for
civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any
other action against a user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-12-6: ADDITIONAL REMEDIES:
   A.   In addition to remedies available to the village set forth elsewhere in
this chapter, if the village is fined by the State or USEPA for violation of
its NPDES permit or violation of water quality standards as the result of
discharge of pollutants by a user or group of users, then the fine, including
all legal, sampling, analytical testing costs, and any other related costs
incurred by the village shall be charges to the responsible user or group of
users. Such charges shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, any other
remedies the village may have under this chapter, statutes, regulations, at law
or in equity.
   B.   If the discharge from any user causes a deposit, obstruction, or damage
to any portion of the POTW, the Coordinator shall cause the deposit or
obstruction to be promptly removed or cause the damage to be promptly repaired.
The cost for such work, including materials, labor, and supervision, shall be
borne by the person or user causing such deposit, obstruction, or damage. (Ord.
2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-12-7: REMEDIES NONEXCLUSIVE:
The remedies provided for in this chapter are not exclusive. The Coordinator
may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance
with the village's enforcement response plan. However, the Coordinator may take
other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the
Coordinator is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any
Noncompliant user. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-13: SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION:
4-19-13-1: PERFORMANCE BONDS:
The Pretreatment Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or
general wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with
any provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless such user first files a satisfactory bond, payable to
the village, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the Coordinator to be
necessary to achieve consistent compliance. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-13-2: LIABILITY INSURANCE:
The Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to comply with any
provision of this chapter, a previous individual or general wastewater
discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard
or requirement, unless the user first submits proof that it has obtained
financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW caused
by the user's discharge of wastewater. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-13-3: PAYMENT FOR OUTSTANDING FEES AND PENALTIES:
The Coordinator may decline to issue or reissue an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit to any user who has failed to pay any outstanding
fees, fines, or penalties incurred as a result of any provision of this
chapter, previous individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order
issued hereunder. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-13-4: WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE:
Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this
chapter, an individual or general wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the
user may be severed. Water service will recommence, at the user's expense, only
after the user has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply with the
violation(s) giving rise to the termination of the service. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-
24-2020)
4-19-13-5: PUBLIC NUISANCES:
A violation of any provision of this chapter, an individual or general
wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and
shall be corrected or abated as directed by the Coordinator. Any person(s)
creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions governing such
nuisances, including reimbursing the Village for any costs incurred in
removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-13-6: CONTRACTOR LISTING:
Users which have not achieved compliance with applicable pretreatment standards
and requirements are hereby declared to be non-responsible users and therefore
are not eligible to receive a contractual award for the sale of goods or
services to the village. Existing contracts for the sale of goods or services
to the village held by a user found to be in significant noncompliance with
pretreatment standards or requirements may be terminated at the discretion of
the Coordinator. (Ord. 2020- 33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-14: AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS:
4-19-14-1: UPSET:
   A.   For the purposes of this section, "Upset" means an exceptional incident
in which there is unintentional and temporary Noncompliance with Categorical
Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the
user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by
operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate
treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper
operation.
   B.   An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought
for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements
of paragraph C., below, are met.
   C.   A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall
demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other
relevant evidence that:
      1.   An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the
upset;
      2.   The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance
procedures; and
      3.   The user has submitted the following information to the Pretreatment
Coordinator within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the upset (if
this information is provided orally, a written report must be provided within
five (5) work days):
         a.   A description of the indirect discharge and cause of
noncompliance;
         b.   The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or,
if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to
continue; and
         c.   Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent recurrence of the noncompliance.
   D.   In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
   E.   Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any
claim of upset only in an enforcement action is brought for noncompliance with
categorical pretreatment standards.
   F.   Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon
reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power
of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-14-2: PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS:
A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in Section
4-19-3 of this chapter if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to
know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other
sources, would cause pass through or interference or that either:
   A.   A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in
compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference; or
   B.   No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially
in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the village was
regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference,
was in compliance with applicable biosolids use or disposal requirements. (Ord.
2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-14-3: BYPASS:
   A.   For the purposes of this section,
      1.   "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any
portion of a user's treatment facility.
      2.   "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to
property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become
inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can
reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property
damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
   B.   A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment
standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to
the provision of Subsections C and D of this section.
   C.   Bypass Notifications
      1.   Anticipated: If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it
shall submit prior notice to the Coordinator, at least ten (10) work days
before the date of the bypass, if possible.
      2.   Unanticipated: A user shall submit oral notice to the coordinator of
an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within
twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written
submission shall also be provided within five (5) work days of the time the
user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a
description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including
exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to
reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Coordinator may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty-four (24) hours.
   D.   Village Actions
      1.   Bypass is prohibited, and the Coordinator may take an enforcement
action against a user for a bypass, unless:
         a.   Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury,
or severe property damage;
         b.   There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the
use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or
maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not
satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the
exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred
during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
         c.   The user submitted notices as required under part C. of this
section.
      2.   The Coordinator may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the Coordinator determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph D.1. of this section. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-15: MISCELLANEOUS FEES:
4-19-15-1: PRETREATMENT CHARGES AND FEES:
   A.   Tap-on fees:
      1.   Water (Commercial and Industrial):
         a.   One thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500) per PE up to 3.5 PE;
and
         b.   Four hundred and fifty dollars ($450) per PE over 3.5 PE.
      2.   Wastewater (Commercial and Industrial):
         a.   Three thousand and five hundred dollars ($3,500) per PE up to 3.5
PE; and
         b.   Seven hundred dollars ($700) per PE over 3.5 PE.
   B.   Surcharge Rate: In the event use of the wastewater facilities by
nonresidential users is determined by the village to include wastes in addition
to average strength domestic waste, the user shall pay a surcharge cost in
addition to the basic user charge and the basic user rate.
   The surcharge rate for excess strengths are as follows:
      Biochemical Oxygen Demand   =   $0.66/lb BOD (if COD/BOD>2.25)
      Biochemical Oxygen Demand   =   $1.98/lb BOD (if COD/BOD<2.25)
      Suspended solids   =   $0.64/lb suspended solids
      *All rates to increase annually beginning on 5/1 by 3% unless otherwise
identified by the Village Board
   Computation Of Wastewater Service Charge: The daily BOD5 loading subject to
surcharge shall be established by the following calculation (negative values
shall not be included in the calculation):
      BOD5 loading subject to surcharge = ( (Gallons Discharged x (BOD5
Concentration mg/L - 200 mg/L) x 8.345 x 10-6) pounds) X Rate = Surcharge
   The daily TSS loading subject to surcharge shall be established by the
following calculation (negative values shall not be included in the
calculation):
      TSS loading subject to surcharge = ((Gallons Discharged x (TSS
Concentration mg/L - 250 mg/L) x 8.345 x 10-6) pounds) X Rate = Surcharge (Ord.
2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-15-2: MEASUREMENT OF INDUSTRIAL WASTE FLOW AND STRENGTH:
Major industrial waste dischargers, within ninety (90) days of the date of
notification by the village, shall install and maintain at their expense
acceptable water meters or flow metering devices, samplers and manholes as
required to determine waste characteristics discharged to the public sewers.
Flow metering devices, installed in monitoring manholes on service lines, will
be required for measurement of the volume of waste discharged to the sewers
when volumes cannot otherwise be determined from metered water consumption
records. This determination shall be made by the village.
The industry shall install and maintain waste samplers and hire an approved
laboratory to complete waste testing when directed by the village. Waste
sampling and testing shall be completed by the discharger as often as may be
deemed necessary by the village, and all certified test results shall be
forwarded to the village. The village shall reserve the right to sample and
test all dischargers at any time and bill the dischargers for all involved
costs. The village shall establish discharge loads. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-16: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS:
4-19-16-1: SEVERABILITY:
If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent
jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue
in full force and effect. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-2020)
4-19-16-2: CONFLICT:
All other village ordinances, codes, rules, and regulations and parts of
thereof inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. (Ord. 2020-33, 11-24-
2020)
4-19-16-3: OFFENSES UNDER PREVIOUS ORDINANCES:
This chapter shall not be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance,
whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense
committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising
under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect such offense or
act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture, or punishment so
incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes
effect, save only that proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in
force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. Nothing contained
in this chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending. (Ord.
2020-33, 11-24-2020)
TITLE 5
ZONING
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
SECTION:
5-1-1 Plan And Map Adopted
5-1-1: PLAN AND MAP ADOPTED:
The proposed official comprehensive plan recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission of the Village, including the official map and subdivision
regulations as set forth in Title 6 of this Code, be and they are hereby
adopted as the official comprehensive plan of the Village.
Said official comprehensive plan, including the official map and subdivision
regulations set forth in Title 6 of this Code, shall be placed on file with the
Village Clerk and shall be available at all times during business hours for
public inspection. (Ord. 1974-2, 5-13-1974)
CHAPTER 2
ZONING PURPOSE, INTENT, DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1 Purpose And Intent
5-2-2 Interpretation
5-2-3 Separability
5-2-4 Rules Of Word Construction
5-2-5 Definitions
5-2-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
   A.   This Title is adopted for the purpose of:
      1.   Promoting the public health, safety, comfort, morals, convenience
and general welfare;
      2.   Securing adequate natural light, pure air and safety from fire and
other dangers;
      3.   Lessening or avoiding the hazards to persons and damage to property
resulting from the accumulation or runoff of storm or flood waters;
      4.   Lessening or avoiding congestion in the public streets and highways;
      5.   Conserving the value of land and buildings throughout the Village;
and
      6.   Preserving and enhancing aesthetic values throughout the Village.
   B.   To these ends this Title is intended to establish and accomplish
certain standards and objectives by:
      1.   Dividing the entire Village into districts and regulating therein
the location, construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of buildings,
structures and land, whether for agriculture, residence, business,
manufacturing or other specified uses;
      2.   Avoiding or lessening congestion in the public streets by adequate
requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities;
      3.   Preventing the overcrowding of land by regulating and limiting the
height and bulk of buildings hereafter erected;
      4.   Establishing, regulating and limiting the building or setback lines
along streets, alleys and property lines;
      5.   Regulating and limiting the intensity of the use of lot areas, and
regulating and determining the area of open spaces surrounding buildings;
      6.   Establishing standards to which buildings or structures therein
shall conform;
      7.   Permitting in each zoning district only those uses, buildings and
structures that are compatible with the character of each district;
      8.   Preventing additions to, and alterations or remodeling of, existing
buildings or structures, in such a way as to avoid the restrictions and
limitations imposed under this Title;
      9.   Providing controls governing the continuation of those existing
uses, buildings and structures, which are incompatible with the character of
the districts in which they are located;
      10.   Providing for the gradual elimination of structures and uses which
are incompatible with the character of the districts in which they are located;
      11.   Defining the powers and duties of the administrative officers and
bodies as provided in this Title; and
      12.   Prescribing penalties for the violation of the provisions of this
Title, or of any amendment thereto. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-2: INTERPRETATION:
In their application, the provisions of this Title shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health,
safety, comfort, morals, convenience and general welfare, and the provisions
shall be interpreted in accordance with the following:
   A.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this Title are either
more restrictive or less restrictive than comparable standards imposed by any
other provision of this Title or of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule
or regulation of any kind, the regulations which are more restrictive, or which
impose higher standards or requirements, shall govern;
   B.   This Title is not intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or other
private agreement; provided, that where the regulations of this Title are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or requirements than such easements,
covenants or other private agreements, the requirements of this Title shall
govern; and
   C.   No building, structure or use not lawfully existing on the effective
date hereof shall become or be made lawful solely by reason of the adoption of
this Title; and to the extent that, and in any manner that said unlawful
building, structure or use are in conflict with the requirements of this Title,
said building, structure or use remains unlawful under the provisions of this
Title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-3: SEPARABILITY:
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the Board of Trustees that the
several provisions of this Title are separable, in accordance with the
following:
   A.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge any provisions of
this Title or amendments thereto to be invalid, such judgment shall not affect
any other provisions of this Title or amendments thereto not specifically
included in said judgment; and
   B.   If any court of competent jurisdiction shall adjudge invalid the
application of any provision of this Title or amendments thereto to a
particular property or structure, such judgment shall not affect the
application of said provision to any other property or structure not
specifically included in said judgment. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-4: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
In the construction of this Title, the rules and definitions contained in this
Section shall be observed and applied, except when the context clearly
indicates otherwise.
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future tense and the
future the present; words used in the singular number shall include the plural
number, and the plural the singular; where the context requires.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary; and the word "may"
is permissive.
   C.   The word "lot" shall include the words "piece", "parcel" and "tract";
and the phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for", "designed
for", "intended for", "maintained for" and "occupied for".
   D.   All measured distances shall be to the nearest integral foot.
   E.   Any words not defined as follows shall be construed in their generally
accepted meaning as defined in the most recent publication of Webster's
Dictionary. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-2-5: DEFINITIONS1. See end of Chapter for illustrations.1:
ABUTS, ABUTTING: To have a common property line or district line.
ACCESSORY BUILDING: A subordinate building or a portion of a principal
building, the use of which is incidental and customary to that of the principal
building. Where an accessory building is attached to and made a part of the
principal building such accessory building shall comply in all respects with
the requirements of this Title applicable to the principal building.
ACCESSORY USE: See Use, Accessory.
ADJACENT: To lie near or close to; in the neighborhood or vicinity of.
ADJOINING: Touching or contiguous, as distinguished from lying near.
AGRICULTURE: Land; or land, buildings and structures, the principal uses of
which are growing of farm or truck garden crops and one or more of the
following: dairying, pasturage, apiculture, horticulture, floriculture,
viticulture or animal and poultry husbandry, and accessory uses customarily
incidental to agricultural activities including, but not limited to, the farm
dwelling, dwellings for tenants and full time hired farm workers and dwellings
or lodging rooms for seasonal workers.
ALLEY: A right of way which affords a secondary means of vehicular access to
abutting properties.
ALTERATION: A change in size, shape, occupancy or use of a building or
structure.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL: A building or portion thereof designed or used for the care,
observation or treatment of domestic animals.
AUTOMOBILE LAUNDRY: A building or portion thereof containing facilities for
washing more than two (2) motor vehicles, using production line methods.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION: A building or portion thereof or lot used or
offering for sale at retail to the public, fuels, oils and accessories for
motor vehicles; where repair service is incidental, where no storage or parking
space is offered for rent and where no motor vehicles or boats are offered for
sale or rent. When such dispensing, sale or offering for sale is incidental to
the conduct of a public garage, the premises are classified as a public garage.
AUTOMOBILE WRECKING YARD: An area of land where three (3) or more motor
vehicles, or vehicles, machinery or equipment drawn or operated by attaching to
motor vehicles or mechanical unit (not in or being restored to running or
operable condition) or parts thereof are stored in the open and any land,
building or structure used for wrecking or storing prior to wrecking of such
motor vehicles, vehicles, machinery or equipment or parts thereof.
AWNING: A roof like mechanism, retractable in operation, which projects from
the wall of a building.
BASEMENT: A story having part but not more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to
clear ceiling height below grade. When a basement is used for storage, or
garages for use of occupants of the building, or other facilities common for
the operation and maintenance of the entire building, it shall not be counted
as a story.
BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE FACILITY: One or more battery cells for storing
electrical energy in a battery energy storage system ("BESS") with a battery
management system ("BMS").
BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE SYSTEM: A physical container providing secondary
containment to battery cells that is equipped with cooling, ventilation, fire
suppression, and a battery management system.
BATTERY MANAGEMENT SYSTEM: An electronic regulator that manages a battery
energy storage system by monitoring individual battery module voltages and
temperatures, container temperature and humidity, off-gassing of combustible
gas, fire, ground fault and DC surge, and door access, and capable of
automatically shutting down the system if necessary to prevent operation
outside safe parameters.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, railroad rights of way, or other lines of demarcation.
BOARDING HOUSE: A residential building or portion thereof (other than a motel,
apartment hotel or hotel) containing lodging rooms for accommodation of three
(3) but not more than ten (10) persons who are not members of the keeper's
family and where lodging or meals or both are provided.
BODY PIERCING: To make a hole in the body or oral cavity in order to insert or
allow the insertion of any ring, hoop, stud, or other object for the purpose of
ornamentation of the body. Body piercing does not include tongue splitting or
ear piercing, and shall not be construed in any way to prohibit any injection,
incision, acupuncture, or similar medical or dental procedure performed by a
licensed healthcare professional or other person authorized to perform that
procedure.
BUILDABLE AREA, FRONT, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That portion
of a lot bounded by the front building lines, side yard lines, front yard line,
and the front of the principal building. Adjustments to area may be required
due to setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility easements,
drainage easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDABLE AREA, PRINCIPAL BUILDING: That portion of a lot bounded by the
required rear yard, side yards and front yard, for construction of the
principal building.
BUILDABLE AREA, REAR CORNER, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That
portion of a lot bounded by the rear building lines, corner, side lot line
abutting another lot, required side yard setback where abutting a street, and
the rear of the principal building. Adjustments to area may be required due to
setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility easements, drainage
easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDABLE AREA, REAR INTERIOR, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That
portion of a lot bounded by the rear building lines, interior, side lot lines,
rear lot line, and the rear of the principal building. Adjustments to area may
be required due to setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility
easements, drainage easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDABLE AREA, SIDE, ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES: That portion of
a lot bounded by the front building line, side yard line, rear building line,
interior/corner, and the principal building. Adjustments to area may be
required due to setbacks for the type of accessory use, public utility
easements, drainage easements, and overland flow routes.
BUILDING: A structure built for the support, enclosure, shelter or protection
of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind, and which is permanently
affixed to the land. When any portion thereof is completely separated from
every other portion by a party wall, then such portion shall be deemed to be a
separate building.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: See definition of Accessory Building.
BUILDING, COMPLETELY ENCLOSED: A building separated on all sides from the
adjacent open space, or from other buildings or structures by a permanent roof
and by exterior or party walls, pierced only by windows and normal entrance and
exit doors.
BUILDING, DETACHED: A building surrounded by open spaces on the same lot.
BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from grade to the highest point of
the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the mean
height level between eaves and ridge for gable, hip or gambrel roofs. Chimneys,
towers, spires, elevator penthouses, cooling towers and similar projections
other than signs shall not be included in calculating building height.
BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building officer and inspector of the village or his
duly authorized representative.
BUILDING LINE, FRONT: The line or lines parallel or nearly parallel to the
front lot line, measured from the front corners of the principal building to
the required side yard lines.
BUILDING LINE, REAR CORNER: The line or lines parallel or nearly parallel to
the front lot line, measured from the rear corners of the principal building to
the required side yard line and side lot line.
BUILDING LINE, REAR INTERIOR: The line or lines parallel or nearly parallel to
the front lot line, measured from the rear corners of the principal building to
the side lot lines.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL: A nonaccessory building in which is conducted the
principal use of the lot.
BUILDING, TEMPORARY: Any building not designed to be permanently located at the
place where it is, or where it is intended to be temporarily placed or affixed.
BULK: The term used to indicate the size and setback of buildings or
structures, and the location of same with respect to one another, and includes
the following: a) size and height of buildings; b) location of exterior walls;
c) floor area ratio; d) open space allocated to buildings; and e) lot area and
lot width provided per dwelling unit.
BUSINESS: An occupation, employment or enterprise which occupies time,
attention, labor and materials; or wherein merchandise is exhibited or sold or
where services are offered.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT: A structure, or lot used in whole or in part as a place
of business, the ownership or management of which is separate and distinct from
the ownership or management of any other place of business located on the same
or another lot.
CANDLEPOWER: The luminous intensity, as evaluated in effectiveness of
stimulating visual sensation, of any radiation in a given direction. The
international candle has been adopted in 1940 as 1/60 of the brightness of
platinum.
CARGO CONTAINER FACILITY: Land which is improved and used, with or without any
principal or accessory structure(s), primarily for the storage of shipping/
storage containers, which may be stored on or off tractor trailers, but may not
be stacked.
CARPORT: A roofed automobile shelter, with two (2) or more open sides.
CELLAR: An area having more than one-half (1/2) of its floor to clear ceiling
height below grade and which is not counted as a story.
CLINIC, MEDICAL OR DENTAL: A building or portion thereof, the principal use of
which is for offices of physicians or dentists or both, for the examination and
treatment of persons on an outpatient basis.
CLOSED CUP FLASHPOINT: The lowest temperature at which a combustible liquid
under prescribed conditions will give off a flammable vapor which will
propagate a flame. The Tag closed cup tester shall be authoritative for liquids
having a flashpoint below one hundred seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F).
The Pensky-Martens tester shall be authoritative for liquids having flashpoints
between one hundred seventy five degrees Fahrenheit (175°F) and three hundred
degrees Fahrenheit (300°F).
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE: A nonprofit association of persons who are bona fide
members and whose facilities are restricted to members and their guests. Food
and alcoholic beverages may be served on its premises provided they are
secondary and incidental to the principal use.
COMMERCIAL SOLAR FARM: A solar energy system that comprises one of the primary
use(s) for the parcel of land on which it is located, or any solar energy
system that has a primary purpose for wholesale or retail sales of generated
electricity.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: A motor vehicle designed to transport passengers or
property if:
   A.   The vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of twenty six thousand
one (26,001) pounds or more or such a lesser gross vehicle weight rating as
subsequently determined by federal regulations or the secretary of state; or
any combination of vehicles with a gross combination weight rating of twenty
six thousand one (26,001) pounds or more, provided the gross vehicle weight
rating of any vehicle or vehicles being towed is ten thousand one (10,001)
pounds or more; or
   B.   The vehicle is designed to transport sixteen (16) or more persons; or
   C.   The vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required to be
placarded in accordance with 49 CFR part 172, subpart F.
Pursuant to the interpretation of the commercial motor vehicle safety act of
1986 by the federal highway administration, the definition of "commercial
vehicle" does not include:
   A.   Recreational vehicles, when operated primarily for personal use;
   B.   United States department of defense vehicles being operated by
noncivilian personnel. This includes any operator on active military duty;
members of the reserves; national guard; personnel on part time training; and
national guard military technicians (civilians who are required to wear
military uniforms and are subject to the code of military justice); or
   C.   Firefighting and other emergency equipment (including, without
limitation, equipment owned or operated by a HAZMAT or technical rescue team
authorized by a county board under section 5-1127 of the county's code), with
audible and visual signals, owned or operated by or for a governmental entity,
which is necessary to the preservation of life or property or the execution of
emergency governmental functions which are normally not subject to general
traffic rules and regulations.
CONCENTRATED SOLAR POWER SYSTEM: A solar energy system that use mirrors to
reflect and concentrate sunlight onto receivers that collect solar energy and
convert it to heat. The thermal energy is then used to produce electricity via
a steam turbine or heat engine that drives a generator.
CONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: A building or structure which: a) complies
with all the regulations of this title or of any amendments thereto governing
bulk of the district in which said building or structure is located; or b) is
designed or intended for a permitted or conditional permitted use as allowed in
the district in which it is located.
DATA CENTER: Any establishment used primarily for the storage, management,
processing, and transmission of digital data, which houses computer and/or
network equipment, systems, servers, appliances and other associated components
related to digital data operations. Such facility may also include air
handlers, power generators, water cooling and storage facilities, utility
substations, and other associated utility infrastructure to support sustained
operations at a data center, provided operations conform with the performance
standards and other general requirements applicable to the DC data center
district.
DAYCARE CENTER: Any childcare facility which regularly provides daycare for
less than twenty four (24) hours per day for more than three (3) children in a
facility other than a family home. The term does not include:
   A.   Programs operated by: 1) public or private elementary school systems or
secondary level school units or institutions of higher learning that serve
children who shall have attained the age of three (3) years or 2) private
entities on the grounds of public or private elementary or secondary schools
and that serve children who have attained the age of three (3) years;
   B.   Facilities operated in connection with a shopping center or service,
religious services, or other similar facility, where transient children are
cared for temporarily while parents or custodians of the children are occupied
on the premises and readily available;
   C.   Any type of daycare center that is conducted on federal, state or local
government premises; or
   D.   Special activities programs, including athletics, crafts instruction
and similar activities conducted on an organized and periodic basis by civic,
charitable and governmental organizations.
DECORATIVE FENCE: A fence used mostly for aesthetics which adds to the visual
beauty of the property. This fence may not exceed forty two inches (42") in
height, excluding posts, when the fence is installed in a front or corner side
yard. Forty percent (40%) of the square footage of the overall dimensions of
the fence shall be open. (A woven wire or cyclone type fence is not considered
a decorative fence.)
DISPLACEMENT (EARTH): The amplitude or intensity of an earthborn vibration
measured in inches. The displacement or amplitude is one-half (1/2) the total
earth movement.
DISTRICT: A section or part of the village within which certain uniform
regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the
provisions of this title.
DRIVE-IN ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment or part thereof in which are provided
facilities where serving or consuming commodities or both are intended to occur
primarily in patrons' automobiles parked on the premises.
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY: Any building or structure or portion thereof that is
designed, intended or used to transact business with customers located in a
motor vehicle, which is usually left running during such business transactions.
These facilities include, but are not limited to, restaurants, banks, financial
institutions, or any business having drive-up or curb service.
DWELLING: A building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for
residential purposes, including single-family, two-family and multiple-family
dwellings, but not including mobile homes or other trailers, or lodging rooms
in hotels, motels or lodging houses.
DWELLING, DETACHED: A dwelling which is surrounded on all sides by open space
on the same lot.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building or portion thereof containing three (3)
or more dwelling units connected primarily vertically, generally but not
necessarily, with a common entrance.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED: A building or portion thereof containing
three (3) or more single-family dwelling units connected primarily horizontally
with each unit having an exclusive entrance.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED: A dwelling containing one dwelling unit in a
detached building unless otherwise specified.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building consisting of two (2) dwelling units either
attached side by side or one above the other, with each dwelling unit having a
separate entrance.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms which are used for living quarters for one
family only. Individual bathrooms and complete kitchen facilities, permanently
installed to serve the entire family, shall always be included within each
"dwelling unit".
EARTHBORN VIBRATIONS: A cyclic movement of the earth due to the propagation of
mechanical energy.
EFFICIENCY UNIT: A dwelling unit consisting of one principal room, exclusive of
bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal
room.
ELECTRIC DISTRIBUTION CENTER: A terminal at which electric energy is received
from the transmission system and is delivered to the distribution system only.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION: A terminal at which electric energy is received from the
transmission system and is delivered to other elements of the transmission
system and, generally, to the local distribution system.
EQUIVALENT OPACITY: The shade on the Ringelmann chart that most closely
corresponds to the density of smoke, other than black or gray.
FALLOUT SHELTER: An accessory building and use which incorporates the
fundamentals for fallout protection (shielding mass, ventilation and space to
live) and which is constructed of such materials and in such a manner as to
afford to the occupants substantial protection from radioactive fallout.
FAMILY: One person or two (2) or more persons each related to the other by
blood, marriage or legal adoption, or a group of not more than four (4) persons
not all so related, together with his or their domestic servants, maintaining a
common household in a dwelling unit. A family may include, in addition thereto,
not more than two (2) roomers, boarders or permanent guests, whether or not
gratuitous.
FENCE: Any structure, partition or enclosure of wood, stone, iron, metal or
other material enclosing or dividing a piece of land for the purpose of this
title. A fence shall not include naturally growing shrubs, bushes and other
foliage.
FLOOD CREST ELEVATION: The elevation of the highest flood level that has been
or may be subsequently designed by the village engineer. The flood crest
elevation designated by the village engineer shall be based upon a storm water
drainage map showing flood crest elevations at appropriate locations as
approved by the board of trustees.
FLOOD PLAIN AREA: That continuous area adjacent to a stream or streambed, or
any storm water retention area and its tributaries, whose elevation is equal to
or lower than the flood crest elevation including also land having an elevation
higher than flood crest elevation but less than ten (10) acres in area and
surrounded by land in a floodplain area or an area of such elevation secured by
landfill projecting into a floodplain area.
   Any point shall be deemed to be within the floodplain area if it falls below
the elevation of a high water mark, as the elevation of the mark is projected
in horizontal directions perpendicular to the flow of the stream and thence to
intersections at an equal elevation with the land on either side of the stream.
Any point between the aforedescribed projections of any two (2) high water
marks shall be deemed within the floodplain area if it is at an elevation equal
to or lower than similar projections of the interpolated flood crest elevation.
The interpolated flood crest elevation is the calculated elevation of the flood
crest at the centerline of the stream between two (2) known flood crests of the
nearest upstream and downstream high water marks and the difference in
elevation between the flood crest at this location and at either of the high
water mark projections is directly proportional to the difference in stream
centerline distance between the two (2) high water mark projections.
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Floor Area Ratio): The sum of the gross horizontal
areas of the several floors including also the basement floor of a building,
measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls, or from the centerlines
of walls separating two (2) buildings. The "floor area" shall also include the
horizontal areas on each floor devoted to: a) elevator shafts and stairwells;
b) mechanical equipment, except if located on the roof, when either open or
enclosed (i.e., bulkheads, water tanks and cooling towers); c) habitable attic
space as permitted by the building code of the village, as adopted in title 4,
chapter 2 of this code; d) interior balconies and mezzanines; e) enclosed
porches; and f) accessory uses. The "floor area" of structures used for bulk
storage of materials (i.e., grain elevators, petroleum tanks) shall also be
included in the "floor area" and such "floor area" shall be determined on the
basis of the height of such structures with one floor for each ten feet (10')
of structure height and if such structure measures less than ten feet (10') but
not less than five feet (5') over such floor height intervals, it shall be
construed to have an additional floor.
   The horizontal area in each floor of a building devoted to off street
parking and off street loading facilities and the horizontal area of a cellar
floor shall not be included in the "floor area".
FLOOR AREA (For Determining Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading
Requirements): "Floor area" when prescribed as the basis of measurement for off
street parking spaces and off street loading spaces for any use shall be the
sum of the gross horizontal area of the several floors of the building,
excluding areas used for accessory off street parking facilities and the
horizontal areas of the basement and cellar floors that are devoted exclusively
to uses accessory to the operation of the entire building. All horizontal
dimensions shall be taken from the exterior of the walls.
FLOOR AREA RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the "floor area"
within a building or buildings on a lot by the area of such lot. The floor area
ratio as designated for each district when multiplied by the lot area in square
feet shall determine the maximum permissible "floor area" for the building or
buildings on the lot.
FOOT-CANDLE: A unit of illumination, equivalent to the illumination at all
points which are one foot (1') distant from a uniform point source of one
candle power.
FOOT-LAMBERT: A unit of brightness, usually of a reflecting surface. A
diffusion surface of uniform brightness reflecting or emitting the equivalent
of the light from one candle at one foot (1') distance over one square foot has
a brightness of one foot-lambert.
FREE BURNING: The rate of combustion of a material which burns actively, and
easily supports combustion.
FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor truck or
railroad freight cars is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or
interstate shipment by motor trucks or railroad freight cars.
GARAGE, PRIVATE: An accessory building designed and used for the storage of
motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is
accessory and in which no occupation or business for profit is carried on. Not
more than one of the motor vehicles may be a commercial vehicle of not more
than one and one-half (11/2) tons' capacity.
GARAGE, PUBLIC (AUTOMOBILE MAINTENANCE): A building or portion thereof, other
than a private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, or
repairing motor vehicles that are not trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, or
semi-trailers. Hiring, selling, or storing of automobiles (not trucks, truck-
trailers, trailers, or semi-trailers) may be included.
GARAGE, PUBLIC (TRUCK MAINTENANCE): A building or portion thereof, other than a
private or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, or
repairing trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, and semi-trailers. Hiring, selling,
or storing of trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, semi-trailers may be included.
GARAGE, STORAGE OR OFF STREET PARKING (AUTOMOBILE): A lot or parcel of land, or
a building or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for the storage of
passenger motor vehicles (not trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, semi-trailers,
or shipping or storage containers), and in which motor fuels and oils are not
sold, and motor vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or sold.
GARAGE, STORAGE OR OFF STREET PARKING (TRUCK): A lot or parcel of land, or a
building or portion thereof designed or used exclusively for storage of motor
vehicles (which may include trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, and semi-
trailers, but not shipping or storage containers), and in which motor fuels and
oils are not sold, and motor vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired or
sold.
GRADE: The established grade of the street or sidewalk. Where no such grade has
been established, the grade shall be the elevation of the sidewalk at the
property line. Where no sidewalks exist, the grade shall be the average
elevation of the street adjacent to the property line, except in cases of
unusual topographic conditions as determined by the building inspector, grade
shall be the average elevation of the finished surface of the ground adjoining
the exterior walls of a building at the base of a structure.
GROSS DENSITY: The ratio between total number of dwelling units on a lot and
total lot area in acres.
GROUND FLOOR AREA: The lot area covered by a principal building, measured at
highest ground grade, adjacent to building, from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls, but excluding open porches or terraces, and garages or
carports.
GROUND-MOUNTED COMMERCIAL SOLAR FARM: A system of solar panels installed on the
ground, rather than on a roof, to convert sunlight into electricity for a
community or building for the purpose of sale or resale. Ground-mounted solar
panels are usually mounted on racks or posts that are anchored to the ground,
and are tilted at an angle to face the sun.
GUEST, PERMANENT: A person who occupies or has the right to occupy a lodging
house, rooming house, boarding house, hotel, apartment hotel or motel
accommodation as his domicile and place of permanent residence.
HOME OCCUPATION: Any gainful business, occupation or profession conducted
within a dwelling unit by a member of the family residing in the dwelling unit
which is incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling unit for dwelling
purposes.
HOTEL: An establishment containing lodging rooms, for occupancy by transient
guests in contradistinction to a lodging house, boarding house or a rooming
house and which provides customary hotel services such as: maid, telephone,
bellboy and desk services; and the use and upkeep of furnishing and laundry of
linens.
HOTEL, APARTMENT: A hotel in which at least eighty percent (80%) of the hotel
accommodations are occupied by permanent guests.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE RATIO: The numerical value obtained by dividing the area of
a lot which is occupied or covered by any material that substantially reduces
or prevents the infiltration of stormwater by the area of such lot. Impervious
surfaces shall include, but not be limited to, the ground area covered by
buildings and other structures, as well as concrete, brick, asphalt, gravel,
and similarly paved surfaces and areas of permanently standing water.
IMPULSIVE: Discrete vibration pulsations occurring no more often than one per
second.
INCOMBUSTIBLE: A material which will not ignite nor actively support combustion
during an exposure for five (5) minutes to a temperature of one thousand two
hundred degrees Fahrenheit (1,200°F).
INSTITUTION: A building occupied by a not for profit corporation wholly for
public or semipublic use.
INTENSE BURNING: The rate of combustion described by a material that burns with
a high degree of activity and is consumed rapidly. Examples: sawdust, magnesium
(powder, flaked or strips) and rocket fuels.
JUNKYARD: An open area of land and any accessory building or structure thereon
which is used primarily for buying, selling, exchanging, storing, baling,
packing, disassembling or handling waste or scrap materials, including
vehicles, machinery and equipment not in operable condition or parts thereof,
and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. A "junkyard" includes
an automobile wrecking yard, but does not include an establishment located in
the applicable manufacturing district, engaged exclusively in processing of
scrap iron or other metals to be sold only to establishments engaged in
manufacturing of steel or metal alloys.
KENNEL: Any premises or portion thereof on which more than three (3) dogs, cats
or other household domestic animals are kept, or on which more than two (2)
such animals are maintained, boarded, bred or cared for, in return for
remuneration, or are kept for the purpose of sale.
LABORATORY: See definition of Research Laboratory.
LAMBERT: Defined as 1/929 of a foot-lambert, usually used to designate
intrinsic brightness of light sources.
LANDING STRIP, PRIVATE: A strip of land used or intended for use for the
landing and take-off of the private aircraft of the owner or lessee of the
landing strip and his guests and such accessory structures customarily
incidental to the operations which may include one building for the storage and
maintenance of not more than two (2) such private aircraft.
LAUNDERETTE: A business that provides coin-operated self-service type washing,
drying, dry cleaning and ironing facilities, providing that: a) not more than
four (4) persons, including owners, are employed on the premises; and b) no
pick-up or delivery service is maintained.
LOADING SPACE: A space within the principal building or on the same lot as the
principal building providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks
and with access to a street or alley.
LODGING HOUSE: A building originally designed for and used as a single or two-
family dwelling, all or a portion of which contains lodging rooms which
accommodate persons who are not members of the keeper's family. Lodging or
meals, or both are provided for compensation for three (3) or more but not more
than ten (10) persons.
LODGING ROOM: A room or suite of rooms rented as sleeping and living quarters,
but without cooking facilities and with or without an individual bathroom. In a
suite of rooms, each room which provides sleeping accommodations shall be
counted as one "lodging room" for the purpose of this Title.
LOT: A single parcel of land which is legally described and recorded as such,
or which is one or more numbered lots or parts of such lots legally described
and recorded as a part of a recorded subdivision plat, and in any case is
located within a single block and having its principal frontage on a street or
an easement or other common-use right of way, and which is designated by the
owner at the time of application for a building permit as the site to be used,
developed or built upon as a unit under single ownership or control. Therefore,
a lot may or may not coincide with a single lot of record.
LOT AREA: The area of a horizontal plane bounded by the front, side and rear
lines of a lot.
LOT, CORNER: A lot of which at least two (2) adjacent sides abut for their full
length upon streets; provided, that the interior angle at the intersection of
such two (2) sides is less than one hundred thirty five degrees (135°).
LOT COVERAGE: The area of a lot occupied by buildings or structures, including
accessory buildings or structures.
LOT DEPTH: The mean distance between the front lot line and the rear lot line
of a lot measured within the lot boundaries.
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot that is not a corner lot.
LOT LINE: The property lines bounding a lot.
LOT LINE, CORNER SIDE: That boundary of a corner lot which abuts a street, but
is not the front lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The only boundary of a lot which abuts a street or, for a
corner lot, the front lot line is the shortest boundary of the lot abutting a
street or, in the event that the boundaries of a lot abutting a street are of
equal length, then the front lot line is the lot line designated as such on a
plat of dedication or a plat of subdivision.
LOT LINE, INTERIOR: A lot line which does not abut a street.
LOT LINE, REAR: An interior lot line which is most distant from and is almost
parallel to the front lot line, and in the case of an irregular, or triangular,
shaped lot at a line ten feet (10') in length within the lot, which is parallel
to and maximum distance from the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any boundary of a lot which is not a front lot line or a rear
lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A single lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Grundy and/or Will
County, Illinois.
LOT, REVERSED CORNER: A corner lot, the street side lot line of which is
substantially a continuation of the front lot line of the first lot to its
rear.
LOT, THROUGH: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines along two (2) more or
less parallel streets, and which is not a corner lot. Both street lines shall
be deemed front lot lines.
LOT WIDTH: The minimum distance between the side lot lines of a lot measured at
the narrowest point within the front thirty feet (30') of the buildable area.
MANUFACTURING ESTABLISHMENT: An establishment, the principal use of which is
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembly, repairing, storing, cleaning,
servicing or testing of materials, goods or products.
MARQUEE OR CANOPY: A roof-like structure of a permanent nature which projects
from the wall of a building.
MICRON: A unit of length, equal to one-thousandths part of one millimeter (.001
millimeter).
MOBILE HOME: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which
contains cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities and has a gross floor area
of two hundred forty (240) square feet or more.
MOBILE HOME PARK: A lot, parcel or tract of land developed with facilities for
accommodating two (2) or more mobile homes, provided each mobile home contains
a kitchen, flush toilet and shower or bath. It shall not include a sales lot in
which automobiles or unoccupied mobile homes or other trailers are parked for
the purpose of inspection or sale, except mobile homes located on a site in the
mobile home park which are occupied or vacant for not more than ninety (90)
days after occupancy may be sold or offered for sale.
MODERATE BURNING: Implies a rate of combustion described by a material which
supports combustion and is consumed slowly as it burns. Examples: wood, timber
and logs.
MOTEL: An establishment consisting of a group of attached or detached lodging
rooms with bathrooms, and where more than fifty percent (50%) of the lodging
rooms are used for occupancy by transient automobile tourists. Cooking
facilities shall not be included in any of the lodging rooms, but one dwelling
unit may be included for occupancy by the owner or manager of the motel.
MOTOR FREIGHT TERMINAL: A building or area in which freight brought by motor
truck is assembled or stored for routing in intrastate or interstate shipment
by motor truck.
MOTOR VEHICLE: A passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-
trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power.
NAMEPLATE: A sign indicating the name and address of a building, or the name of
an occupant thereof, and the practice of a permitted occupation therein.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A strip of land within and along a rear lot line of a through
lot adjoining a street which is designated on a recorded subdivision plat or
property deed as land over which motor vehicular travel shall not be permitted.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE: Any building or structure lawfully
established which: a) does not comply with all the regulations of this title or
of any amendment hereto governing bulk of the district in which such building
or structure is located; or b) is designed or intended for a nonconforming use.
NONCONFORMING USE: Any building or structure and the use thereof or the use of
land that does not conform with the regulations of this title or any amendment
thereto governing use in the district in which it is located but which
conformed with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements
applicable at the time such building or structure was erected, enlarged or
altered, and the use thereof or the use of land was established.
NOXIOUS MATTER OR MATERIAL: A material which is capable of causing injury to
living organisms by chemical reaction, or is capable of causing detrimental
effects of the physical or economic well being of individuals.
NURSERY SCHOOL: Educational institution for children who are preelementary
school age.
NURSING HOME: A home for aged, chronically ill, care of children, infirm or
incurable persons, or a place of rest for those persons suffering bodily
disorders, in which three (3) or more persons not members of the family
residing on the premises are received, and provided with food, shelter and
care, but not including hospitals, clinics or similar institutions devoted
primarily to the diagnosis and treatment of disease or injury, maternity cases
or mental illness.
ODOR THRESHOLD: The lowest concentration of odorous matter in air that will
produce an olfactory response in a human being. Odor thresholds shall be
determined in accordance with ASTM method D 1391-57, "standard method for
measurement of odor in atmospheres (dilution method)".
ODOROUS MATTER: Any material that produces an olfactory response among human
beings.
OFF STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT (AUTOMOBILE): Land which is improved and used or
a structure which is designed and used exclusively for the storage of passenger
motor vehicles (but not trucks, truck-trailers, trailers, or semi-trailers),
either for accessory off street parking spaces or commercial off street parking
spaces when permitted herein by district regulations.
OFF STREET PARKING AREA OR LOT (TRUCK): Land which is improved and used or a
structure which is designed and used exclusively for the storage of trucks,
truck-trailers, trailers, semi-trailers, semi-trucks, but not storage or
shipping containers, either for accessory off street parking spaces or
commercial off street parking spaces when permitted herein by district
regulations.
OPEN SALES LOT: Land used or occupied for the purpose of buying, selling or
renting merchandise stored or displayed out of doors prior to sale. Such
merchandise includes automobiles, trucks, motor scooters, motorcycles, boats or
similar commodities.
PARKING SPACE: An area, enclosed in a building or unenclosed, reserved for the
parking of one motor vehicle and which is accessible to and from a street or
alley.
PARTICULATE MATTER: Material other than water which is suspended in or
discharged into the atmosphere in a finely divided form as a liquid or solid at
outdoor ambient conditions.
PARTY WALL: A common wall which extends from its footings below grade to the
underside of the roof and divides buildings.
PERFORMANCE STANDARD: A criteria established to control smoke and particulate
matter, noise, odorous matter, toxic matter, vibration, fire and explosion
hazards, glare and radiation hazards generated by or inherent in uses of land
or buildings.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT: A parcel of land or contiguous parcels of land under
single ownership or unified control and which is approved for development as a
single, cohesive entity planned and designed in conformance with the purposes
and standards of the planned unit development regulations as specified in title
6, chapter 7 of this code.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The village's planning and zoning commission.
References in this code to "plan commission" or "planning commission" shall be
deemed to mean the village's planning and zoning commission.
POULTRY: Any domesticated fowl including chickens, turkeys, geese, and ducks.
PYROPHORIC DUST: A dust in a finely divided state that is spontaneously
combustible in air.
RADIATION HAZARDS: The deleterious and harmful effects of all ionizing
radiation, which shall include all radiation capable of producing ions in their
passage through matter. Such radiations shall include, but are not limited to,
electromagnetic radiations such as X-rays and gamma rays and particulate
radiation such as electrons or beta particles, protons, neutrons and alpha
particles.
RAILROAD RIGHT OF WAY: A strip of land containing railroad tracks and auxiliary
facilities for track operations, but not including freight depots or stations,
loading platforms, train sheds, warehouses, car or locomotive shops or car
yards.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A transportation vehicle, self-propelled or capable of
being towed by a passenger car, station wagon or small pickup truck, of such
size as not to require any special highway movement permits, and primarily
designed or constructed to provide temporary, movable living quarters for
recreational, camping or travel use, or to carry such equipment, but not for
profit nor commercial use. Included as a recreational vehicle, but not to the
exclusion of any other types not mentioned are: trailers, trailer coaches,
camping trailers, motor homes, pickup (side in) campers, chassis mounts,
converted vans, chopped vans, mini-motor homes, fifth wheel trailers of
recreational vehicle type, construction and design, boat trailers, with and
without boats mounted thereon, snowmobile trailers, with and without
snowmobiles mounted thereon and truck caps.
REFUSE: All waste products resulting from human habitation, except sewage.
RESEARCH LABORATORY: A building or group of buildings in which are located
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or experimentation,
but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of products, except as
incidental to the main purpose of the laboratory.
RESERVOIR PARKING SPACES: Those off street parking spaces allocated for
temporary standing of automobiles awaiting entrance to a particular
establishment.
RESIDENTIAL DRIVEWAY: The area connecting the traveled portion of the public
way and the motor vehicle entrance to a garage or the front of a house.
RINGELMANN CHART: The chart described in the U.S. bureau of mines information
circular 6888, on which are illustrated graduated shades of gray for use in
estimating the light obscuring capacity of smoke (smoke density).
RINGELMANN NUMBER: The number of the area of the Ringelmann chart that
coincides most nearly with the visual density or equivalent opacity of the
emission of smoke observed.
ROADWAY: That portion of a street which is used or intended to be used for the
travel of motor vehicles.
ROOD-MOUNTED COMMERCIAL SOLAR FARM: A system of solar panels installed in which
the racking, which holds the panels in place and/or the panels themselves are
installed directly on the roof of a commercial or industrial building to
convert sunlight into electricity for a community or building for the purpose
of sale or resale. Panels can be attached to flat or sloping metal, shingle, or
rubber roofs.
SETBACK: The minimum horizontal distance between a street line and the nearest
wall of a building or side of a structure facing such street line, or edge of
the area of operation of a principal use when no building or structure is
involved.
SETBACK, ESTABLISHED: When forty percent (40%) or more of the lots fronting on
one side of a street within a block are improved, the existing setbacks of such
improved lots shall be the "established setback" for determining the depth of
the required front yards for the remainder of the lots along such street
frontage, as regulated in this title.
SIGN: A name, identification, description, illustration, display or device
which is affixed to, painted or represented upon a building, structure or land
and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution
or business. For purpose of definition, a sign structure may be single face or
double face. However, a sign shall not include any display of any court, public
or official notice, nor shall it include the flag, emblem, insignia of a
nation, political unit, school, religious or charitable institution or
organization. A sign shall also include a permanent sign located within an
enclosed building in such a manner as to be viewed or intended for view
primarily from the exterior of the building.
SIGN, ADVERTISING: A structure including a billboard on which is portrayed
information which directs attention to a business, commodity, service or
entertainment or other activity not related to use on the lot upon which the
sign structure is located.
SIGN, BUSINESS: A sign which directs attention to a business, commodity,
service, entertainment or other activity conducted on the lot upon which such
sign is located.
SIGN, FLASHING: An illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained constant or stationary in intensity or color at all times when such
sign is in use. For the purpose of this title, a revolving sign, or any
advertising device which attracts attention by moving parts, operated by
mechanical equipment or movement is caused by natural sources, whether or not
illuminated with artificial lighting, shall be considered a flashing sign.
SIGN, GROSS SURFACE AREA OF: The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of a sign.
SIGN, GROUND: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces in or
upon the ground.
SIGN, PROJECTING: A sign which is affixed to any building wall or structure and
extends beyond the building wall or parts thereof or structure more than twelve
inches (12").
SIGN, ROOF: A sign erected, constructed and maintained above the roof of any
building.
SIGN, WALL: A sign which is affixed to an exterior wall of any building, when
sign shall project not more than twelve inches (12") from the building wall or
parts thereof.
SMOKE: The visible discharge from a chimney, stack, vent, exhaust or combustion
process which is made up of particulate matter.
SMOKE UNIT: The number obtained when the smoke density in the Ringelmann number
is multiplied by the time of emission in minutes. For the purpose of this
calculation: a) a Ringelmann density reading shall be made at least once a
minute during the period of observation; b) each reading is then multiplied by
the time in minutes during which it is observed; and c) the various products
are then added together to give the total number of "smoke units" observed
during the entire observation period.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM: Any combination of solar panels or solar arrays, including
mounting structures, inverters, and other accessory equipment, used for the
generation and storage of electricity.
STABLE, PRIVATE: A building or structure which is located on a lot on which a
dwelling is located, and which is designed, arranged, used or intended to be
used for housing horses for the private use of occupants of the dwelling, but
in no event for hire.
STABLE, PUBLIC: A building where horses are kept for remuneration, hire or
sale.
STORY: That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the
surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be
no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above
it. The floor of a story may have split levels, provided that there are not
more than four feet (4') difference in elevation between the different levels
of the floor. A basement shall be counted as a story, except when used for
storage, garages for use of occupants of a building or other facilities common
for the rest of the building. A mezzanine floor shall be counted as a story
when it covers over one-third (1/3) the area of the floor next below it, or if
the vertical distance from the floor next below it to the floor next above it
is twenty four feet (24') or more.
STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip or gambrel roof, the wall
plates of which on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls are not more than
three feet (3') above the floor of such story, except that any partial story
used for residence purposes, other than for a janitor or caretaker or his
family, or by a family occupying the floor immediately below it, shall be
deemed a full story.
STREET: A public or private right of way or easement which is designated as a
permanent right of way or easement for common use as the primary means of
vehicular access to properties abutting on it.
STREET, FRONTAGE: All of the property fronting on one side of a street between
two (2) intersecting streets, or in the case of a dead end street, all of the
property along one side of the street between an intersecting street and the
end of such dead end street.
STREET LINE: The street right of way line abutting a property line of a lot.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such
as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the
roof or in the exterior walls, excepting such repair or replacement as may be
required for the safety of the building.
STRUCTURE: Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or
less permanent location on the ground or attached to something having a
permanent location on the ground, including, but without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, advertising signs, backstops for tennis courts and
pergolas.
TATTOO, TATTOOED, TATTOOING: To insert pigment under the surface of the skin of
a human being, by pricking with a needle or otherwise, so as to produce an
indelible mark or figure visible through the skin.
TAVERN: An establishment where liquors are sold to be consumed on the premises
but not including restaurants where the principal business is the serving of
food.
THREE-COMPONENT MEASURING SYSTEM: Instruments which measure simultaneously
earthborn vibrations in horizontal and vertical planes.
TOURIST HOME: A building which contains a single dwelling unit and in which
meals or lodging or both are provided or offered to transient guests for
compensation. "Tourist home" does not include a hotel, apartment hotel or
motel.
TOURIST PARK: A parcel or tract of land containing facilities for locating
three (3) or more travel trailers or mobile homes, and for use only by
transients remaining less than three (3) months, whether or not a charge is
made. An open sales lot in which automobiles or unoccupied trailers are parked
for the purposes of inspection or sale is not included in a tourist park.
TOXIC MATTER OR MATERIAL: Those materials which are capable of causing injury
to living organisms by chemical means.
TRAILER: Any vehicle or portable structure constructed so as to permit
occupancy thereof for lodging or dwelling purposes or for the use as an
accessory building or structure in the conduct of business, trade or
occupation, and which may be used as a conveyance on streets and highways, by
its own or other motive power.
TRAILER, CAMPING: A trailer designed and constructed for temporary dwelling
purposes which does not contain certain built-in sanitary facilities and has a
gross floor area of less than one hundred thirty (130) square feet.
TRAILER, TRAVEL: A trailer designed and constructed for dwelling purposes which
may contain cooking, sanitary and electrical facilities, and has a gross floor
area of one hundred thirty (130) square feet or more, but less than two hundred
forty (240) square feet.
TRUCK: Includes without limitation all semi-trucks, semi-tractors, ten (10)-
wheelers, and all similar classes of vehicles, typically weighing in excess of
fifteen (15) tons when pulling an empty trailer. Truck does not include pickup
trucks, panel vans, box trucks, tow trucks, and other small passenger and
commercial vehicles of a similar nature. Truck also does not include garbage
trucks.
USE: The purpose or activity for which the land, or building thereon, is
designed, arranged or intended, or for which it is occupied or maintained, and
shall include any manner of performance of such activity with respect to the
performance standards of this Title.
USE, ACCESSORY: An accessory use is one which is incidental to the dominant use
of the premises.
USE, CONDITIONAL PERMITTED: A use that has unusual operational, physical or
other characteristics that may be different from those of the predominant
permitted uses in a district, but which is a use that complements and is
otherwise, or can be made, compatible with the intended over-all development
within a district. Compliance with special standards not necessarily applicable
to other permitted uses or conditional permitted uses in the district shall be
required for a conditional permitted use, as regulated in this Title.
USE, LAWFUL: The use of any building, structure or land that conforms with all
of the regulations of this Title or any amendment hereto and which conforms
with all of the codes, ordinances and other legal requirements, as existing at
the time of the effective date hereof or any amendment thereto, for the
structure or land that is being examined.
USE, PERMITTED: Any use which is or may be lawfully established in a particular
district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations
and when applicable, performance standards of this Title for the district in
which such use is located.
USE, PRINCIPAL: The dominant use of land or buildings as distinguished from a
subordinate or accessory use.
VENDING MACHINE: A machine for dispensing merchandise or services designed to
be operated by the customer.
VIBRATION: The periodic displacement, measured in inches, of earth at
designated frequency (cycles per second).
VIDEO GAMING CAFÉ: An establishment for which the primary or major business
focus is video gaming, and the service of alcohol and food is incidental to the
operation of the video gaming terminals.
YARD: An open area on a lot which is unobstructed from its lowest level to the
sky, except as otherwise provided in this Title.
YARD, FRONT: A yard which is bounded by the side lot lines, front lot line and
the front yard line.
YARD, INTERIOR SIDE: A side yard which adjoins another lot or an alley
separating such side yard from another lot.
YARD, LINE: A line in a lot that is parallel to the lot line along which the
applicable yard extends and which is not nearer to such lot line at any point
than the required depth or width of the applicable yard. A building, structure
or other obstruction shall not encroach into the area between the "yard line"
and such adjacent lot line, except for such permitted obstruction in yards as
are set forth in this Title.
YARD, REAR: A yard which is bounded by side lot lines, rear lot line and the
rear yard line.
YARD, SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the rear yard line, front yard line,
side yard line and side lot line.
YARD, CORNER SIDE: A yard which is bounded by the front yard line, corner side
yard line, rear yard line and corner side lot line.
ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS: References in this Code to the "Zoning Board of
Appeals" or the "Board of Appeals" shall be deemed to be references to the
Village's Planning and Zoning Commission.
ZONING DISTRICTS: The districts into which the Village has been divided for
zoning regulations and requirements as set forth on the Zoning District Map.
ZONING ENFORCEMENT OFFICE: The Zoning Enforcement Office is the office of the
Building Officer and Inspector of the Village from which the Building Officer
and Inspector, and such deputies or assistants as may be duly appointed by the
Board of Trustees, shall administer and enforce the provisions of the Zoning
Title and to make such determinations, interpretations and orders as are
necessary therefor, and require such plats, plans and other descriptive
material in connection with applications for permits as are necessary for him
to judge compliance with this Title in accordance with regulations set forth in
this Title.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3ac17dd9791f4a27d2df1d32b83da81a9cc9bd19/
IMAGES/0-0-0-25.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3ac17dd9791f4a27d2df1d32b83da81a9cc9bd19/
IMAGES/0-0-0-27.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3ac17dd9791f4a27d2df1d32b83da81a9cc9bd19/
IMAGES/0-0-0-29.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/3ac17dd9791f4a27d2df1d32b83da81a9cc9bd19/
IMAGES/0-0-0-31.png]
 
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993; Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996; 1997
Code; Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997; Ord. 2000-46, 10-10-2000; Ord. 2003-26, 5-27-
2003; Ord. 2005-41, 9-13-2005; Ord. 2006-01, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-
2006; Ord. 2006-38, 10-10-2006; Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006; Ord. 2007-31, 6-26-
2007; Ord. 2009-26, 6-23-2009; Ord. 2013-14, 5-28-2013; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-
2017; Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; Ord. 2024-18, 4-23-2024; Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-
2024; Ord. 2024-50, 11-26-2024)
CHAPTER 3
GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-3-1 Control Over Use
5-3-2 Control Over Bulk
5-3-3 Number Of Buildings On Lot
5-3-4 Lot Division
5-3-5 Yards
5-3-6 Setbacks Along Street
5-3-7 Accessory Buildings, Structures And Uses
5-3-8 Permitted Accessory Buildings, Structures, Uses In Required Yards
5-3-9 Vision Clearance For Corner Lots
5-3-10 Parking Restrictions For Trailers, Mobile Homes, Boats, Recreational
Vehicles, And Motor Vehicles
5-3-11 Sewerage And Water Systems
5-3-12 Floodplain Area
5-3-13 Building Height
5-3-14 Exemptions
5-3-15 Drive-Through Facility
5-3-16:    Anti-Monotony Standards
5-3-1: CONTROL OVER USE:
   A.   The uses of land and the erection, alteration and use of buildings or
structures shall be limited to:
      1.   Uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date hereof,
except uses lawfully established and existing on the effective date hereof and
rendered nonconforming by the provisions herein shall be subject to the
regulations of chapter 10 of this title; and
      2.   Uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the zoning district in
which the land, building or structure is to be located.
   B.   Where a use which is classified as a conditional use by this title
exists on the effective date hereof, it shall be considered to be a lawful
conditional use.
   C.   Where the construction of a building or structure has begun prior to
the effective date hereof and is being prosecuted to completion, said building
or structure may be completed and occupied.
   D.   Where plans for the construction of a building or structure have been
filed with the village clerk within ten (10) days after the effective date
hereof or any amendment hereto, said building or structure may be constructed
and occupied if construction is commenced within six (6) months and completed
within one year of the filing date. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1997 Code)
5-3-2: CONTROL OVER BULK:
   A.   New buildings or structures shall conform with the bulk regulations
established by this title for the district in which each such building or
structure is located. Existing buildings or structures shall not be enlarged,
reconstructed, structurally altered, converted or relocated in such a manner as
to conflict or to increase any existing conflict with the bulk regulations of
this title for the district in which such structures are located.
   B.   However, a lot of record at the time of the effective date hereof in a
residence district which is unable to meet the requirements of this title as to
area and yard requirements may be used for a single-family detached dwelling,
provided it shall meet all the other requirements of this title and other
applicable village ordinances, regulations and codes. A lot of record existing
on the effective date hereof, referred to above, shall be as follows:
      1.   In residence districts, a lot, parcel or tract of land which was
recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy, Kendall and Will
Counties prior to the effective date hereof; and
      2.   In residence districts, a lot in a subdivision which was so recorded
after the effective date hereof, provided a preliminary plat for such
subdivision had been given tentative approval, as required by the subdivision
regulations1. See title 6 of this code.1 prior to the effective date hereof and
a final plat had been submitted and approved by the village board and
thereafter recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy County
within the time periods required by such subdivision regulations for filing and
application for final plat approval and for recording after approval.
   C.   The zoning officer shall issue a zoning certificate for erecting a
single-family detached dwelling on a lot of record upon compliance with all of
the foregoing provisions. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-3: NUMBER OF BUILDINGS ON LOT:
In any residence district, every single-family detached dwelling hereafter
erected or structurally altered shall be located on a lot, and there shall be
not more than one such dwelling on a lot. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-4: LOT DIVISION:
No lot containing a structure or use shall hereafter be divided in order to
secure one or more additional lots for transfer of ownership and establishment
of a principal use thereon, unless each lot, including also the lot containing
the structure or use, resulting from such division, shall have the minimum lot
area, lot width and yards as required in this title for the district in which
the lot is located. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-5: YARDS:
   A.   Yards and other open spaces as required by this title shall be located
on the same lot as the principal building, structure or use.
   B.   On through lots, the front lot line shall be along the street right of
way designated by the zoning officer, except that when a front lot line has
been established on one or more lots in the same block, the street right of way
line designated as the front lot line for such lot or lots shall be the front
lot line on all vacant through lots in such block. Only those obstructions
permitted in this title in front yards shall be located in that part of a rear
yard adjoining a street that is equivalent in depth to a required front yard,
except where a no access strip has been provided for such lots on the recorded
plat.
   C.   No legally required yards, open space or lot area for any use or
structure shall be used to satisfy yard, open space or lot area requirements
for any other structure or use.
   D.   No yards allocated to a building, structure or use existing on the
effective date hereof shall be subsequently reduced or further reduced below
the yard requirements of this title, except a yard adjoining a street may be
reduced in depth in the event the right of way width of such street is
subsequently increased. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-6: SETBACKS ALONG STREETS:
Minimum setbacks on lots abutting a street or thoroughfare shall be the
distance required for a front yard, or side yard adjoining a street, in the
districts where such lots are located, measured from the existing right of way
line of the street or thoroughfare, or from the proposed right of way line as
designated on the official map of the village, and as duly established by other
ordinances of the village or as established by county or state highway
authorities, whichever has the greatest right of way width requirements. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
5-3-7: ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES AND USES:
   A.   Accessory buildings, structures and uses shall be compatible with the
principal use, shall not be erected or altered in required yards except those
that are herein permitted as obstructions in yards, and shall not be
established prior to the establishment of the principal use. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   B.   Accessory uses shall not include the keeping, propagation, or culture
of pigeons, poultry, rabbits, bees, livestock or other nonhousehold animals
except as follows:
      1.   The keeping, propagation, or culture of pigeons, poultry, rabbits,
bees, livestock or other nonhousehold animals shall be permitted on such lots
where the pursuit of agriculture is a permitted principal or accessory use; and
      2.   The keeping of poultry shall be permitted on lots in districts zoned
R1, R1A, and R2 pursuant to chapter 6 of this title, subject to the following
conditions:
         a.   Any poultry kept on such a lot must be kept, at all times, within
a fully enclosed and secured poultry enclosure. Said enclosure must be
constructed within the rear yard of the lot and must be located not less than
five feet (5') from the edges of the lot;
         b.   No male poultry (including, but not limited to, roosters,
ganders, and drakes) shall be permitted;
         c.   No more than eight (8) female poultry (including, but not limited
to, geese, hens, and ducks), regardless of species, shall be permitted on a
single lot;
         d.   Waste must be regularly removed from the poultry enclosure and
the poultry enclosure must be maintained in a reasonably clean and sanitary
manner. (Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
   C.   Except as herein otherwise required for a specific accessory use,
detached accessory buildings, as herein permitted as obstructions in required
rear yards, shall:
      1.   Be not more than one story or fifteen feet (15') in height,
whichever is lower;
      2.   Cover not more than thirty percent (30%) of the area of the rear
yard; and
      3.   Be located not less than five feet (5') from a lot line of adjoining
lots, except:
         a.   On corner lots, not nearer to the side street lot line than the
distance required in the district in which the lot is located for a side yard
adjoining a street.
         b.   On through lots that do not have a rear lot line adjoining a no
access strip, not nearer to the rear lot line adjoining a street than the
distance required for a front yard.
         c.   On lots which abut a public alley, not nearer to the centerline
of the alley than eleven feet (11').
   D.   No detached building accessory to a single-family detached dwelling
hereafter erected or altered at any location on a lot, shall be more than one
story or fifteen feet (15') in height, whichever is lower, nor shall it be
nearer than ten feet (10') from the principal building on the lot. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
5-3-8: PERMITTED ACCESSORY BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, USES IN REQUIRED YARDS:
The following accessory buildings, structures and uses are permitted and may be
obstructions in yards as follows:
 
F Denotes permitted obstructions in the buildable area, front, accessory
  buildings, structures and uses.
S Denotes permitted obstructions in the buildable area, side, accessory
  buildings, structures and uses.
R Denotes permitted obstruction in the buildable area, rear, accessory
  buildings, structures and uses.
 
Air conditioning equipment shelters.                                               R
Arbors or trellises - where trellises are attached to the principal building,      R
they may also project into front yards and side yards.
Awnings or canopies - projecting not more than 3 feet into a required yard.    F S R
Balconies.                                                                         R
Bay windows - projecting not more than 3 feet into a yard.                     F   R
Chimneys, attached - projecting not more than 2 feet into a yard.              F S R
Eaves and gutters - projecting not more than 4 feet into a front and rear yard F S R
and not more than 2 feet into a side yard.
Fallout shelters, attached or detached.                                            R
Fences - not more than 8 feet in height in business districts, not more than 8
feet in manufacturing districts, and not more than 6 feet in height in           S R
residence districts unless otherwise specified.
Fire escapes, open or enclosed projected into a front yard or side yard
adjoining a street not more than 5 feet, and into an interior side yard, not   F S R
more than 3 feet.
Flagpoles.                                                                     F S R
Growing of garden crops in the open.                                             S R
Lawn furniture, such as benches, sundials, birdbaths and similar structures.   F S R
Open off street loading spaces.                                                    R
Open off street parking spaces – not less than 5 feet from a lot line or not
less than 10 feet from a building wall or a greater distance if required
herein and in all business districts open off street parking spaces may be in  F S R
a required front yard or side yard adjoining a street as hereinafter
regulated.
Playground and laundry drying equipment.                                           R
Playhouses and open sided summerhouses.                                            R
Poultry enclosure.                                                                 R
Sheds and storage buildings for garden equipment and household items.              R
Signs, nameplates and light standards.                                         F S R
Sills, belt courses, cornices and ornamental features of the principal         F S R
buildings, projecting not more than 18 inches.
Steps, open - necessary for access to and from the dwelling or an accessory
building, provided there are no more than 8 steps for access to and from a     F S R
principal or accessory building.
Swimming pools, private.                                                           R
Tennis courts, private.                                                            R
Terraces, patios and outdoor fireplaces.                                         * R
Trees, shrubs and other plants.                                                F S R
                                                                               Not
Other accessory buildings, structures and uses as herein permitted in district allowed
regulations as accessory to a specific permitted use.                          in
                                                                               yards
 
Note:
   *    =    Patios (and decks) are permitted obstructions in the side yard for
single-family detached dwellings and two-family (duplex) dwellings, subject to
the following conditions:
         A.      The single-family detached dwelling or two-family (duplex)
dwelling has a door that accesses the side yard and does not have a door that
accesses the rear yard,
         B.      The side yard patio or deck shall not exceed 225 square feet
and shall be constructed adjacent to the door that accesses the side yard,
         C.      No fencing of any height shall be constructed as part of
patios or decks constructed in side yards that face a street, and
         D.   The patio or deck shall not be constructed in a utility or
drainage easement.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1977 Code; Ord. 1984-10, 11-12-1984; Ord. 2007-31, 6-26-
2007; Ord. 2013-20, 6-25-2013; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-2017)
5-3-9: VISION CLEARANCE FOR CORNER LOTS:
On corner lots within that part of a yard located within a radius of twenty
five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right of
way lines forming the lot corner, no structures or shrubs as herein permitted
as obstructions in front yards or side yards adjoining a street shall be
erected, altered or planted which have a height more than thirty inches (30")
above the ground grade in this area, and trees planted in such areas shall be
maintained in a manner that trees shall not have branches lower than eight feet
(8') above the ground grade elevation in this area. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-10: PARKING RESTRICTIONS FOR TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, BOATS, RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES, AND MOTOR VEHICLES1. See also section
9-1-23 of this code.1 :
   A.   Recreational Vehicle Parking Restricted: The parking of recreational
vehicles such as boats, snowmobiles, personal watercraft on trailers, travel
trailers, campers, motor homes, other recreational vehicles and their trailers
in residential areas within the village of Minooka is hereby restricted, as
described in this section.
   B.   Parking In Public Roadway: None of said items as set forth in
subsection A of this section shall be parked or stored on the roadway or right
of way.
   C.   Parking On Private Land: Only one said item as set forth in subsection
A of this section shall be parked on any lot or parcel of land by the resident
of the subject lot or parcel of land, provided:
      1.   Said item shall be parked in an interior side yard, rear yard or a
fully enclosed building or structure. It shall not be parked in the front yard
or corner side yard, except as provided for in subsection D of this section.
      2.   Where said item is parked in an interior side yard or rear yard, it
shall be parked upon a surface that is open, impervious, and constructed of a
hard dustless material, such as concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, slate, or
stamped concrete, with a surface capable of supporting the weight of the
recreational vehicle, and which otherwise complies with all of the provisions
of this code. The impervious surface dimensions must minimally meet the same
length and width dimensions of any recreational vehicle parked upon it.
      3.   Access of recreational vehicles to interior side and rear yards for
parking purposes must also be upon surfaces that meet the requirements for
recreational vehicle parking set forth in subparagraph 2 (i.e. concrete,
asphalt, brick pavers, slate, or stamped concrete).
      4.   In any zoning district, the wheels or any similar transporting
devices shall not be removed, except for repairs.
      5.   It shall not be permanently affixed to the ground in a manner that
would prevent its removal.
      6.    It shall not be located closer than five feet (5') to any rear or
interior side lot line.
   D.   Parking In Residential Driveway: If the side yard or rear yard is not
accessible, the said items as set forth in subsection A of this section may be
parked in the residential driveway, if:
      1.   It is used daily and it is the owner's principal means of
transportation; or
      2.   It is parked in a manner so as to not block the sidewalk or block
the view of the street for safe exiting;
      3.   Only one said item as set forth in subsection A of this section may
be parked in the residential driveway, if permitted pursuant to subsection D1
or D2 of this section, during its normal season that it would be used (i.e.,
watercraft and campers from May 1 to October 30; snowmobiles from December 1 to
March 1).
   E.   Temporary Parking: Said items as set forth in subsection A of this
section may be parked temporarily in the residential driveway, if:
      1.   It is the property resident's second such item and it is being
repaired and will not be on the property longer than forty eight (48) hours; or
      2.   Said item is owned by a guest of the resident of the property, and
is only to be parked on the property no longer than fourteen (14) consecutive
days at a time and a temporary parking permit as set forth in subsection F of
this section is approved.
   F.   Permit: It will be the responsibility of the resident of the property
to obtain a temporary parking permit from the village office for any
nonresident.
   G.   Parking Restrictions For Motor Vehicles In Residence Districts:
      1.   On residential lots within the village of Minooka, the parking of
motor vehicles is restricted to: a) the residential driveway; b) fully enclosed
building or structure; or c) the side yard or rear yard, so long as the entire
area beneath the motor vehicle is open, impervious, and constructed of a hard
dustless material, such as concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, slate, or stamped
concrete, with a surface capable of supporting the weight of the vehicle, and
otherwise complies with all of the provisions of this code. Access of motor
vehicles to side and rear yards for parking purposes must also be upon surfaces
that meet the same surface requirements for motor vehicle parking (i.e.
concrete, asphalt, brick pavers, slate, or stamped concrete).
H.   Penalty: Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than fifty
dollars ($50.00) and not more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed on each and every day on which a violation continues or is permitted
to exist. In addition, the village shall have all such other rights and
remedies as may be available to it at law or equity. (Ord. 2009-26, 6-23-2009;
Ord. 2019-16, 6-25-2019)
5-3-11: SEWERAGE AND WATER SYSTEMS:
   A.   A lot that was not a lot of record on the effective date hereof which
is to be used for a single-family detached dwelling served with an individual
sewerage disposal system shall have an area of not less than one acre and a
width of not less than one hundred fifty feet (150') or a greater area or width
if required to conform with regulations contained in subsection B of this
section.
   B.   Installation of individual sewage disposal systems and private wells or
community sewerage and water systems shall be in accordance with standards and
specifications set forth in applicable laws of the county, state and the
village.
   C.   All buildings other than single-family detached dwellings located on
lots less than one acre in area may be served with individual sewage disposal
systems and individual wells when on lots having areas and widths conforming
with minimum or greater lot area and lot width requirements for the districts
where such uses are located, provided:
      1.   Greater lot areas and widths shall be required when it is necessary
to provide areas of adequate size, that are not covered by buildings,
structures and pavements, to conform with state and county standards for
installation of individual sewage disposal systems and individual wells; and
      2.   The board of trustees may require, in specific cases, that such uses
shall be served with public or community sewerage systems and/or water systems
when it is found practical to make connections with nearby public or community
sewerage and/or water systems or to install such systems. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-12: FLOODPLAIN AREA:
The main floor shall have an elevation of not less than two feet six inches
(2'6") above flood crest, with the lowest point of the lowest window opening of
the foundation to be not less than six inches (6") above flood crest, or the
distance above flood crest level that may be required by the building officer
and inspector for specific locations. (Code change, 1980)
5-3-13: BUILDING HEIGHT:
No building shall be erected, converted, enlarged, reconstructed or
structurally altered to exceed the height limit herein established for the
district in which the building is located, except that penthouses or roof
structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or
similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building and fire or
parapet walls, skylight, towers, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks,
radio and television aerials, wireless masts, water tanks, silos, storage
hoppers, elevators or similar structures may be erected above the height limits
when recommended by the planning commission and approved by the board of
trustees. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-14: EXEMPTIONS:
The regulations of this title shall not be exercised so as to:
   A.   Deprive the owner of any existing property of its use or maintenance
for the purpose to which it is lawfully devoted at the time of enactment of
this title or subsequent amendments thereto.
   B.   Impose regulations or require permits (except as herein outlined) with
respect to land used or to be used for agricultural purposes or with respect to
the erection, maintenance, repair, alteration, remodeling or extension of
buildings used or to be used for such agricultural purposes upon such land
except that such building for agricultural purposes may be required to conform
to building or setback lines.
   C.   Specify or regulate the type or location of poles, wires, cables,
conduits, vaults, laterals or any other similar distributing equipment of a
public utility as defined in "an act concerning public utilities" enacted by
the general assembly of the state of Illinois. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-3-15: DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY:
   A.   Setbacks: All drive-through facilities adjoining residential property
shall locate the drive-through lanes (including the bypass lane and the
required stacking space requirements) not less than forty feet (40') from the
residential property, measured as the distance between the residential property
line and the nearest curb of the drive- through lane(s).
   B.   Bypass: A minimum of ten feet (10') shall be provided adjacent to the
drive-through lane(s) in order for vehicles to bypass the drive-through lane
(s).
   C.   Drive-Through Lane And Stacking Space Requirements:
      1.   All drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall be not less than
twelve feet (12') wide.
      2.   Drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall not cross off street
parking areas or pedestrian walkways.
      3.   All drive-through lanes shall be sized to hold at least the minimum
stacking spaces required for each use.
      4.   All drive-through lanes and stacking spaces shall be separated from
the site access (public street, neighboring lots, etc.) and parking.
   D.   Minimum Standards For Stacking: There shall be provided for each
building, structure and use hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged
with a drive-through lane, the minimum number of stacking spaces as set forth
in a traffic analysis, which shall be evaluated and approved by the village
engineer. (Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006)
5-3-16:   ANTI-MONOTONY STANDARDS:
   A.   The purpose of these requirements is to preserve the aesthetically
pleasing character of development by promoting such character, protecting and
enhancing property values, and to promote the easy identification of houses, by
encouraging dwelling units of distinctive design and discouraging excessive
similarity among adjacent dwellings.
   B.   All residential construction in the village is subject to the following
standards:
      1.   No two (2) single-family dwellings or single-family attached
buildings of substantially similar front elevation or facade shall be
constructed or located adjacent to one another, nor shall there be constructed
or located more than twenty-five percent (25%) of buildings of substantially
similar front elevation or facade on any block.
         a.   For the purposes of these anti-monotony provisions, a "block"
shall be measured as the greater of (i) the space between two intervening cross
streets or (ii) six hundred sixty feet (660') from lot line to lot line.
         b.   For the purposes of these anti-monotony provisions, a "front"
elevation or facade shall include every elevation or facade facing a street or
public way, such as the front and rear faces of a building on a through lot or
the front and side faces of a building on a corner lot.
      2.   A building on a corner lot shall not be considered substantially
similar to another building in the same block if the front elevations of the
buildings face different streets. On cul-de-sac turnarounds, no building shall
have a front elevation or facade which is substantially similar to any other
building on the cul-de-sac.
      3.   A building shall not be considered substantially similar to another
building if a preponderance of the front elevations of the two buildings are of
different color and the front elevations of the two buildings differ as to two
or more of the characteristics set forth below (a-i).
         a.   Roof type (e.g. gable, hip, mansard, gambrel, flat, combination,
etc.).
         b.   Roof height.
         c.   Approximate dimensions (height and length) of the front
elevation.
         d.   Shape of the front elevation silhouette.
         e.   Relative locations and sizes of windows in the front elevation,
including the addition of bay window(s).
         f.   Siding type (e.g. brick veneer, lapped horizontal siding, half-
timber, board and batten, shakes, etc.) on the front elevation.
         g.   Relative locations and dimensions of garage door(s), if included
on the front elevation.
         h.   Reverse elevations.
         i.   Housing styles (e.g. ranch, bi-level, tri-level, 1½ , 2, and 3
story).
   However, a change in roof color shall not constitute a factor of
dissimilarity.
      4.   If the building and zoning administrator, or person acting in that
capacity, finds that the dwelling for which a building permit is requested is
substantially similar to a dwelling for which a building permit has been issued
for a dwelling located adjacent to it, or located in any block with more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of buildings of substantially similar front elevation
or facade, if issued, the building and zoning administrator shall deny the
permit request for noncompliance with this chapter.
      5.   An applicant for a building permit that has been denied based on the
provisions of this chapter may:
         a.   Alter the dwelling plans so that the proposed dwelling is no
longer substantially similar to the other dwelling(s), according to the
criteria specified in this chapter.
         b.   Appeal the decision of the building and zoning administrator, or
person acting in that capacity, to the village board of trustees.
      6.   In appealing the interpretation of this chapter to the village board
of trustees, an applicant for a building permit shall present evidence
sufficient to demonstrate conformity with this article, such as, but not
limited to architectural drawings. (Ord. 2024-57, 12-17-2024)
CHAPTER 4
ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP
SECTION:
5-4-1 Establishment Of Districts
5-4-2 Zoning District Map; Boundaries Of Districts
5-4-3 Annexed Territory
5-4-1: ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS:
In order to carry out the purposes and intent of this title, the village is
hereby divided into the following districts:
A   Agricultural district
R1  Single-family detached residence district
R1A Single-family detached residence district
R2  Single-family detached residence district
R3  Single-family attached and multiple-family residence district
R4  Two-family (duplex) residence district
R4A Two-family (duplex) residence district
R5  Single-family attached residence district
R6  Multiple-family residence district
B1  Business district
B2  Commercial district
M1  Manufacturing district
M2  Manufacturing district
   Lowland conservancy overlay district
DC  Data center district
 
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2024-50, 11-26-2024)
5-4-2: ZONING DISTRICT MAP; BOUNDARIES OF DISTRICTS:
   A.   Zoning District Map: The zoning districts and their boundaries are as
shown upon the zoning district map entitled "zoning district map, village of
Minooka, Illinois", dated 1974, which map and all amendments thereto and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon are hereby
incorporated into and made a part of this title, with the same force and effect
as if fully set forth in this title. The original zoning district map, properly
attested to, shall be filed with the village clerk.
   B.   Boundaries Of Districts: Where uncertainty exists with respect to the
boundaries of the various districts as shown on the zoning district map, the
following rules apply:
      1.   District boundary lines are either: a) the centerlines of railroads,
highways, streets, alleys, easements or waterways; b) the boundary lines of
sections, quarter sections and divisions of sections; c) property lines of
record on the effective date hereof for tracts and lots; or d) such lines
extended unless otherwise indicated.
      2.   Wherever a district is indicated as a strip adjacent to and
paralleling a street or highway, and the boundaries are not located as set
forth in subsection B1 of this section, the depth of such strips shall be in
accordance with dimensions shown on the map measured at right angles from the
centerlines of the street or highway, and the length of frontage shall be in
accordance with dimensions shown on the map from section, quarter section or
division lines, or centerlines of streets, highways or railroad rights of way
unless otherwise indicated.
      3.   Where a district boundary line divides a lot in single ownership,
the regulations for either portion of the lot may, in the owner's discretion,
extend to the entire lot, but not more than forty feet (40') beyond the
boundary line of the district. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      4.   Questions concerning the exact locations of zoning district boundary
lines shall be resolved by the board of trustees after receiving
recommendations from the planning and zoning commission. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd.
Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
5-4-3: ANNEXED TERRITORY:
On land hereafter annexed to the village, no structures shall be erected,
enlarged or moved and no change in use of land or existing structures shall be
made until an amendment to this title designating the zoning district
classification of such annexed land is duly adopted by the board of trustees;
provided, that if no such ordinance has been so adopted within one hundred
twenty (120) days after such land is annexed, the annexed land shall be
automatically classified as R1 single-family detached residence district.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
CHAPTER 5
AGRICULTURAL DISTRICT
SECTION:
5-5-1 Preamble
5-5-2 Permitted Uses
5-5-3 Conditional Permitted Uses
5-5-4 Lot Area
5-5-5 Lot Width
5-5-6 Floor Area Ratio
5-5-7 Yards
5-5-8 Signs
5-5-9 Off Street Parking And Loading
5-5-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations of the agriculture district are designed to regulate the use of
land, buildings and structures within the areas of the village where soil and
topographic conditions are best adapted to the pursuit of agriculture and
utilization of other natural land resources, and preservation of land for
further agricultural uses. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses of the A agricultural district shall be as follows:
   Agriculture, on a lot not less than twenty (20) acres in area. After the
effective date hereof, the following uses, either as a dominate or accessory
use in the pursuit of agriculture, shall not be established, and existing
structures shall not hereafter be structurally altered or enlarged.
      A.   Commercial livestock feedlots located nearer than one thousand three
hundred twenty feet (1,320') from an existing dwelling or a residence district
boundary line.
      B.   Land used for the disposal of garbage, sewage, rubbish or offal.
   Cemeteries, including crematories and mausoleums, provided no buildings
shall be located less than three hundred thirty feet (330') from a lot line.
   Churches, temples or synagogues.
   Dog kennels, provided no buildings or structures are located less than one
hundred feet (100') from a lot line.
   Energy plant water storage pond, including all fencing, pumps, aeration, and
other mechanical equipment related to the development and operation of the
energy plant water storage pond, which is accessory to a power plant or related
energy use located within an M2 manufacturing district.
   Golf courses, regulation size, but not including "par 3" golf courses,
commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses; and provided,
that no clubhouse or accessory building shall be located less than two hundred
feet (200') from a lot line.
   Greenhouses, wholesale or retail.
   Home occupations.
   Hospitals, on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area.
   Milk depots.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   Private recreational areas or camps, when not operated for profit.
   Railroad rights of way and trackage.
   Rest homes, nursing homes, sanitariums and institutions for children and the
aged.
   Schools, public or private, day or nursery, elementary, junior high and
high.
   Seminaries, convents, monasteries and similar religious institutions.
   Single-family detached dwelling on a lot not less than three (3) acres in
area and two hundred thirty one feet (231') in width.
   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed
such construction and when located on the same lot where such construction is
being undertaken or on a contiguous lot thereto.
   Accessory uses. Uses, buildings and structures, accessory to agricultural
uses:
      A.   Those customarily accessory to the pursuit of agriculture; provided,
that buildings and structures for the shelter of farm animals set back no less
than one hundred feet (100') from a property line.
      B.   Roadside stands for the sale of farm products grown and raised on
the farmer's land, but not including live animals, and provided that such stand
shall contain not more than six hundred (600) square feet of floor area. The
stand, and items on sale, shall not be located nearer than fifty feet (50')
from a street or highway right of way line, except a temporary roadside stand
may be within ten feet (10') of a street or highway right of way line, provided
the stand shall be at such location only during the selling period. There shall
be provided with each roadside stand facilities approved by the building
inspector for vehicular ingress and egress and adequate off street parking
facilities for the customers. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2006-10, 2-28-2006)
5-5-3: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES 1 .
Airports, public or private, on a lot not less than five (5) acres in area.
Animal feed, storage, preparation, grinding and mixing; and fertilizer and seed
sales, including bulk storage and mixing; provided, no building or structure is
located nearer than one thousand three hundred twenty feet (1,320') from an
existing dwelling or a residence district boundary line.
Battery Energy Storage Facility, subject to all rules and regulations of
Chapter 16 (Battery Energy Storage Facilities) of this Title.
Commercial solar farm (ground mounted only), subject to all rules and
regulations of Chapter 15 (Commercial Solar Farms) of this Title.
Community centers and fairgrounds for such uses as: agricultural fairs,
exhibits conducted by rural and agricultural organizations and other public or
semipublic voluntary organizations; provided, that no commercial race tracks
shall be erected or operated. The operations of all uses shall conform with
performance standards set forth in this title for the M1 manufacturing
district. The setback areas bordering the property lines shall be landscaped
and so maintained as permanent open areas but may contain driveways, walks,
fences and buildings or structures at entrances for admission controls.
Colleges, junior colleges and universities including fraternity and sorority
houses, dormitories and other accessory structures and facilities necessary to
the operation of a college or university, on a lot not less than ten (10) acres
in area and provided no buildings, structures or use of land, including off
street parking and loading spaces shall be located nearer than one hundred feet
(100') from a lot line.
General uses. Each of the conditional permitted uses hereunder shall be on a
lot which is located no nearer than five hundred feet (500') from a residence
district boundary line. On such lots no building, structure or use of land,
including off street parking and loading spaces, but not including growing of
farm crops, floriculture or horticulture, shall be located nearer than one
hundred feet (100') from a lot line except as hereinafter set forth for
excavations.
   A.   Landfills, public or private, including sanitary landfills and dry
waste dumps; application for a conditional use permit shall also include an
agreement between the village and the operator of the landfill, in the form
approved by the state's attorney, binding the operator and his successors to
comply with scope and method of operation in accordance with standards and
specifications set forth therein. A bond, other security or guarantee in the
form approved by the state's attorney and as required by the board of trustees
shall be filed with the village in the amount established by the board of
trustees to cover the estimated cost of improvements to the landfill area upon
completion of filling operations. The above mentioned bond shall not apply to a
public body.
   B.   Mining, loading and hauling of coal, clay, sand, gravel, topsoil or
other aggregate or minerals, and oil or gas well drilling, including equipment,
buildings or structures for screening, crushing, mixing, washing or storage;
provided, that 1) no excavation shall take place within forty feet (40') of any
property line fronting upon a public road or a greater distance if required by
Illinois statutes; 2) the entire property is fenced in by a stationary fence;
3) a plan of development for the reclamation of the land is provided as part of
the application for a conditional use permit; 4) buildings, structures,
equipment and operations for processing on the premises of material secured by
such uses shall be allowed only when authorized by the board of trustees for a
specified period of time, and provided the operations shall conform with
performance standards set forth in the M2 manufacturing district measured at
the lot line.
Grain storage when not accessory to the pursuit of agriculture.
Heliports, public or private, on a lot not less than one acre in area.
Marinas, including boat storage and incidental service facilities and
clubhouses or recreation buildings, on a lot not less than one acre in area.
Outdoor recreational areas, private, used for one of the following uses:
equestrian sports, horse shows and hunter trails; dog shows and field trials;
hunt clubs and gun clubs; conservation clubs; archery ranges; fishing ponds;
swimming clubs and tennis clubs; picnic and camping grounds; and accessory
buildings, structures or uses such as off street parking and loading spaces,
administration, maintenance and clubhouse buildings, including sale of food and
beverages, provided that such accessory buildings and uses are located not less
than two hundred feet (200') from a lot line.
Public service uses.
   A.   Filtration plant, pumping station, well and water reservoir.
   B.   Sewage treatment plant.
   C.   Police and fire stations.
   D.   Other governmental uses.
Resorts, privately owned and operated containing dwelling units and lodging
rooms for guests and employees of the resort; indoor recreation facilities for
use only by guests of the resort and when located in the principal building or
a detached recreation building or clubhouse; and outdoor recreation facilities,
on a lot not less than twenty (20) acres in area and provided no building or
structure is located less than two hundred feet (200') from a lot line.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2023-40 10-24-2023; Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-11-9 of this title.
5-5-4: LOT AREA:
The lot area requirement shall be not less than five (5) acres, except as
otherwise regulated herein for a specific permitted or conditional permitted
use. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-5: LOT WIDTH:
The required lot width shall be not less than three hundred thirty feet (330')
except as otherwise regulated herein for a specific permitted or conditional
permitted use. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-6: FLOOR AREA RATIO:
The floor area ratio shall not exceed 0.1. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-7: YARDS:
Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in accordance with
the following regulations:
   A.   Front Yard: Not less than fifty feet (50').
   B.   Side Yards: Not less than thirty feet (30') for an interior side yard
and not less than fifty feet (50') for a side yard adjoining a street.
   C.   Rear Yard: Not less than one hundred feet (100'). (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-5-8: SIGNS:
Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this title. (Ord. 1998-
1, 1-13-1998)
5-5-9: OFF STREET PARKING AND LOADING:
The off street parking and loading requirements shall be in accordance with the
regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
CHAPTER 6
RESIDENCE DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-6-1 Preamble
5-6-2 General Provisions
5-6-3: R1 Single-Family Detached Residence District
5-6-4: R1A Single-Family Detached Residence District
5-6-5: R2 Single-Family Detached Residence District
5-6-6: R3 Single-Family Attached And Multiple-Family Residence District
5-6-7: R4 Two-Family (Duplex) Residence District
5-6-8: R4A Two-Family (Duplex) Residence District
5-6-9: R5 Single-Family Attached Residence District
5-6-10: R6 Multiple-Family Residence District
5-6-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations for residence districts are designed to conserve existing
residential areas and to regulate the efficient use and orderly development of
vacant land designated for residential uses. It is essential that areas be
designated and regulations imposed for the various kinds of residential
developments in order that the village and other governing bodies can plan
ahead for services, future schools, parks, streets and utilities. (Ord. 1996-
33, 12-10-1996)
5-6-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in the regulations of this title, the following
provisions shall apply to all residence districts: (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
   A.   Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   B.   Home Occupations: In all residence districts, any customary home
occupation shall be permitted, provided:
      1.   It is conducted entirely within the dwelling and only by members of
the family residing in the dwelling, and when such home occupation is
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling purpose.
      2.   It is not conducted from a detached or attached accessory building
or does not require internal or external alteration, or involve construction
features or use of equipment not customary in a dwelling, and the entrance to
the space devoted to such occupation shall be from within the dwelling and not
more than one-fourth (1/4) of the floor area of a story (including also a
cellar of the dwelling) shall be devoted to such home occupation.
      3.   There is no display or activity that will indicate from the interior
of a dwelling that is being used for any use other than a dwelling, except one
nameplate, no more than one square foot in area which contains only the name of
the occupant of the dwelling and the home occupation conducted therein and is
attached to the dwelling and not illuminated shall be permitted.
      4.   No mechanical equipment is used, except such as is customarily used
for purely domestic or household purposes.
      5.   Stock in trade, including that which is produced on the premises,
shall not require receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods or equipment by
other than United States letter carrier mail, similar parcel delivery service
or by private passenger automobile.
      6.   A home occupation conducted by a professional person shall be only
for consultation or performance of religious rites, but not for the general
practice of the professional.
   C.   Temporary Buildings: In all residence districts, temporary buildings
for construction purposes are for a period not to exceed such construction.
   D.   Accessory Uses: In all residence districts, accessory uses, buildings
or other structures customarily incidental to and commonly associated with a
principal or conditional use may be permitted provided that they are operated
and maintained under the same ownership and on the same lot as the permitted
use and do not involve the conduct of any business, trade or industry.
   E.   Off Street Parking And Loading: In all residence districts, off street
parking and loading is permitted in accordance with the regulations set forth
in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
5-6-3: R1 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Accessory poultry husbandry, subject to the requirements of subsection
5-3-7B of this title.
   Agriculture on a tract of land twenty (20) acres or more in area.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   Cemeteries on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area and provided no
building shall be located less than three hundred feet (300') from a lot line.
   Churches, temples, synagogues or other places of religious worship on a lot
not less than two (2) acres in area.
   Colleges, universities and accessory uses thereto, provided on a lot not
less than forty (40) acres in size.
   Community parks, recreational facilities, and amenities, when approved as
part of a planned unit development.
   Golf courses, public or private, but not including par 3 courses,
commercially operated driving ranges or miniature golf courses; and provided
that no clubhouse or accessory building shall be located less than two hundred
feet (200') from a property line.
   Hospitals.
   Planned unit developments.
   Public libraries on lots having areas, widths, yards and other conditions as
approved by the village board.
   Public utility and governmental service uses on lots having areas, widths,
yards and other conditions as approved by the village board, including, but not
limited to:
      Electrical substations and booster stations.
      Filtration plant, pumping station, well and water reservoir.
      Police and fire station.
      Sewage treatment plant.
      Telephone exchange and microwave relay tower.
      Other government and utility uses.
   Schools, public or private, elementary, junior high or high.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Area:
 
Single-family detached dwelling                 1 acre
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise specified 5 acres
 
      2.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Single-family detached dwelling                 150 feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise specified 300 feet
 
      3.   Minimum Lot Depth:
 
Single-family detached dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses             375 feet
 
      4.   Yards: Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in
accordance with the following regulations:
 
Front                    Not less than 50 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 25 feet
Corner side              Not less than 50 feet
Rear                     Not less than 50 feet
 
      5.   Building Height:
 
Single-family detached dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet,
                                whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses             Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever
                                is lower
 
      6.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25.
      7.   Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Exclusive Of Basement And/Or
Garage Area:
 
One-story dwelling              Not less than 1,500 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 2,200 total square feet
 
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-
2017; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022)
5-6-4: R1A SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Accessory poultry husbandry, subject to the requirements of subsection
5-3-7B of this title.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   As in the R1 district.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
      1.   Minimum lot area:
 
Single-family detached dwelling 12,500 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless     5 acres
otherwise specified
 
      2.   Minimum lot width:
 
Single-family detached dwelling 100 feet
Nonresidential uses             300 feet
 
      3.   Minimum lot depth:
 
Single-family detached dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses             375 feet
 
      4.   Yards:
 
Front                    Not less than 35 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet,
                         whichever is greater
Corner side              Not less than 25 feet
Rear                     Not less than 40 feet
 
      5.   Building height:
 
Single-family detached dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet,
                                whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses             Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever
                                is lower
 
      6.   Floor area ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25.
      7.   Minimum ground floor area per dwelling exclusive of basement and/or
garage area:
 
One-story dwelling              Not less than 1,700 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 2,400 total square feet
 
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-04, 1-24-2006; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-
2017; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022)
5-6-5: R2 SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Accessory poultry husbandry, subject to the requirements of subsection
5-3-7B of this title.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   Single-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   As in the R1 district.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
   1.   Minimum Lot Area:
 
Single-family detached dwelling       10,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      2.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Single-family detached dwelling 80 feet
Nonresidential uses             300 feet
 
      3.   Minimum Lot Depth:
 
Single-family detached dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses             375 feet
 
      4.   Yards:
 
Front                    Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet,
                         whichever is greater
Corner side              Not less than 20 feet
Rear                     Not less than 40 feet
 
      5.   Building Height:
 
Single-family detached dwelling Not more than 21/2 stories or 30 feet,
                                whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses             Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever
                                is lower
 
      6.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
      7.   Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Exclusive Of Basement And/Or
Garage Area:
 
One-story dwelling              Not less than 1,300 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 1,900 total square feet
 
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-04, 1-24-2006; Ord. 2017-09, 3-28-
2017; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022)
5-6-6: R3 SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED AND MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
There shall be no application for any zoning map amendment to the R3 zoning
district after December 10, 1996. No land annexed into the village after
December 10, 1996, shall be zoned for the R3 district.
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Any of the permitted uses in the R2 single-family residence district.
   Multiple-family dwellings, provided that the minimum gross area of the
development is one acre.
   Single-family attached dwellings.
   Single-family attached dwellings but not more than six (6) such dwellings in
addition to the two (2) single-family semidetached dwellings shall be contained
within a detached building.
   Two-family detached dwellings.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   Any of the conditional permitted uses permitted in the R2 single-family
residence district.
   Mobile home parks on a lot not less than ten (10) acres in area, and each
mobile home site shall have a minimum area of four thousand five hundred
(4,500) square feet and a width of not less than fifty feet (50'). The mobile
home park shall have front, side and rear yards having a depth or width of no
less than forty feet (40'), and containing no obstructions except trees and
shrubs. Municipal type sanitary sewerage, storm sewers and water systems; paved
service drives, off street parking of no less than one and one-half (1 1/2)
spaces for each mobile home; grading and landscaping; building containing
recreational, laundry and office facilities; and other improvements shall be
constructed in accordance with the development plans and specifications
approved by the planning and zoning commission.
   Tourist homes not having more than five (5) rooms for transient guests, on a
lot not less than one acre in area.
   C.   Lot Area Per Dwelling:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling, not less than nine thousand six
hundred (9,600) square feet.
      2.   Single-family semidetached dwelling, (duplex building), not less
than five thousand five hundred (5,500) square feet per dwelling unit.
      3.   Single-family semidetached dwelling having a party wall common with
a single-family attached dwelling, single-family attached dwelling and
multiple-family dwelling as follows:
 
                     Minimum Lot Area
                     Per Dwelling Unit
Type Of Dwelling Unit In Square Feet
4 bedroom and over    4,500
3 bedroom             3,500
2 bedroom             2,500
1 bedroom             2,000
 
      4.   Two-family detached dwellings, not less than eleven thousand
(11,000) square feet.
      5.   Nonresidential uses, not less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square
feet unless otherwise specified.
      6.   All residential uses permitted in this district shall be served by
public or community water and sanitary sewer systems.
   D.   Lot Width:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling, not less than eighty feet (80').
      2.   Two-family detached dwelling, not less than eighty feet (80').
      3.   Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex building), not less than
seventy feet (70') and not less than thirty five feet (35') for each dwelling.
      4.   Two (2) single-family semidetached dwellings and one single-family
attached dwelling (row house building), not less than eighty eight feet (88'),
plus not less than twenty feet (20') of additional lot width for each
additional single- family attached dwelling in a building.
      5.    Multiple-family dwelling, not less than one hundred feet (100').
   E.   Floor Area Ratio:
      1.   Single-family detached dwelling, not applicable.
      2.   Multiple-family dwelling and nonresidential uses:
         a.   For one-story structures, not more than 0.3; and
         b.   For structures having two (2) stories or more, not more than 0.5.
   F.   Building Height:
      1.   Single-family detached, attached and semidetached dwellings and
permitted nonresidential buildings and structures, as in the R1 district.
      2.   Two-family detached dwellings shall not exceed a height of two (2)
stories or thirty feet (30'), whichever is lower.
      3.   All other dwelling types, not more than two (2) stories or thirty
feet (30'), whichever is lower.
   G.   Ground Floor Area Per Single-Family Dwelling: As in the R2 district.
   H.   Yards: Except as may be herein otherwise required, yards shall be in
accordance with the following regulations:
      1.   For Single-Family Detached Dwellings:
         a.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that
in any block in the village which is developed with buildings erected prior to
the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the building setback
shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not
less than ten percent (10%) of the lot width except where a side yard adjoins a
street, the minimum width shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25').
      2.   For Two-Family Detached Dwellings:
         a.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that
in any block in the village which is developed with buildings erected prior to
the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the building setback
shall conform to the adjacent setbacks and shall not be required to be set back
twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Side Yards: A side yard on each side of the zoning lot of not
less than ten percent (10%) of the lot, except where a side yard adjoins a
street, the minimum width shall be not less than twenty five feet (25').
         c.   Rear Yard: Not less than thirty feet (30').
      3.   For Multiple-Family Dwellings:
         a.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that
in any block in the village which is developed with buildings erected prior to
the adoption of these regulations having front yard, the building setback shall
conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be set
back twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Side Yards: Two (2) side yards each not less than twelve feet
(12') in depth, except a side yard adjoining a street shall not be less than
twenty five feet (25') in depth and for structures more than thirty feet (30')
in length, measured perpendicular to the front lot line, an interior side yard
shall be increased in depth by one-half foot (1/2') for each foot the building
exceeds thirty feet (30') in length.
         c.   Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
      4.   For Single-Family Semidetached Dwellings:
         a.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that
in any block in the village which is developed with buildings erected prior to
the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the building setback
shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Side Yards: One yard but not less than ten feet (10') in width,
except a side yard adjoining a street shall not be less than twenty five feet
(25').
         c.   Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
      5.   For Single-Family Attached Dwellings;
         a.   Front Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25'); provided, that
in any block in the village which is developed with buildings erected prior to
the adoption of these regulations having front yards, the building setback
shall conform to the adjacent building setbacks and shall not be required to be
set back twenty five feet (25').
         b.   Side Yards: Not applicable.
         c.   Rear Yards: Not less than forty feet (40').
   I.   Spacing Between Structures: When two (2) or more structures which
contain single-family detached dwellings, single-family attached dwellings,
single-family semi-detached dwellings or two (2) or more multiple-family
dwelling structures, or combinations thereof are on a lot or on contiguous lots
comprising a unified development under the same ownership or control, the
distance between the structure walls shall be as follows:
      1.   When the front wall of a structure faces the front wall or rear wall
of the nearest structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls
shall be not less than sixty feet (60').
      2.   When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less
than fifty feet (50').
      3.   When the side wall of a structure faces the front or rear wall of
the nearest structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall
be not less than forty feet (40'), except when the side wall contains more than
two (2) windows on a floor that are not from bathrooms or storage rooms, such
distance between structures shall be not less than fifty feet (50'), or sixty
feet (60') if a main entrance doorway is in such side wall.
      4.   When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the nearest
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less
than twenty feet (20'), except when facing side walls of either of such
structures contain more than two (2) windows on a floor that are not from
bathrooms or storage rooms, such distance between the two (2) structures shall
be not less than fifty feet (50'), or sixty feet (60') if a main entrance
doorway is in such side wall.
      5.   A wall of a structure forming the end of a court shall be not less
than ten feet (10') from the nearest wall of a structure forming the sides of
the court, and a structure forming the end of the court may be attached to one
or both of the structures forming the sides of the court, providing the
distance between facing walls of the structures forming the sides of the court
is not less than the applicable requirements as set forth above.
      6.   Where structures are not parallel to each other the required spacing
shall be measured at the midpoint of the distance along which they face each
other, however, the spacing between the structures at the narrowest point shall
in no event be less than one-half (1/2) the required distance. (Ord. 1996-33,
12-10-1996)
5-6-7: R4 TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
There shall be no application for any zoning map amendment to the R4 zoning
district after August 26, 2003. No land annexed into the village after August
26, 2003, shall be zoned for the R4 district. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
      Two-family dwelling.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
      As in the R1 district.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Area:
 
Two-family dwelling                   12,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      2.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Two-family dwelling 80 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
 
      3.   Yards:
 
Front       Not less than 30 feet
Side        Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever is
            greater
Corner side Not less than 20 feet
Rear        Not less than 30 feet
 
      4.   Building Height:
 
Two-family dwelling Not more than 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
 
      5.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25.
      6.   Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement
And/Or Garage Area: Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet for one-
story dwellings and not less than seven hundred twenty (720) square feet for
dwellings greater than one-story. (Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996; amd. Ord. 2003-34,
8-26-2003; Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022)
5-6-8: R4A TWO-FAMILY (DUPLEX) RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
      Two-family dwellings.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
      As in the R1 district.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Lot Area:
 
Two-family dwelling                   15,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      2.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Two-family dwelling 120 feet
Nonresidential uses 300 feet
 
      3.   Minimum Lot Depth:
 
Two-family dwelling 125 feet
Nonresidential uses 375 feet
 
      4.   Yards:
 
Front                    Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 12 feet,
                         whichever is greater
Corner side              Not less than 20 feet
Rear                     Not less than 40 feet
 
      5.   Building Height:
 
Two-family dwelling Not more than 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is lower
Nonresidential uses Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
 
      6.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25. (Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003)
      7.   Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement
And/Or Garage Area:
 
One-story dwelling              Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story dwelling Not less than 1,500 total square feet
 
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-
2022)
5-6-9: R5 SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted independently or
collectively in the R5 district provided that they are planned so as to create
a cohesive and unified development. All R5 residential developments must be
planned unit developments planned and approved in conformance with title 6,
chapter 7 of this code:
   Single-family attached dwellings.
   Single-family detached dwellings.
   Two-family dwellings.
   The following uses are permitted in the R5 district as part of a planned
unit development or may, if they are the sole use of the property, be permitted
without need of a planned unit development:
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   As in the R1 district.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Total Lot Area:
 
Single-family detached                10,000 square feet
Two-family                            15,000 square feet
Single-family attached                20,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      2.   Minimum Gross Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
 
Single-family detached                10,000 square feet
Two-family                            7,500 square feet
Single-family attached                7,250 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      3.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Single-family detached 80 feet
Two-family             120 feet
Single-family attached 120 feet
Nonresidential uses    300 feet
 
      4.   Yards:
Single-family detached dwelling:
Front                            Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots         Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or
                                 10 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side                      Not less than 20 feet
Rear                             Not less than 40 feet
Two-family dwelling:
Front                            Not less than 30 feet
Side, except corner lots         Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or
                                 12 feet, whichever is greater
Corner side                      Not less than 20 feet
Rear                             Not less than 40 feet
Single-family attached dwelling:
Front                            Not less than 25 feet
Side, except corner lots         Not less than 15 feet
Corner side                      Not less than 20 feet
Rear                             Not less than 30 feet
 
      5.   Building Height:
 
Residential dwellings Not more than 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet, whichever is
                      lower
Nonresidential uses   Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lower
 
      6.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25.
      7.   Number Of Dwelling Units Per Structure: There shall be no more than
six (6) dwelling units attached in a single-family attached structure.
      8.   Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement
And/Or Garage Area:
Single-family detached dwelling:
One-story                        Not less than 1,200 total square feet
Greater than one-story           Not less than 1,800 total square feet
Two-family dwelling:
One-story                        Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story           Not less than 1,500 total square feet
Single-family attached dwelling: Not less than 900 total square feet
 
(Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003; amd. Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-
2022)
5-6-10: R6 MULTIPLE-FAMILY RESIDENCE DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses: The following uses are permitted independently or
collectively in the R6 district provided that they are planned so as to create
a cohesive and unified development. All R6 residential developments must be
planned unit developments planned and approved in conformance with title 6,
chapter 7 of this code:
   Multiple-family dwellings.
   Single-family attached dwellings.
   Single-family detached dwellings.
   Two-family dwellings.
   The following uses are permitted in the R6 district as part of a planned
unit development or may, if they are the sole use of the property, be permitted
without need of a planned unit development:
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   As in the R1 district.
   C.   Site And Structure Requirements:
      1.   Minimum Total Lot Area:
 
Single-family detached                9,600 square feet
Two-family                            12,000 square feet
Single-family attached                20,000 square feet
Multiple-family                       30,000 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      2.   Minimum Gross Lot Area Per Dwelling Unit:
 
Single-family detached                9,600 square feet
Two-family dwelling                   6,000 square feet
Single-family attached                7,250 square feet
Multiple-family                       3,750 square feet
Nonresidential uses, unless otherwise 5 acres
specified
 
      3.   Minimum Lot Width:
 
Single-family detached 80 feet
Two-family             80 feet
Single-family attached 120 feet
Multiple-family        120 feet
Nonresidential uses    300 feet
 
      4.   Yards:
Single-family:
Front          Not less than 30 feet
Side           Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever
               is greater
Corner side    Not less than 20 feet
Rear           Not less than 30 feet
Two-family:
Front          Not less than 30 feet
Side           Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever
               is greater
Corner side    Not less than 20 feet
Rear           Not less than 30 feet
Attached single-family:
Front          Not less than 30 feet
Side           Not less than 10 percent of the lot width or 10 feet, whichever
               is greater
Corner side    Not less than 20 feet
Rear           Not less than 30 feet
Multiple-family:
Front          Not less than 30 feet
Side           Not less than 15 feet
Corner side    Not less than 30 feet
Rear           Not less than 30 feet
 
      5.   Building Height:
 
Single-family attached or detached, Not more than 2 1/2 stories or 30 feet,
two-family dwellings                whichever is lower
Multiple-family dwellings           Not more than 2 stories
Nonresidential uses                 Not more than 3 stories or 35 feet,
                                    whichever is lower
 
      6.   Floor Area Ratio: Not applicable to residential, but all others not
more than 0.25.
      7.   Number Of Dwelling Units Per Structure: There shall be no more than
six (6) dwelling units attached in a single-family attached structure and no
more than eight (8) units in a multiple-family structure.
      8.   Minimum Ground Floor Area Per Dwelling Unit Exclusive Of Basement
And/Or Garage Area:
Single-family detached dwelling:
One-story                        Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story           Not less than 1,800 total square feet
Two-family dwelling:
One-story                        Not less than 1,000 total square feet
Greater than one-story           Not less than 1,440 total square feet
Single-family attached dwelling: Not less than 900 total square feet
Multiple-family dwelling:        Not applicable
 
      9.   Spacing Between Buildings: When two (2) or more structures which
contain attached single-family or multiple-family dwellings, or combinations
thereof, are on a lot or on contiguous lots comprising a unified development
under the same ownership or control, the distance between the exterior
structure walls shall be as follows:
         a.   When the front wall of a structure faces any wall of another
structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall be not less
than sixty feet (60').
         b.   When the rear wall of a structure faces the rear wall of the
nearest structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not
be less than fifty feet (50').
         c.   When the side wall of a structure faces the side wall of the
nearest structure, the distance between the two (2) structure walls shall not
be less than twenty feet (20').
         d.   Where structures are not parallel to each other, the required
spacing shall be measured at the midpoint of the distance along which they face
each other; however, the spacing between the structures at the narrowest point
shall in no event be less than one-half (1/2) the required distance. (Ord.
1996-33, 12-10-1996; amd. Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997; Ord. 2003-34, 8-26-2003;
Ord. 2003-41, 10-28-2003; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022)
CHAPTER 7
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-7-1 Preamble
5-7-2 General Provisions
5-7-3: B1 Business District
5-7-4: B2 Commercial District
5-7-1: PREAMBLE:
Business district regulations are intended to govern the locations and uses of
a full range of business and commercial establishments needed to serve the
citizens of the village and its trade area. The regulations of the various
business districts are designed to provide for groupings of business and
commercial establishments that are compatible in scope of services and method
of operations. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-7-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
Unless otherwise provided in the regulations of this title, the following
provisions shall apply to all business districts:
   A.   Dwelling Units: Dwelling units and lodging rooms are not permitted on
the ground floor level in any business district except in a permitted hotel,
motel or as a nonconforming use existing on the effective date hereof. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
   B.   Enclosure Of Operations: All business servicing or processing shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings except:
      1.   Off street parking or off street loading;
      2.   Drive-in type of operations when conducted as a conditional
permitted use in the B2 commercial district;
      3.   Open sales and rental lots when operated as a use in the B2
commercial district; and
      4.   Truck and boat storage, building material storage, and landscaping
materials such as landscaping rocks and bulk wood chips for sale at
greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries, when operated as a use in the B2
commercial district. Provided, that the area for storage shall be completely
surrounded by a uniformly painted solid fence or wall not over eight feet (8')
in height and no storage shall project higher than the height of the fence or
wall. (Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006)
   C.   Performance Standards: All activities shall conform with the
performance standards established for the M1 manufacturing district; provided,
that performance standards shall in every case be applied at the boundaries of
the lot on which any such activities take place.
   D.   Parking Limitations: Parking of trucks when accessory to the conduct of
a permitted use shall be limited to vehicles having not over one and one-half
(11/2) tons' capacity, except for pick up or delivery services during normal
business hours.
   E.   Scope Of Operations: All business establishments shall be retail trade
or service establishments dealing directly with consumers, and all goods
produced on the premises shall be sold on the premises where produced except
for specific uses in the B2 commercial district where wholesale sales or
processing and fabricating are permitted. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-7-3: B1 BUSINESS DISTRICT:
The B1 business district regulations are designed to accommodate prime retail
trade activities of the village and environs significant thereto as designated
by the official zoning map. Regulations provide for a wide variety of related
shopper type business establishments along with personal service and other
complementary uses.
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Art and school supply stores.
   Art galleries and antique shops.
   Automobile accessory stores.
   Bakeries.
   Banks and financial institutions.
   Barbershops and beauty parlors.
   Book; stationery; and office supply stores.
   Business machine sales and service.
   Camera and photographic supply stores.
   Candy and ice cream stores.
   Catalog sales stores and mail order service stores.
   Catering establishments.
   China and glassware stores.
   Clothing stores.
   Clubs or lodges, when located above the ground floor.
   Coin and philatelic stores.
   Currency exchange.
   Department stores.
   Drugstores.
   Dry cleaning and laundry receiving stations, including self-service coin
operated equipment.
   Dry goods stores.
   Flower and gift shops.
   Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions, when located above
the ground floor.
   Frozen food stores, including locker rental in conjunction therewith.
   Furniture stores, including upholstering when conducted as part of the
retail operations and secondary to the principal use.
   Furrier shops, including the incidental storage and conditioning of furs.
   Garden supply store with no outdoor storage or display of merchandise.
   Grocery stores, supermarkets, meat and fish markets and delicatessens.
   Hardware stores, retail and wholesale.
   Hobby shops.
   Household appliance stores, including radio and television sales with
incidental repair facilities.
   Interior decorating shops, including upholstery and making of draperies,
slipcovers and other similar articles when conducted as part of the retail
operations and secondary to the principal use.
   Jewelry stores.
   Laboratories, medical, dental or optical, when located above the first story
or as accessory to a principal use occupying the first story.
   Leather goods and luggage stores.
   Libraries, public and private.
   Liquor stores, package.
   Loan offices.
   Locksmith shops.
   Magazine and news stores.
   Medical and dental clinics.
   Millinery shops.
   Music stores - phonographs, phonograph records, sheet music, musical
instrument sales and repair.
   Newspaper offices, including printing.
   Newsstands.
   Offices, professional or business.
   Paint and wallpaper stores.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when publicly owned and
operated.
   Pawnshops.
   Pet service, domestic (no overnight boarding).
   Photography studios, including developing and printing of photographs when
conducted on the premises as part of the retail business.
   Picture framing.
   Post offices.
   Radio and television broadcasting studios.
   Restaurants, including entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic
beverages.
   Shoe and hat repair stores.
   Shoe stores.
   Sporting goods stores.
   Tailor shops.
   Taverns.
   Telephone booths, outdoor.
   Theaters.
   Tobacco shops.
   Toy stores.
   Travel bureaus and ticket offices.
   Undertaking establishments and funeral parlors.
   Vending machines.
   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses,
including, but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and
business signs as herein regulated and dwelling units or lodging rooms when
above the first story.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses 1 :
   Other uses similar to permitted uses in this district.
   Animal hospitals, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in area.
   Automobile sales establishments for only authorized new passenger automobile
sales agencies and accessory open sales lots and public garages (automobile
maintenance), provided vehicular access to open sales lots and public garages
(automobile maintenance) is from an alley or service drive at the rear lot
line.
   Automobile service stations, on a lot not less than ten thousand (10,000)
square feet in area.
   Bakeries, including sale of bakery products to restaurants, clubs, hotels,
institutions and similar establishments.
   Battery and tire sales and service establishments.
   Catering establishments, when located above the ground floor or not less
than fifty feet (50') from the front lot line on the ground floor.
   Commercial Solar Farm (Roof Mounted Only), subject to all rules and
regulations of Chapter 15 (Commercial Solar Farms) of this Title.
   Daycare center.
   Drive-in establishments, except theaters.
   Drive-through facilities.
   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, provided that not more than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area shall be devoted to dry
cleaning, pressing or laundering processes other than self-service coin
operated facilities.
   Laboratories, medical, dental, optical.
   Medical cannabis cultivation center, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis
cultivation center operates in strict conformance with the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.1, as amended and
the regulations promulgated thereunder; and 2) the medical cannabis cultivation
center is not located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility; public park; church or other place of worship; or an area
zoned for residential use or designated for residential use on the Village's
comprehensive plan.
   Medical cannabis dispensing organization, provided that: 1) each medical
cannabis dispensing organization operates in strict conformance with the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act2. 410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.2, as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 2) the medical
cannabis dispensing organization is not located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or
elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare
home, part day childcare facility; public park; or church or other place of
worship; and 3) drive-throughs are prohibited.
   Meeting halls.
   Nursery school.
   Parking lots or structures, commercial or governmental.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when privately owned and
operated.
   Pet service, domestic and overnight boarding services.
   Pet shops.
   Plumbing, electrical or heating, fixture and equipment - sales, service and
repair establishments.
   Printing, publishing or lithography establishments, maximum gross floor area
of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   Public Garages (Automobile Maintenance).
   Restricted production and repair, limited to the following: needlework;
clothing, such as custom manufacturing and alterations; jewelry from precious
metals; watches, dentures and optical lenses.
   Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dancing,
business, commercial or technical subjects when operations do not involve
danger of fire and explosion, and objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odor, glare, heat or other similar influences.
   Self-service car washes, coin operated, on a lot not less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet in area.
   Storage garages (automobile), storage or off street parking lots or
structures, commercial or governmental.
   Video gaming cafes.
   C.   Lot Area: Minimum lot area shall be in accordance with bulk and off
street parking and loading requirements of the district and as specifically
required for a conditional permitted use.
   D.   Yards:
      1.   Front yard: No yard requirements.
      2.   Side yards: No yard requirements, except if a yard is provided, it
shall not be less than five feet (5') in width, except where the side lot line
adjoins a residence district a side yard not less than ten feet (10') in width
shall be provided, and be maintained as a landscaped area.
      3.   Rear yard: No yard requirement, except where the rear lot line
adjoins a residence district, a rear yard not less than twenty five feet (25')
in depth shall be provided, and be maintained as a landscaped area.
   E.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.0.
   F.   Building Height: No height limitations.
   G.   Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this
title. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   H.   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title.  (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
1986-8, 7-14-1986; Ord. 1988-20, 12-12-1988; Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; Ord. 2005-
41, 9-13-2005; Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2009-19, 5-12-2009; Ord. 2014-12,
5-27-2014; Ord. 2018-26, 8-28-2018; Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 4-
23-2024; Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
 
Notes
1 1. See section
  5-11-9 of this title.
5-7-4: B2 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT:
The B2 Commercial District classification is established to accommodate a wide
range of specialized commercial uses including highway oriented service and
commercial types of establishments to serve the needs of the motorists. In
addition, those shopper and personal service types of business establishments
permitted in the B1 District are also permitted uses in the B2 Commercial
District. The B2 Commercial Districts may be located adjacent to the B1
Business Districts to form a complete business center, or may be commercial
areas consisting entirely of specialized commercial activities.
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Uses permitted in the B1 District.
   Amusement establishments - bowling alleys, billiard parlors, gymnasiums,
swimming pools and clubs and recreation centers containing one or more of the
above uses and other recreation uses as approved by the Board of Trustees.
   Auction rooms.
   Automobile and truck sales establishments.
   Automobile service stations.
   Bakeries, including sale of bakery products to restaurants, clubs, hotels,
institutions and similar establishments.
   Battery and tire sales and service establishments.
   Boat sales, rentals, storage and repair including sales and service of
marine motors, boat parts and accessories and boat fuels.
   Building material sales with outdoor storage.
   Catering establishments.
   Clubs or lodges, private, fraternal or religious.
   Contractors' offices and shops.
   Drive-in establishments, except theaters.
   Dry cleaning and laundry establishments, provided that not more than two
thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of floor area shall be devoted to dry
cleaning, pressing or laundering processes other than self-service coin
operated facilities.
   Feed fertilizer and seed stores.
   Fraternal, philanthropic and eleemosynary institutions.
   Frozen food lockers.
   Fruit and vegetable stands.
   Fuel and ice retail sales establishments with no outside storage and liquid
fuels are stored in underground tanks.
   Greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries, retail and wholesale sales.
   Highway maintenance shops and yards.
   Laboratories, medical, dental, optical.
   Linen, towel or diaper service establishments.
   Live bait stores.
   Machine, sheet metal or welding shops; provided, a building for such a use
shall contain not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet of floor area,
and operations are within the enclosed building, and glare from welding
operations is not visible from outside the building.
   Machinery and equipment sales establishments, construction and agriculture.
   Mail order houses, order and service centers.
   Meat markets, including sale of meats to restaurants, clubs, hotels,
institutions and similar establishments.
   Medical and dental clinics.
   Meeting halls, convention or exhibition halls.
   Mobile homes and trailer sales establishments.
   Model homes or garage display and sales.
   Monument sales.
   Motels and hotels.
   Newspaper distribution agencies, for home delivery and retail trade.
   Newspaper offices, including printing.
   Open sales lots.
   Packing and crating establishments.
   Parcel delivery stations.
   Pet service, domestic (no overnight boarding).
   Pet shops.
   Plumbing, electrical or heating, fixture and equipment - sales, service and
repair establishments.
   Printing, publishing or lithography establishments, maximum gross floor area
of six thousand (6,000) square feet.
   Public garages (automobile maintenance), including painting, body and fender
work and motor rebuilding.
   Public utility and governmental service uses.
   Radio and television stations and towers, transmitting and receiving.
   Religious institutions - churches, chapels, temples and synagogues,
convents, monasteries and theological schools.
   Research laboratories.
   Restaurants, including entertainment, dancing and serving of alcoholic
beverages.
   Schools, commercial or trade, including those teaching music, dancing,
business, commercial or technical subjects when operations do not involve
danger of fire and explosion, and objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust,
odor, glare, heat or other similar influences.
   Self-service stores, coin operated vending machines.
   Taverns.
   Taxidermists.
   Temporary buildings for construction purposes for a period not to exceed the
duration of construction.
   Training centers, engineering or sales.
   Wholesale and warehouse establishments, except for the sales or storage of
flammable liquids, materials or gases, except those that are in the original
sealed containers.
   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above permitted uses including,
but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and signs as herein
regulated and dwelling units or lodging rooms customarily accessory to
religious institutional uses and clubs and lodges.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses1. See section
5-11-9 of this title.1:
   Other uses similar to the above permitted uses.
   Amusement establishments, outdoor - par 3, miniature or pitch and putt golf
courses, golf driving ranges and similar recreation facilities, on a lot not
less than one acre in area.
   Animal hospitals, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in area.
   Athletic fields, stadiums, arenas or recreation buildings.
   Automobile laundries, on a lot not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet in area.
   Cartage, express and parcel delivery establishments, not including motor
freight terminals, on a lot not less than one acre in area.
   Daycare center.
   Drive-through facilities.
   Medical cannabis cultivation center, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis
cultivation center operates in strict conformance with the Compassionate Use of
Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.1 , as amended and
the regulations promulgated thereunder; and 2) the medical cannabis cultivation
center is not located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility; public park; church or other place of worship; or an area
zoned for residential use or designated for residential use on the Village's
comprehensive plan.
   Medical cannabis dispensing organization, provided that: 1) each medical
cannabis dispensing organization operates in strict conformance with the
Compassionate Use of Medical Cannabis Pilot Program Act 2. 410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.2 , as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 2) the medical
cannabis dispensing organization is not located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or
elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare
home, part day childcare facility; public park; or church or other place of
worship; and 3) drive-throughs are prohibited.
   Nursery school.
   Parks, forest preserves and recreational areas, when privately owned and
operated.
   Pet service, domestic and overnight boarding services.
   Radio and television towers, receiving or transmitting.
   Railroad rights-of-way.
   Rebound tumbling (trampoline) centers and go-kart tracks.
   Single-family dwellings when designed as an integral part of a building, the
principal use of which is a permitted or conditional permitted use, and when
occupied by the proprietor of such use.
   Theaters, outdoor, provided that vehicular entrance and exit driveways
intersect with a secondary or primary thoroughfare and traffic signal lights or
other means of traffic control are provided. Reservoir parking spaces for
temporary parking of automobiles of patrons awaiting entrance shall be provided
on the lot, in the amount of not less than the number of parking spaces
equivalent to ten percent (10%) of the vehicular capacity of the theater. No
building or structure shall be located nearer than one hundred feet (100') from
a residence district boundary line. Artificial illumination shall be arranged
in such a manner that direct rays of light shall not beam upon adjoining
properties and streets.
   Video gaming cafes.
   Accessory uses customarily incidental to the above conditional permitted
uses including, but not limited to, off street parking, off street loading and
signs as herein regulated.
   C.   Lot Area And Lot Width: Except as may herein otherwise be required for
a specific permitted or conditional permitted use, not less than fifteen
thousand (15,000) square feet in area and one hundred feet (100') in width.
   D.   Yards: No yards are required unless the lot abuts a residential
district, and then the following shall apply:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
      2.   Side Yard: Two (2) side yards, neither of which is less than ten
feet (10') in width, except: a) a side yard adjoining or across the alley from
a residence district shall be not less than twenty feet (20') in width; and b)
a side yard adjoining a street shall be not less than forty feet (40') in
depth.
      3.   Rear Yard: Not less than forty feet (40').
   E.   Floor Area Ratio: Not to exceed 1.0.
   F.   Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this
title.
   G.   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title.  (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1997
Code; Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; Ord. 2005-41, 9-13-2005; Ord. 2006-02, 1-10-2006;
Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006; Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2018-26, 8-28-2018;
Ord. 2022-47, 12-20-2022; Ord. 2024-18, 4-23-2024; Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 8
MANUFACTURING DISTRICTS
SECTION:
5-8-1 Preamble
5-8-2 General Provisions
5-8-3: M1 Manufacturing District
5-8-4: M2 Manufacturing District
5-8-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations for manufacturing districts are designed to provide for the
establishment of a full range of industrial and allied activities and to govern
their operations in a manner that will not have a deleterious effect on
agricultural, residential and business areas. It is essential that there are
adequate provisions for the expansion of industry, both those existing today
and for attracting a diversification of new industry. Adequate industrial sites
and industrial expansion will create growth and development of the village's
economic and tax base and provide a variety of employment for its labor force.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-8-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Prohibited Uses: No activities involving the manufacture of materials
or products which decompose by detonation shall be permitted in the M1 and M2
districts. Such materials shall include, but shall not be limited to, all
primary explosives such as lead azide, lead styphnate, fulminates and
tetracene; all high explosives such as TNT, RDX, HMX, PETN and picric acid;
propellants and components thereof such as nitrocellulose, black powder, boron
hydrides, hydrazine and its derivatives; pyrotechnics and fireworks such as
magnesium powder, potassium chlorate and potassium nitrate; blasting explosives
such as dynamite and nitroglycerin; unstable organic compounds such as
acetylides, tetrazoles and ozonides; strong oxidizing agents such as liquid
oxygen, perchloric acid, perchlorates, chlorates and hydrogen peroxide in
concentrations greater than thirty five percent (35%); and nuclear fuels,
fissionable materials and products, and reactor elements such as uranium 235
and plutonium 239. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   B.   Operations Within Enclosed Buildings, Outdoor Storage And Screening:
      1.   M1 Manufacturing District: All activities involving the
manufacturing, fabricating, processing, assembling, disassembling, repairing,
cleaning, servicing and testing of materials, products and goods shall be
conducted within completely enclosed buildings. Truck and boat storage, fuel
and ice storage, the overnight parking of commercial vehicles, building
material storage, and landscaping materials such as landscaping rocks and bulk
wood chips for sale at greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries, when operated
as a use in the M1 manufacturing district, shall be screened as provided in
subsection B3 of this section.
      2.   M2 Manufacturing District: Within five hundred feet (500') of any
residence district, all activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning, servicing and
testing of materials, products and goods shall be within completely enclosed
buildings, or if outdoors, effectively screened as provided in subsection B3 of
this section. Truck and boat storage, fuel and ice storage, the overnight
parking of commercial vehicles, the dock areas of all air, rail or motor truck
freight terminals, cartage facilities, railroad switching and classification
yards, repair shops and roundhouses, building material storage, and landscaping
materials such as landscaping rocks and bulk wood chips for sale at
greenhouses, garden centers and nurseries, when operated as a use in the M2
manufacturing district, shall be screened as provided in subsection B3 of this
section.
      3.   Screening: The area for permitted overnight outdoor storage and
permitted outdoor activities, in the M1 manufacturing district as provided in
subsection B1 of this section and in the M2 manufacturing district as provided
in subsection B2 of this section, shall be screened by either or both of the
following methods:
         a.   A wall extending from and immediately adjacent to the primary
building of sufficient height and width sufficient to screen by an opacity of
one hundred percent (100%) constructed:
            (1)   Of the same material of the exterior building facade facing
the public street if the exterior building facade is constructed of masonry or
tilt-up concrete panels; or
            (2)   Of masonry or tilt-up concrete panels if the exterior
building facade is not constructed of masonry or tilt-up concrete panels.
         b.   A height not less than eight feet (8') and an opacity of not less
than seventy five percent (75%) using any one or a combination of the following
methods:
            (1)   Trees having a combination of sixty percent (60%) evergreen
and overstory trees with fences having structural components though which only
twenty five percent (25%) of the storage area is visible on a year round basis;
            (2)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed to a height
where only twenty five percent (25%) of the storage area is visible; or
            (3)   Fences, berms and/or landscaping can be installed having a
width or design where only twenty five percent (25%) of the remaining
horizontal storage area is visible. (Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-2006)
   C.   Performance Standards: Any use established in the manufacturing
districts after the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply
with the performance standards governing:
      1.   Noise
      2.   Vibration
      3.   Smoke and particulate matter
      4.   Toxic matter
      5.   Odorous matter
      6.   Fire and explosive hazards
      7.   Glare
      8.   Radiation hazards
   as set forth hereinafter for the district in which such use shall be
located.
   Uses already established on the effective date hereof shall be permitted to
be altered, enlarged, expanded or modified, provided that the additions or
changes comply with said performance standards. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      1.   Noise: The definitions and measurement procedures of 35 Illinois
administrative code, titled "environmental protection", subtitle H, titled
"noise", chapter 1, titled "pollution control board", parts 900, titled
"general provisions", 901, titled "sound emission standards and limitations for
property line noise sources", and 910, titled "measurement procedures for the
enforcement of 35 Illinois administrative code 900 and 901" are adopted in full
and incorporated, and as such may be subsequently amended, and such provisions
will be incorporated in this section in their entirety. (Ord. 2013-30, 11-26-
2013)
      2.   Vibration: In all manufacturing districts, no activity or operation
shall cause or create earthborn vibrations in excess of the displacement values
given below.
   Measurements shall be made at or beyond the adjacent lot line or the nearest
residence district boundary line, as described below. Vibration displacements
shall be measured with an instrument or complement of instruments capable of
simultaneously measuring in three (3) mutually perpendicular directions. The
maximum vector resultant shall be less than the vibration displacement
permitted.
   The maximum permitted displacements shall be determined in each district by
the following formula:
   D =    K
        f
 
where D = Displacement in inches.
      K = A constant to be determined by reference to the tables below.
      f = The frequency of the vibration transmitted through the ground, cycles
      per second.
 
         a.   M1 Manufacturing District: The maximum earth displacement
permitted at the points described in the following table shall be determined by
use of the formula in this subsection C2 and the appropriate K constant shown
in table 1 of this section.
   TABLE 1
   VALUES OF K TO BE USED IN VIBRATION FORMULA
Location                              K
In any neighboring lot:
Continuous                            0.008
Impulsive                             0.015
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period 0.037
In any residence district:
Continuous                            0.003
Impulsive                             0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24 hour period 0.015
 
         b.   M2 Manufacturing District: The maximum earth displacement
permitted at the points described below shall be determined by use of the
formula in subsection C2 and the appropriate K constant shown in Table 2.
   Table 2
   Values of K to be Used in Vibration Formula
Location                              K
In any neighboring lot
Continuous                            0.030
Impulsive                             0.060
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.150
In any residence district
Continuous                            0.003
Impulsive                             0.006
Less than 8 pulses per 24-hour period 0.015
 
      3.   Smoke And Particulate Matter: The emission of smoke or particulate
matter in such manner or quantity as to endanger or be detrimental to the
public health, safety, comfort or welfare is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance and shall not be permitted in the manufacturing districts.
   For the purpose of grading the density or equivalent opacity of smoke, the
Ringelmann Chart described in the U.S. Bureau of Mines Information Circular
6888 shall be employed. The emission of smoke or particulate matter of a
density or equivalent opacity greater than No. 2 on the Ringelmann Chart is
prohibited at all times except as otherwise provided hereinafter.
   Dust and other types of air pollution borne by the wind from such sources as
storage areas, yards, roads and the like within lot boundaries shall be kept to
a minimum by appropriate landscaping, paving, oiling, fencing, wetting or other
acceptable means.
   The open burning of refuse, paint, oil, debris and any other combustible
material is prohibited in all manufacturing districts.
   No operation shall cause or allow to be emitted into the open air from any
process or control equipment or to pass any convenient measuring point in a
breaching or stack, particulate matter in the gases that exceeds six-tenths
(0.60) pounds per thousand pounds of gases during any one hour.
   Particulate matter loadings in pounds per acre described below shall be
determined by selecting a continuous four (4) hour period which will result in
the highest average emission rate.
         a.   M1 Manufacturing District: The emission of smoke having a density
or equivalent opacity in excess of Ringelmann No. 1 is prohibited. However, for
two (2) minutes in any four (4) hour period, smoke up to and including
Ringelmann No. 2 shall be permitted.
   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all vents and stacks within
the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed five-tenths (0.5) of a pound per
acre of lot area per hour.
         b.   M2 Manufacturing District: The emission of smoke having a density
or equivalent opacity in excess of Ringelmann No. 2 is prohibited. However, for
two (2) minutes in any four (4) hour period, smoke up to and including
Ringelmann No. 3 shall be permitted.
   The rate of emission of particulate matter from all stacks and vents within
the boundaries of any lot shall not exceed three (3) pounds per acre of lot
area per hour.
      4.   Toxic Matter:
      M1 And M2 Manufacturing Districts: The release of airborne toxic matter
(including radioactive matter) shall not exceed one-thirtieth (1/30) of the
maximum permissible concentration allowed an industrial worker when measured by
any point beyond the lot line, either at ground level or habitable elevation,
whichever is more restrictive. Concentrations shall be measured and calculated
as the highest average that will occur over a continuous twenty four (24) hour
period.
   If a toxic substance is not contained in the most recent listing of
threshold limit values published by the American Conference of Governmental
Industrial Hygienists, the applicant shall satisfy the Grundy County Health
Department that the proposed levels will be safe and not detrimental to the
public health or injurious to plant and animal life.
      5.   Odorous Matter: The release of materials capable of becoming
odorous, either by bacterial decomposition or chemical reaction, shall meet the
standards of the district in which the odor is created.
         a.   M1 Manufacturing District: When odorous matter is released from
any operation, activity or use in the M1 Manufacturing District, the
concentration of such odorous materials shall not exceed the odor threshold
when measured beyond the lot line, either at ground level or habitable
elevation.
         b.   M2 Manufacturing District: When odorous matter is released from
any operation, activity or use in the M2 District, the concentration of such
odorous materials shall not exceed the odor threshold when measured beyond the
M2 District boundary line.
      6.   Fire And Explosion Hazards: All flammable solid, liquid and gaseous
substances shall be manufactured, stored and utilized in accordance with all
applicable codes.
   In all manufacturing districts the storage, utilization or manufacture of
solid materials or products ranging from incombustible to moderate burning is
permitted.
   In the M1 and M2 Manufacturing Districts, the storage, utilization or
manufacture of solid materials or products ranging from free or active burning
to intense burning is permitted, provided either of the following conditions is
met:
   Said materials or products shall be stored, utilized or manufactured within
completely enclosed buildings having no less than two (2) hour fire resistant
exterior walls and protected with an automatic fire extinguishing system, or
   Said material, if stored outdoors, will be no less than fifty feet (50') to
the nearest lot line.
         a.   M1 Manufacturing District: The storage, utilization or
manufacture of flammable liquids shall be permitted in accordance with the
following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed
containers, which shall be unrestricted. Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks
shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from all lot lines.
   Total Capacity Of Flammable Materials Permitted
   (In Gallons)
 
                                       Above Ground Within Enclosed Underground
                                       Building
Materials having a closed cup flash    20,000                       100,000
point over 187°F but less than 300°F
From and including 105°F to and       10,000                       100,000
including 187°F
Materials having a closed cup flash    3,000                        100,000
point of less than 105°F
 
   When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure
shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed above.
         b.   M2 Manufacturing District: The storage, utilization or
manufacture of flammable liquids shall be permitted in accordance with the
following table, exclusive of storage of finished products in original sealed
containers, which shall be unrestricted. Flammable liquid and gas storage tanks
shall not be less than fifty feet (50') from all lot lines.
   Total Capacity Of Flammable Materials Permitted
   (In Gallons)
Industries Engaged in Storage for Resale Above Ground
Materials having a closed cup flash      400,000
point over 200°F but less than 350°F
From and including 105°F to and         200,000
including 200°F
Materials having a closed cup flash      100,000
point of less than 105°F
Total                                    700,000
Industries Engaged in Utilization and
Manufacture of Flammable Materials       Above Ground
Where Storage is an Ancillary Use
Materials having a closed cup flash      200,000
point over 200°F but less than 350°F
From and including 105°F to and         100,000
including 200°F
Materials having a closed cup flash      50,000
point of less than 105°F
Total                                    350,000
 
   The quantity of flammable liquids or materials stored below ground shall be
unrestricted.
   When flammable gases are stored, utilized or manufactured and measured in
cubic feet, the quantity in cubic feet at standard temperature and pressure
shall not exceed thirty (30) times the quantities listed above.
      7.   Glare: Any operation or activity producing glare shall be conducted
so that direct and indirect illumination from the source of light shall not
cause illumination in excess of one- half (1/2) foot-candle when measured in a
residence district.
   Flickering or intense sources of light shall be controlled or shielded so as
not to cause a nuisance across lot lines.
   When street lighting produces illumination in excess of one foot candle at
any point in a residence district, the contribution by light sources from
within any of the manufacturing districts measured at the same point shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the street lighting.
      8.   Radiation Hazards:
         a.   Release Outside Property Lines: In all manufacturing districts,
the release of radioactive materials or the emission of ionizing radiation
outside of property lines shall be in accordance with the rules and regulations
of the State of Illinois.
         b.   Unsealed Radioactive Materials: In all manufacturing districts,
unsealed radioactive materials shall not be manufactured, utilized or stored
(except when such materials are stored in a fireproof container at or below
ground level) in excess of the following multiples of the quantities set forth
in Table 3 of this Section.
   Table 3
   QUANTITIES OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS
Radioactive Material                   Unsealed,
                                       Curies
Antimony (Sb124)                       1
Arsenic 76 (As76)                      10
Arsenic 77 (As77)                      10
Barium-lanthanum 140 (BaLa140)         1
Beryllium (Be7)                        50
Cadmium-silver 109 (CdAg109)           10
Calcium 45 (Ca45)                      10
Carbon 14 (C14)                        50
Cerium-praseodymium 144 (CePr144)      1
Cesium-barium 137 (CsBa137)            1
Chlorine 36 (Cl36)                     1
Chromium 51 (Cr51)                     50
Cobalt 60 (Co60)                       1
Copper 64 (Cu64)                       50
Europium 154 (Eu154)                   1
Fluorine 18 (F18)                      50
Gallium 72 (Ga72)                      10
Germanium 71 (Ge71)                    50
Gold 198 (Au198)                       10
Gold 199 (Au199)                       10
Hydrogen 3 (tritium) (H3)              250
Indium 114 (In114)                     1
Iodine 131 (I131)                      10
Iridium 192 (Ir192)                    10
Iron 55 (Fe55)                         50
Iron 59 (Fe59)                         1
Lanthanum 140 (La140)                  10
Manganese 52 (Mn52)                    1
Manganese 56 (Mn56)                    50
Molybdenum 99 (Mo99)                   10
Nickel 59 (Ni59)                       1
Nickel 63 (Ni63)                       1
Niobium 95 (Nb95)                      10
Palladium 109 (Pd109)                  10
Palladium-rhodium 103 (PdRh103)        50
Phosphorus 32 (P32)                    10
Polonium 210 (Po210)                   0.1
Potassium 42 (K42)                     10
Praseodymium 143 (Pr143)               10
Promethium 147 (Pm147)                 10
Radium 226 (Ra226)                     0.1
Rhenium 186 (Re186)                    10
Rhodium 105 (Rh105)                    10
Rubidium 86 (Rb86)                     10
Ruthenium-rhodium 106 (RuRh106)        1
Samarium 153 (Sm153)                   10
Scandium 46 (Sc46)                     1
Silver 105 (Ag105)                     1
Silver 111 (Ag111)                     10
Sodium 22 (Na22)                       10
Sodium 24 (Na24)                       10
Strontium 89 (Sr89)                    1
Strontium-yttrium 90 (SrY90)           0.1
Sulfur 35 (S35)                        50
Tantalum 182 (Ta182)                   10
Technetium 96 (Tc96)                   1
Technetium 99 (Tc99)                   1
Tellurium 127 (Te127)                  10
Tellurium 129 (Te129)                  1
Thallium 204 (Tl204)                   50
Tin 113 (Sn113)                        10
Tungsten 185 (W185)                    10
Vanadium 48 (V48)                      1
Yttrium 90 (Y90)                       1
Yttrium 91 (Y91)                       1
Zinc 65 (Zn65)                         10
Beta and/or gamma emitting radioactive 1
material not listed above
 
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-8-3: M1 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   Any establishment the principal use of which is manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing
and storing of materials, products and goods, provided operations conform with
the performance standards and other general requirements applicable to an M1
District.
   Agriculture.
   Building material sales and storage, including milling, planing, jointing or
manufacture of millwork.
   Contractors' offices and shops.
   Dwelling units for watchmen and operating personnel and their families when
the nature of operations require such personnel to reside on the premises where
they are employed.
   Fuel and ice retail sales and storage.
   Greenhouses, including retail and wholesale sales of plants and produce.
   Monument establishments, including accessory open sales lots.
   Offices.
   Parking lots and storage garages.
   Printing and publishing establishments.
   Public garage (automobile maintenance).
   Public open space.
   Public utility, governmental service and similar uses as follows:
      Bus transit facilities, including shelters, passenger stations parking
areas, and service buildings.
      Compressor stations, well head stations, well separators and other
similar above-the-ground facilities customarily used for the distribution of
natural gas as a part of the operations of a natural gas company or nonexempt
operations of a public utility company.
      Electric distribution centers and substations.
      Gas regulator stations.
      Public utility and governmental service establishments, other, including
offices, storing, testing, repairing and servicing.
      Radio and television towers (no limit on height of towers).
      Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers and telephone transmission
equipment and other such service buildings (no limit on height of towers).
      Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs; sewage
treatment plants and lift stations, public or community.
   Research laboratories.
   Schools, commercial or trade.
   Training centers, engineering or sales.
   Wholesale establishments.
   Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses1. See section
5-11-9 of this title.1:
   Airports, public and private on a lot not less than five (5) acres in area.
   Auto and truck sales establishments.
   Commercial solar farm (ground mounted only), subject to all rules and
regulations of
Chapter 15 (Commercial Solar Farms) of this Title.
   Commercial solar farm (roof mounted only), subject to all rules and
regulations of
Chapter 15 (Commercial Solar Farms) of this Title.
   Heliports, public and private on a lot not less than one acre in area.
   Medical cannabis cultivation center, provided that: 1) each medical cannabis
cultivation center operates in strict conformance with the compassionate use of
medical cannabis pilot program act 2. 410 ILCS 130/1 et seq.2 , as amended and
the regulations promulgated thereunder; and 2) the medical cannabis cultivation
center is not located within two thousand five hundred feet (2,500') of the
property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or elementary or
secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare home, part day
childcare facility; public park; church or other place of worship; or an area
zoned for residential use or designated for residential use on the village's
comprehensive plan.
   Medical cannabis dispensing organization, provided that: 1) each medical
cannabis dispensing organization operates in strict conformance with the
compassionate use of medical cannabis pilot program act 1. 410 ILCS 130/1 et
seq.1 , as amended and the regulations promulgated thereunder; 2) the medical
cannabis dispensing organization is not located within one thousand feet
(1,000') of the property line of a preexisting public or private preschool or
elementary or secondary school; daycare center, daycare home, group daycare
home, part day childcare facility; public park; or church or other place of
worship; and 3) drive-throughs are prohibited.
   Off-street parking area or lot (truck).
   Public garage (truck maintenance).
   Storage garage or off street parking (truck).
   Telecommunication facilities and towers.
   C.   Lot Coverage: Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 0.6.
   Impervious service ratio: Not to exceed 0.7.
   D.   Yards: Except as required herein under regulations along residence
district boundary lines, and applicable M1 district performance standards,
yards shall be provided in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards: a) Not less than forty feet (40') wide when adjoining a
street or residence district; b) not less than fifteen feet (15') wide when
adjoining an interior lot line.
      3.   Rear Yard: Not less than twenty five feet (25') in depth, except
when adjoining a railroad right of way, the rear yard may be measured from the
centerline of the railroad right of way, and except when adjoining a residence
district, the rear yard shall be not less than forty feet (40') in depth.
      4.   Yard Requirements For Existing Buildings Or Structures: Where
manufacturing buildings or structures existing on the effective date hereof
have yards of less dimension than those required herein, any expansion of said
buildings or structures shall, in lieu of the above requirements, be required
to provide yards having a minimum depth or width equal to those provided by
said buildings or structures on the effective date hereof; provided, that the
yard so affected does not adjoin a residence district boundary line.
   E.   Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this
title.
   F.   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
1998-1, 1-13-1998; Ord. 2006-38, 10-10-2006; Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014; Ord.
2015-17, 6-23-2015; Ord. 2023-36, 9-26-2023; Ord. 2024-18, 4-23-2024; Ord.
2024-39, 8-27-2024; Ord. 2025-11, 5-27-2025)
   5-8-4: M2 MANUFACTURING DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
   All activities involving the manufacturing, fabricating, processing,
assembling, disassembling, repairing, cleaning, servicing, testing and storing
of materials, products and goods, provided operations conform with the
performance standards and other general requirements of this chapter applicable
to the M2 district.
   Any use permitted in the M1 district.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses:
   Air or rail intermodal terminals, rail spurs, railroad switching and
classification yards, railroad rights of way and passenger stations.
   Any use allowed as a conditional permitted use in the M1 district.
   Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics, on a lot not less than eighteen
thousand (18,000) square feet in area.
   Automobile wrecking yards and junkyards, providing they are screened by a
solid wall or uniformly painted solid fence at least eight feet (8') high.
   Cargo container facilities, for both temporary and permanent uses,
contingent upon the approval of a site plan and provided that:
      1.   The cargo container facility shall not be adjacent to any
residential district expressway or main arterial road;
      2.   The storage of the cargo containers shall have a minimum setback
distance of one hundred feet (100'), a minimum side setback distance of thirty
feet (30') and a minimum rear setback distance of forty feet (40') from the
property lines;
      3.   The area for the storage of such containers shall be limited to less
than thirty five percent (35%) of the buildable area of the site;
      4.   Screening in the form of a berm with a minimum height of six feet
(6') and fencing (100 percent opaque) with a minimum height of eight feet (8'),
sufficient to shield the containers from the view of the surrounding properties
shall be used and continuously maintained on the property; and
      5.   The containers shall be stored horizontally and may not be stacked.
      Single or multiple cargo containers, temporarily and/or permanently,
shall not be used for any purpose within any residential or business district.
   Commercial solar farm (ground mounted only), subject to all rules and
regulations of
Chapter 15 (Commercial Solar Farms) of this Title.
   Commercial solar farm (roof mounted only), subject to all rules and
regulations of
Chapter 15 (Commercial Solar Farms) of this Title.
   Food grade tank wash facility which shall be limited to tank washing where
the last load in the tank was: (1) material that is safe for human consumption
("Food"), (2) ingredients used to make Food (including without limitation
vegetable and other cooking oils), or (3) material that is safe to come into
contact with Food.
   Mining, loading and hauling of coal, clay, sand, gravel, topsoil or other
aggregate or minerals, and oil or gas well drilling, including equipment,
buildings or structures for screening, crushing, mixing, washing or storage;
provided, that: 1) no excavation shall take place within forty feet (40') of
any property line; 2) all buildings or structures, for the screening, crushing,
washing, mixing or storage are located not less than five hundred feet (500')
from an existing residence or any residence district established by this title;
3) all property lines adjoining other districts except other manufacturing
districts shall be provided with a stationary fence; 4) a plan of development
for the reclamation of the land is provided as part of the application for a
conditional use permit; 5) buildings, structures, equipment and operations for
processing on the premises of material secured by such uses shall be allowed
only when authorized by the board of trustees and provided the operations shall
conform with performance standards set forth in the M2 manufacturing district.
   Off-street parking area or lot (truck).
   Public garage (truck maintenance).
   Storage and utilization of flammable liquids or materials which produce
flammable or explosive vapors or gases exceeding the total capacity permitted
in the M2 district.
   Storage garage or off street parking (truck).
   Tattoo and/or body piercing parlor; provided that each tattoo and/or body
piercing parlor shall conform with all regulations of the applicable county
health department, but at the minimum: 1) maintain records, including, at the
minimum, the name, date of birth, address, and signature for each patron, which
shall be available for examination by the village, and the Will, Grundy, or
Kendall health department, whichever is applicable, for a period of not less
than two (2) years; 2) construct the interior walls, floor and ceilings in
which tattooing and/or body piercing is done of an impervious, smooth and
washable surface of not less than five hundred (500) square feet; 3) utilize
sterile single use needles and sterile instruments, and shall not reuse tattoo
ink; 4) utilize closed cabinets and/or covered containers for the storage of
clean linens, towels, needles, and other materials, instruments and equipment,
and closed cabinets and/or covered containers for all used linens, towels,
needles, materials, instruments and equipment, separate from the clean storage
areas; 5) comply with the department of labor's occupational safety and health
administration regulations, with respect to occupational exposure to blood,
blood borne pathogens, or other potentially infectious materials; 6) shall
comply with all state and county health requirements; and 7) allow for periodic
inspections by the applicable health department. Furthermore, no person shall
operate or cause to be operated a tattoo and/or body piercing parlor within one
thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundary of a preexisting:
      1.   Public or private elementary or secondary school; or
      2.   Licensed daycare center; or
      3.   Cemetery; or
      4.   Public park; or
      5.   Public housing; or
      6.   Place of religious worship; or
      7.   Residential zoning district; or
      8.   Other tattoo and/or body piercing parlor.
   For the purpose of this use, measurements shall be made in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion
of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where the tattoo
and/or body piercing parlor business is conducted, to the nearest property line
of the other specified use.
   Telecommunication facilities and towers.
   C.   Lot Coverage: Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 0.65.
   Impervious surface ratio: Not to exceed 0.8.
   D.   Yards: As in the M1 district.
   E.   Signs: Sign regulations shall be as set forth in chapter 13 of this
title.
   F.   Off Street Parking And Off Street Loading: In accordance with
regulations set forth in chapter 9 of this title.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1991-2, 4-9-1991; Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; Ord.
2003-26, 5-27-2003; Ord. 2006-01, 1-10-2006; Ord. 2006-38, 10-10-2006; Ord.
2015-17, 6-23-2015; Ord. 2020-34, 11-24-2020; Ord. 2023-36, 9-26-2023; Ord.
2024-18, 4-23-2024; Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
CHAPTER 9
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
SECTION:
5-9-1 Scope Of Regulations
5-9-2 Permissive Parking And Loading Facilities
5-9-3 Damage Or Destruction
5-9-4 Off-Street Parking
5-9-5 Off-Street Loading
5-9-6 Minimum Standards Of Parking Spaces, Aisles, Parking Bays; Table
5-9-7 Access Driveways From Streets To Off-Street Parking And Loading Spaces
5-9-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
The off-street parking and off-street loading provisions of this Title shall
apply as follows:
   A.   Accessory off-street parking and off-street loading facilities shall be
provided as required by the regulations of this Chapter for all buildings and
structures erected and all uses of land established in each district after the
effective date hereof.
   B.   When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall
be increased through the addition of dwelling units, gross floor area, seating
capacity or other units of measurement in the amount specified herein requiring
parking or loading facilities, such additional parking and loading facilities
as required herein shall be provided.
   C.   Whenever the existing use of a building or structure shall hereafter be
changed to a new use, parking or loading facilities shall be provided as
required for such new use. However, if the said building or structure was
erected prior to the effective date hereof, additional parking or loading
facilities are mandatory only in the amount by which the requirements for the
new use would exceed those for the existing use, if the latter were subject to
the parking and loading provisions of this Title. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-9-2: PERMISSIVE PARKING AND LOADING FACILITIES:
Nothing in this Title shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of
off-street parking or loading facilities to serve any existing use of land or
buildings; provided, that all regulations herein governing the location, design
and operation of such facilities are adhered to. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-9-3: DAMAGE OR DESTRUCTION:
When any conforming or nonconforming building, structure or use which is in
existence on the effective date hereof, which is restored and continued in
operation after being damaged or destroyed by fire, collapse, explosion or
other cause, to the extent that the cost of restoration does not exceed sixty
percent (60%) of the assessor's valuation, there may be provided only the off-
street parking or loading facilities equivalent to any maintained at the time
of such damage or destruction. However, in no case shall it be necessary to
restore or maintain parking or loading facilities in excess of those required
by this Title for equivalent new uses or construction. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-9-4: OFF-STREET PARKING:
Off-street parking facilities for motor vehicles shall be provided in
accordance with additional regulations set forth hereinafter.
   A.   Existing Parking Facilities: Accessory off-street parking facilities in
existence on the effective date hereof and located on the same lot as the
building or use served shall not hereafter be reduced below, or if already less
than, shall not be further reduced below the requirements for a similar new
building or use under the provisions of this Title.
   B.   Use: Accessory off-street parking facilities required as accessory to
uses listed herein, shall be solely for the parking of automobiles of patrons,
occupants or employees. When bus transportation is provided for patrons,
occupants or employees of a specific establishment, additional open or enclosed
off-street parking spaces for each bus to be parked on the premises shall be
provided in accordance with regulations set forth in this Chapter.
   C.   Computation: When determination of the number of off-street parking
spaces required by this Title results in a requirement of a fractional space,
any fraction of one-half (1/2) or less may be disregarded while a fraction in
excess of one-half (1/2) shall be counted as one parking space.
   D.   Collective Provisions: Off street parking facilities for separate uses
may be provided collectively if the total number of spaces so provided is not
less than the sum of the separate requirements for each such use and provided
that all regulations governing location of accessory parking spaces, in
relation to the use served, are adhered to, and provided it is authorized by
the zoning board of appeals in accordance with procedures set forth in this
chapter.
   E.   Size: A required off street parking space shall have a width and
length, exclusive of access drives or aisles, ramps, columns or office and work
areas in accordance with standards set forth in section 5-9-6 of this chapter.
Enclosed parking spaces shall have a vertical clearance of at least seven feet
(7').
   F.   Access: Each required off street parking space shall open directly upon
an aisle or driveway of width and design in accordance with standards set forth
in section 5-9-6 of this chapter. All off street parking facilities shall be
provided with appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley with
location and design of intersection of parking area access driveway and the
street or alley in accordance with regulations set forth in section 5-9-7 of
this chapter.
   G.   In Yards: Off street parking spaces, open to the sky, may be located in
required interior side yards and rear yards, not less than five feet (5') from
the nearest lot line, except a parking area containing four (4) or more parking
spaces shall be not less than twenty feet (20') from a residential lot line. In
the business district, the required off street parking spaces may be located in
a front yard or side yard adjoining a street, not less than five feet (5') from
a street line.
   H.   Design And Maintenance:
      1.   Open And Enclosed Spaces: Accessory off street parking spaces
located on the same lot as occupied by the use served may be open to the sky or
enclosed in a building. Accessory off street parking spaces that may be
permitted elsewhere than on the same lot occupied by the use shall be open to
the sky. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      2.   Surfacing: All open off street parking areas, driveways, and laydown
yards shall be constructed of hot mix asphalt (HMA), portland cement concrete
(PCC) or interlocking concrete pavers over a compacted aggregate base, as
approved by the building inspector. Interlocking concrete pavers shall meet
manufacturer and Interlocking Concrete Pavement Institute (ICPI) installation
guidelines and shall conform to ASTM C936 and/or C1319. When interlocking
concrete pavers are proposed, a maintenance plan shall be required to assure
continued functionality and appearance. Gravel and asphalt grindings are
prohibited for surfacing material.
      Materials for off street parking areas pavement shall be designed to
service the anticipated traffic loadings; however, the minimum structural
number (SN) for off street parking areas shall be 2.30 for regular/light duty
pavement and 3.00 for heavy duty pavement. (Ord. 2014-11, 5-27-2014)
      3.   Screening And Landscaping: All open off street parking areas
containing more than four (4) parking spaces, located less than forty feet
(40') from the nearest property line of a lot in a residence district shall be
effectively screened on each side adjoining or fronting on such property line
by a wall, fence or densely planted compact hedge, not less than five feet (5')
nor more than eight feet (8') in height. Such screening shall be as approved by
the building inspector.
      4.   Lighting: Any lighting used to illuminate off street parking areas
shall be arranged so as not to reflect direct rays of light into streets or
adjacent residence districts.
      5.   Repair And Service: No motor vehicle repair work or service of any
kind shall be permitted in off street parking areas. No gasoline or motor oil
shall be sold in conjunction with any accessory parking facilities.
      I.   Location: After the effective date hereof, required accessory off
street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building or use
served, except when the planning commission recommends and the board of
trustees authorizes, for a specific use, the location of all or part of the
required off street parking spaces on a lot that does not contain the principal
use or structure. However, there shall be compliance with regulations set forth
in subsection J of this section.
      J.   Control Of Off Site Parking Facilities: In cases where parking
facilities are permitted on a lot other than the lot on which the structure or
use served is located, the owner of record of such lot shall be the same as the
owner of record of the lot occupied by the structure or use in which the
parking facilities are accessory. A covenant running with the land must be
recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy and/or Will County,
Illinois, on the lot upon which the accessory off street parking is located
which prohibits any other use on that lot, and a copy of the recorded covenant
certified by the recorder of deeds of Grundy and/or Will County, Illinois, must
be deposited with the building inspector. The covenant shall not be released
until such time as either one of the following conditions occur:
      1.   The structure on the lot containing the principal use is removed and
the principal use terminated.
      2.   Another lot of the required size within the required distance is
properly developed and used for the required accessory off street parking in
place of and in lieu of the initial lot used for accessory off street parking
with the same requirements, covenants and conditions attached to such
substitute accessory use lot as approved by the same authority as required for
approval of such initial lot.
   K.   Employee Parking: Parking spaces required on an employee basis shall be
based on the maximum number of employees on duty or residing, or both, on the
premises at any one time.
   L.   Required Garages:
 
                                       There shall be provided for each single-
                                       family detached dwelling a private
Single-family detached dwellings       garage, accessory to and attached to the
                                       dwelling, with a minimum floor area of
                                       400 square feet
                                       There shall be provided for each two-
                                       family or single-family detached
Two-family and single- family attached dwelling unit a private garage,
dwellings                              accessory to and attached to the
                                       dwelling unit, with a minimum floor area
                                       of 200 square feet
 
   M.   Required Spaces: There shall be provided for each building, structure
and use hereafter erected, structurally altered or enlarged, the minimum number
of accessory off street parking spaces in accordance with the following: (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
      1.   Dwelling And Lodging Uses:
 
                                      1 parking space for each room or suite of
                                      rooms comprising a lodging unit, 1
Hotels and motels                     parking space for each 2 employees, and 1
                                      parking space for each 100 square feet of
                                      retail sales and dining area
                                      1 parking space for each lodging room and
Lodging houses and apartment hotels   1 parking space for each dwelling unit,
                                      and 1 parking space for each 2 employees
Multiple-family dwellings             2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
                                      2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit
                                      plus 1 additional parking space per each
                                      2 roomers or lodgers accommodated, but no
Single-family, detached and attached, more than 4 spaces for each single-family
and two-family                        detached dwelling and no more than 3
                                      spaces for each single-family attached or
                                      two-family dwelling. Attached garages
                                      required in accordance with subsection L
                                      of this section
 
   (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1984-2, 2-27-1984; Ord. 1996-33, 12-10-1996)
      2.   Schools, Institutions And Auditoriums Or Other Places Of Assembly:
Auditoriums, meeting halls, exhibition    1 parking space for each 5 seats, or
halls and auditoriums as accessory to     for each 90 linear inches of seating
churches, schools and other institutional space
establishments
                                          1 parking space for each 5 seats, or
Churches, chapels, temples and synagogues for each 90 linear inches of seating
                                          space
                                          1 parking space for each 6 students,
Colleges, junior colleges and             based upon the maximum number of
universities                              students that can be accommodated in
                                          accordance with design capacity plus
                                          1 parking space for each 2 employees
Hospitals                                 1 parking space per bed
Libraries, museums and art galleries      1 parking space for each 800 square
                                          feet of floor area
Nursing homes and similar types of        1 parking space for each 2 beds, plus
establishments                            1 parking space for each 2 employees
                                          1 parking space for each lodging room
Private clubs and lodges                  and 1 parking space for each 5 seats
                                          in accordance with design seating
                                          capacity of the main meeting room
Schools: When the number of parking
spaces as required herein is provided for
an auditorium or other places of public
assembly accessory to a school, and when
approved by the planning commission,
additional parking spaces need not be
provided when the number of parking
spaces for such auditorium or other
places of public assembly is equal to or
in excess of the applicable requirements
set forth below:
                                          1 parking space for each 2 employees,
   Commercial or trade, music dance or plus 1 space for each 3 students,
business                                  based on the maximum number of
                                          students that can be accommodated in
                                          accordance with design capacity
                                          1 parking space for each 7 students
   High, public or private             based on the maximum number of
                                          students that can be accommodated in
                                          accordance with design capacity
                                          1 parking space for each faculty
   Nursery, elementary or junior high  member and each other full time
                                          employee
 
      3.   Recreational Uses, Commercial Or Noncommercial:
 
                                        7 parking spaces for each lane plus
Bowling alleys                          such additional spaces as may be
                                        required herein for affiliated uses
                                        such as restaurants and the like
                                        1 parking space for each 2 persons,
                                        based upon the maximum number of
Parks, recreation centers and community persons that can be accommodated at the
centers - private, semipublic or public same time in accordance with such
                                        design capacity, and 1 parking space
                                        for each 2 employees
Theaters                                1 parking space for each 4 seats
                                        Reservoir standing spaces equal in
Theaters (automobile drive-in)          number to 10% of the vehicle capacity
                                        of such theaters
 
   (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      4.   Business, Commercial And Industrial Uses:
                                        1 parking space for each employee, and
                                        in addition, reservoir standing spaces
                                        to accommodate automobiles awaiting
                                        entrance to the automobile laundry
Automobile laundries                    equal in number to 5 times the maximum
                                        capacity of the automobile laundry.
                                        Maximum capacity shall mean the
                                        greatest possible number of automobiles
                                        undergoing same phase of laundering at
                                        the same time
                                        1 parking space for each island of
Automobile service stations             gasoline pumps, plus 2 for each service
                                        stall
Banks and other financial institutions  1 parking space for each 300 square
                                        feet of floor area
                                        1 parking space for each 5,000 square
                                        feet of building area. The site shall
                                        be designed to accommodate 1 parking
                                        space for each 1,500 square feet of
Data centers                            building area as a land bank for
                                        potential future parking needs. If
                                        future parking is deemed inadequate by
                                        the building officer, the land banked
                                        parking shall be constructed upon
                                        written notice from the village.
Furniture and appliance stores, motor
vehicle sales establishments, and       1 parking space for each 400 square
establishments for repair of household  feet of floor area
equipment or furniture
Manufacturing, fabricating processing,  1 parking space for each 1.5 employees
storing, cleaning, testing, assembling, as related to the working period when
repairing or servicing establishments   the maximum number of persons are
as permitted in the manufacturing       employed on the premises, or 1 for each
districts                               800 square feet of floor area,
                                        whichever is greater
                                        2 parking spaces for each office,
                                        examining room and treatment room, plus
Medical and dental clinics              1 space for each 50 square feet of
                                        floor area contained in the reception
                                        room or waiting lobby
                                        4 parking spaces plus 1 parking space
                                        for each 1,500 square feet of floor
Medical cannabis cultivation centers    space over 4,500 square feet or when
                                        the number of employees is specifically
                                        indicated, 1 parking space for each 1.5
                                        employees employed on the premises
Medical cannabis dispensing             1 parking space for each 100 square
organizations                           feet of floor area
Offices - business, professional and    1 parking space for each 250 square
public administration or service office feet of floor area
buildings
Public utility and public service uses  1 parking space for each 2 employees
Restaurants, not including drive-in     1 parking space for each 100 square
establishments                          feet of floor area
                                        1 parking space for each 100 square
Undertaking establishments and funeral  feet of floor area, plus 1 parking
parlors                                 space for each of the funeral parlor's
                                        official vehicles
                                        The required number of parking spaces
Uses in a shopping center under unified shall be equal to the required number
control or ownership                    of parking places as heretofore set
                                        forth for the individual uses located
                                        in the center
                                        4 parking spaces plus 1 parking space
                                        for each 1,500 square feet of floor
Warehouse, storage, wholesale and mail  space over 4,500 square feet or when
order establishments                    the number of employees is specifically
                                        indicated, 1 parking space for each 1.5
                                        employees employed on the premises
All other business and commercial       1 parking space for each 200 square
establishments                          feet of floor area
 
   (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2014-12, 5-27-2014; Ord. 2024-50, 11-26-2024)
      5.   Other Uses: Parking spaces for other permitted uses or conditional
uses not listed above shall be provided in accordance with requirements
designated by the planning commission. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2025-34, 10-
21-2025)
5-9-5: OFF STREET LOADING:
There shall be provided off street loading spaces not less than the minimum
requirements specified in this chapter in connection with any building,
structure or use which is to be erected or substantially altered, and which
requires the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by trucks or
similar vehicles in accordance with the following: (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   A.   Location: Accessory off street loading spaces shall be located on the
same lot as the principal use. Open off street loading spaces which abut a
residence district boundary line shall be completely screened therefrom by a
fence, wall or door, or any combination thereof, of an architectural design
approved by the building inspector, not less than six feet (6') nor more than
eight feet (8') in height, or a densely planted tree or shrub hedge maintained
to not less than six feet (6') in height. No permitted or required loading
space shall be located within forty feet (40') of the nearest point of
intersection of any two (2) streets. No loading space shall be located in a
required front or side yard, except in a manufacturing zoning district (M1 or
M2) with manufacturing zoning adjacent to and across the street. In that event,
a loading space may be located in a required front yard as long as it will be
set back sufficiently so as to allow vehicles being loaded or unloaded not to
extend into the street. (Ord. 1998-09, 5-26-1998)
   B.   Size: Unless otherwise specified in this Title, a required off-street
loading space shall be at least twelve feet (12') in width and at least fifty
five feet (55') in length, exclusive of access drives, aisles, ramps and
maneuvering space, and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than fifteen
feet (15').
   C.   Access: Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with
appropriate means of vehicular access to a street or alley in a manner which
will least interfere with traffic movements. Access drives and intersection of
driveways with streets shall be in accordance with regulations set forth in
Section
5-9-7 of this Chapter.
   D.   Surfacing: All open off-street loading spaces, access drives, aisles
and maneuvering spaces shall be improved with a compacted base and a permanent
wearing surface as approved by the Building Inspector.
   E.   Repair And Service: No storage of any kind nor motor vehicle repair
work or service of any kind shall be permitted within any required loading
space.
   F.   Utilization: Space allocated to any off-street loading spaces shall
not, while so allocated, be used to satisfy the space requirements for any off-
street parking facilities or portions thereof.
   G.   Off-Street Loading Space Requirements: The minimum number of off-street
loading spaces accessory to building structures and uses hereafter erected,
structurally altered or enlarged in all business and manufacturing districts
shall be in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Gross Floor Area  Required Number
Of Establishments
5,000 to 10,000   1
10,000 to 25,000  2
25,000 to 40,000  3
40,000 to 100,000 4
 
For each additional one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor
area, or fraction thereof over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet of
gross floor area: one additional loading space. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord.
2022-34, 9-27-2022)
5-9-6: MINIMUM STANDARDS OF PARKING SPACES, AISLES, PARKING BAYS; TABLE:
Specifications provided in the following table shall apply:
MINIMUM STANDARDS OF PARKING SPACES, AISLES, AND PARKING BAYS
PARKING SPACE AND AISLE DIMENSIONS
 
                                Width Of Space Depth Of Space
Angle Of Parking Width Of Space Parallel To    Perpendicular To Width Of Aisle
                                Aisle          Aisle
45°             8'6"           12'0"          17'0"            11'6"
45°             9'0"           12'9"          17'0"            13'0"
60°             8'6"           9'10"          18'0"            18'0"
60°             9'0"           10'5"          18'0"            18'0"
90°             8'6"           8'6"           18'0"            29'0"
90°             9'0"           9'0"           18'0"            24'0"
 
WIDTH OF PARKING BAYS*
Type Of Parking Space Arrangement
Intermeshing Head-In To Curb Back-In To Curb
Type Of Parking Space Arrangement
Intermeshing Head-In To Curb Back-In To Curb
43'0"        43'10"          49'0"
42'10"       43'8"           49'2"
53'5"        52'7"           57'8"
52'8"        51'10"          57'2"
             65'0"           65'0"
             63'0"           63'0"
 
*Parking bay consists of two (2) rows of parking spaces and one aisle.
(adapted from traffic design of parking garages, the eno foundation for highway
traffic control, 1957)
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2022-34, 9-27-2022)
5-9-7: ACCESS DRIVEWAYS FROM STREETS TO OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING SPACES:
   A.   Width Of Driveways (Measured At The Lot Line Adjoining A Street):
      1.   Residential Uses: Residential driveways shall not be less than nine
feet (9') wide, nor more than thirty feet (30') wide.
         a.   No driveway constructed upon a corner lot shall be closer than
thirty feet (30') from the intersection of the street right-of-way line. (Ord.
2001-08, 4-24-2001)
      2.   Nonresidential Uses:
         a.   Not less than fourteen feet (14') wide nor more than twenty feet
(20') wide for a one-way driveway.
         b.   Not less than twenty feet (20') wide nor more than thirty five
feet (35') wide for a two-way driveway serving twenty (20) or fewer parking
spaces and/or one loading space.
         c.   Not less than twenty four feet (24') wide nor more than thirty
five feet (35') wide for a two-way driveway serving more than twenty (20)
parking spaces and/or two (2) or more loading spaces.
   B.   Radius Connecting Street Pavement Edge And Driveway Edge:
      1.   In Residence Districts: Not less than five feet (5'), except
driveways more than twenty feet (20') in width, not less than eight feet (8').
      2.   Business, Data Center, And Manufacturing Districts:
         a.   Not less than fifteen feet (15') at the intersection of a
driveway and street pavement in a street having a right of way more than sixty
six feet (66') wide.
         b.   Not less than eight feet (8') at the intersection of a driveway
and a street pavement in a street having a right of way of sixty six feet (66')
or less in width.
   C.   Angle At Intersection Of A Driveway And Street: The acute angle formed
at the intersection of driveway and street pavement edges shall be not less
than sixty degrees (60°).
   D.   Spacing Between Separate Driveway Entrances On A Lot (Measured At The
Lot Line Adjoining A Street):
      1.   Not less than twenty feet (20') on streets having rights of way more
than sixty six feet (66') in width.
      2.   Not less than ten feet (10') on streets having rights of way sixty
six feet (66') or less in width.
   E.   On Corner Lots, Spacing Between Driveway Entrance And Right-Of-Way Line
Of An Adjacent Intersecting Street (Measured From The Nearest Edge Of The
Driveway Pavement At Its Intersection With The Street Right-Of-Way Line Of An
Adjacent Intersecting Street):
      1.   Not less than fifteen feet (15') to an adjacent intersecting street
having a right of way more than sixty six feet (66') in width.
      2.   Not less than eight feet (8') to an adjacent intersecting street
having a right of way sixty six feet (66') or less in width. (Ord., 5-15-1974;
amd. Ord. 2024-50, 11-26-2024)
CHAPTER 10
NONCONFORMING USES
SECTION:
5-10-1 Preamble
5-10-2 Authority To Continue Nonconformance
5-10-1: PREAMBLE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to provide for the regulation of nonconforming
uses, buildings and structures, and to specify those circumstances and
conditions under which those nonconforming buildings, structures and uses may
be continued. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-10-2: AUTHORITY TO CONTINUE NONCONFORMANCE:
Any building, structure or use which existed lawfully on the effective date
hereof, and which becomes nonconforming upon the effective date hereof, or of
any subsequent amendment hereto, may be continued only in accordance with the
following regulations:
   A.   Repairs And Alterations: Ordinary repairs and alterations may be made
to a nonconforming building or structure; provided, that no structural
alterations shall be made in or to such building or structure, except those
required by law, or except to make the building or structure and use thereof
conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. Ordinary
repairs and alterations shall be determined by the Building Inspector and shall
include, among other things, the replacement of storage tanks where the safety
of operations of the installation requires such replacement.
   B.   Additions And Enlargements:
      1.   A nonconforming building or structure shall not be added to or
enlarged in any manner unless such nonconforming building or structure and use
thereof, including all additions and enlargements thereto, is made to conform
to all the regulations of the district in which it is located.
      2.   A nonconforming building or structure which is nonconforming only as
to bulk may be added to or enlarged, provided such additions or enlargements
conform to all regulations of the district in which it is located.
   C.   Moving: No nonconforming building or structure shall be moved in whole
or in part to any other location unless every portion of such building or
structure, and the use thereof, is made to conform to all regulations of the
district in which the moved building is to be located.
   D.   Restoration Of Damaged Nonconforming Buildings Or Structures: A
nonconforming building or structure, or portion thereof, which is destroyed or
damaged by fire or other casualty or act of God to the extent that the cost of
restoration to the condition in which it was before the occurrence will exceed
sixty percent (60%) of the total cost of reconstructing the building or
structure, shall not be restored unless said building or structure and the use
thereof shall conform to all regulations of the district in which it is
located. However, if the damage is less than sixty percent (60%) of the cost of
reconstructing the building or structure, no repairs or restoration shall be
made unless such work is started within one year from the date of the partial
destruction.
   E.   Change Of Use In Nonconforming Building Or Structure: The nonconforming
use of a building or structure, or portion thereof, may be changed to a use
permitted in the district in which the building or structure is located,
however, once a use is changed to a conforming use, such building or structure
shall not thereafter be used for a nonconforming use.
   F.   Nonconforming Use Of Conforming Buildings Or Structures: The existing
nonconforming use of a part or all of a conforming building or structure may be
continued subject to the following provisions:
      1.   The nonconforming use of a part of such building or structure shall
not be expanded or extended into any other portion of such building or
structure, nor changed to any other nonconforming use.
      2.   If a nonconforming use of such a building or structure is
discontinued, or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall
not be renewed, and any subsequent use of such building or structure shall
conform to the use regulations of the district in which the premises are
located.
      3.   Any lawful nonconforming use in a conforming building or structure
existing in a residence district on the effective date hereof, or any
amendments hereto, shall be entirely discontinued within ten (10) years from
the effective date hereof, or any amendments hereto.
   G.   Nonconforming Use Of Land: The nonconforming use of land not involving
a building or structure, or in connection with which any building or structure
thereon is incidental or accessory to the principal use of land, may be
continued subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the
area it occupies on the effective date hereof, or changed to another
nonconforming use.
      2.   If such a nonconforming use of land is discontinued or abandoned for
a period of six (6) consecutive months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and
any subsequent use of such land shall conform to the regulations of the
district in which the land is located.
      3.   Where the nonconforming use of land is accessory to the
nonconforming use of a building or structure, it shall be discontinued on the
same date as the nonconforming use of the building or structure. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
   H.   Nonconforming Use Of Off Street Parking Surfacing Materials: The
nonconforming use of off-street parking surfacing materials, may be continued
subject to the following provisions:
      1.   Such nonconforming use shall not be expanded or extended beyond the
area it occupies on the effective date hereof, or changed to another
nonconforming use.
      2.   If such a nonconforming use of the off-street parking surfacing
materials is discontinued or abandoned for a period of six (6) consecutive
months, it shall not thereafter be renewed, and any subsequent use of such land
shall conform to the regulations of the district in which the land is located.
      3.   Where the nonconforming use of the off-street parking surfacing
materials is accessory to the nonconforming use of a building or structure, it
shall be discontinued on the same date as the nonconforming use of the building
or structure. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 2025-34, 10-21-2025)
CHAPTER 11
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
5-11-1 Organization
5-11-2 Zoning Administrator
5-11-3 Zoning Certificates
5-11-4 Filing Plans
5-11-5 Certificate Of Occupancy
5-11-6 Variations
5-11-7 Appeals, Scope Of
5-11-8 Amendments
5-11-9 Conditional Permitted Uses
5-11-10 Penalty, Enforcement
5-11-1: ORGANIZATION:
The administration of this title is hereby vested in:
   The office of the building officer and inspector
   The planning and zoning commission
   The board of trustees
(Ord., 5-15-1974, amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
5-11-2: ZONING ADMINISTRATOR:
The building officer and inspector1. See section
4-1-1 of this code.1 shall enforce this title and in furtherance of his
authority shall:
   A.   Determine conformance of applications for zoning certificates with
regulations of this title.
   B.   Issue all zoning certificates, following approval as required in this
title, and maintain records thereof.
   C.   Issue all certificates of occupancy, and maintain records thereof.
   D.   Conduct inspections of buildings, structures and uses of land to
determine compliance with the terms of this title.
   E.   Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning commission all
applications for amendments, conditional uses or for other matters on which the
planning and zoning commission is required to act under this title.
   F.   Receive, file and forward to the planning and zoning commission all
applications for amendments, conditional uses, or other matters which, under
this title, require referral to the planning and zoning commission.
   G.   Maintain permanent and current records of the administration and
enforcement of this title, including, but not limited to, all maps, amendments,
variations, appeals and applications therefor and records of hearings thereon,
and designate on the zoning district map each amendment thereto.
   H.   Decide or make recommendations on all other matters under this title
upon which the building officer and inspector is required to act.
   I.   Receive from the village clerk all notices of petitions for appeals,
variations, amendments and conditional use permits which have been referred by
the village clerk to the planning and zoning commission or other appropriate
reviewing body.
   J.   Provide and maintain public information facilities relative to all
matters pertaining to this title. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-
1993)
5-11-3: ZONING CERTIFICATES:
   A.   No permit pertaining to the use of land or buildings shall be issued by
an officer or employee of the village, unless the application for such permit
has been examined by the building officer and inspector and has affixed to it a
certificate of the building officer and inspector that the proposed building or
structure and use complies with all the provisions of this title. Any
certificate issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null
and void.
   B.   An application for a zoning certificate for a use of land, buildings or
structures, which requires compliance with performance standards as set forth
in the manufacturing district regulations 1. See subsection
5-8-2C of this Title.1 , shall have affixed to it a certification of a
professional engineer, licensed by the State of Illinois, whose qualifications
pertinent to the engineering aspects of the various performance standards
regulations have previously been approved by the Board of Trustees. The
Building Officer and Inspector shall, upon receipt of such application, approve
and authorize the issuance of a zoning certificate, provided there is
compliance with all other provisions of this Title. Within fifteen (15) days
after the date of issuance of such zoning certificate, the Building Officer and
Inspector shall examine said application and if he finds the proposed use of
land, building or structure does not comply with such performance standards or
other applicable regulations of this Title, he shall notify the professional
engineer and person filing the application, in writing, of his finding. Failure
of the professional engineer to show that such application is in compliance or
for the applicant to submit a revised application which shows compliance within
thirty (30) days of such notification shall be cause for revocation of the
zoning certificate. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-11-4: FILING PLANS:
All applications for zoning certificates shall be accompanied by plans in
triplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual shape, area and dimensions of
the lot to be built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the
existing buildings and accessory buildings, and the lines within which the new
buildings or structures shall be erected, the existing and intended use of each
building or structure, the number of dwelling units or lodging rooms a building
is designed to accommodate, location and number of off-street parking and off-
street loading spaces, and such other information with regard to the lot and
neighboring lots and performance standards as may be necessary to determine and
provide for the enforcement of this Title. One copy of such plans shall be
returned to the owner when such plans shall have been approved by the Building
Officer and Inspector. The lot and location of the building thereon shall be
staked out on the ground before construction is started. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-11-5: CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY:
   A.   Occupancy Permit Required.
      1.   No land shall be occupied or used in a manner different than that
existing on the effective date hereof, and no building or structure hereafter
erected or altered shall be occupied or used in whole or in part for any
purpose whatsoever until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by
the Building Officer and Inspector stating that the building, structure or land
improvement complies with all the building and health laws and the provisions
of this Title.
      2.   No change of use shall be made in any building, structure or land
improvement or part thereof, now or hereafter erected or altered, without an
occupancy permit having been issued by the Building Officer and Inspector, and
no permit shall be issued to make such change unless it is in conformity with
the provisions of this Title and amendments thereto.
      3.   No zoning certificate or occupancy permit for a change of use in an
existing building, structure or land improvement shall be issued until the
premises have been inspected and certified by the Building Officer and
Inspector to be in compliance with applicable requirements for the zoning
district in which it is located.
      4.   The Building Officer and Inspector shall not issue any permanent
occupancy permit for any new construction, whether residential, commercial,
industrial, or otherwise, prior to the completion of the construction and
installation of all required facilities therein, but the Building Officer and
Inspector may issue temporary occupancy permits in as permitted by this
Section, below.
      5.   Nothing in this Chapter shall prevent the continuance of the present
occupancy or use of any existing building, structure, or lane improvement,
except as may be necessary for the safety of life and property.
      6.   Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made coincident
with the application for a zoning certificate and shall be issued within ten
(10) days after the erection or alteration of the building or structure has
been completed. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept on file
in the office of the Building Officer and Inspector and copies shall be
furnished on request to any person having proprietary or tenancy interest in
the land, building or structure affected. A fee of five dollars ($5.00) shall
be charged for each original certificate, and one dollar ($1.00) for each copy
thereof.
   B.   Temporary Occupancy Permits. Pending the issuance of a permanent
certificate of occupancy, a temporary permit may be issued to be valid for a
period not to exceed six (6) months from its date, during the completion of any
building, structure or land improvement or during partial occupancy thereof.
Application for a temporary permit shall be accompanied with a statement
covering the items of work to be completed and the reasons the temporary permit
is requested.
      1.   Upon receipt of an application for a temporary occupancy permit, the
Building Officer and Inspector, shall review the application and the status of
construction to determine whether permitting temporary occupancy, in light of
the outstanding work required to complete construction, would pose a threat to
or otherwise affect the health, safety and welfare of the occupants of such
buildings or of other persons who may be on the premises and site of such
buildings. If the Building Officer and Inspector determines that allowing
temporary occupancy would not pose a threat to or otherwise affect the health,
safety and welfare of the occupants of such buildings or of other persons who
may be on the premises and site of such buildings, he may issue a temporary
occupancy permit. Otherwise, he shall deny the application in a writing setting
out the reason for the denial. Examples of incomplete items that the Building
Officer and Inspector may (but is not required to) consider safe in issuing an
occupancy permit when construction is not complete include, but are not limited
to, the following: gutters, down spouts, patios, decks, cabinets, fixtures,
yard grading, driveways, unfinished bathrooms, unfinished second floors in two
(2) story homes, damaged sidewalks, window well drains, exterior caulking and
interior trim.
      2.   No temporary occupancy permit shall be issued unless and until the
applicant therefore has provided the Building Officer and Inspector with a
complete list of outstanding items necessary for the completion of
construction, as well as financial surety to ensure completion of all such
items. The financial surety may be in any form acceptable to the Building
Officer and Inspector, including without limitation a cash deposit, bond, or
letter of credit, and may be required to be in the name or account of the owner
of the building, the construction contractor thereof, or both as determined by
the Building Officer and Inspector. The amount of the financial surety shall be
sufficient to complete the construction of said building, the installation of
all required facilities therein, and/or the completion of any and all land
improvements required by code, plus twenty five percent (25%). In the case of a
cash deposit, said deposit shall be held in a separate account by the Village
and shall be returned to the person depositing the same upon the Building
Officer and Inspector's written statement that the unfinished construction for
which such deposit was required has been completed in accordance with the
provisions so stipulated by ordinance. All construction work for which said
deposit is being held must be completed no later than six (6) months from date
of the temporary occupancy permit. Any portion remaining unfinished after the
six (6) month period shall be just cause for the forfeiture of the total amount
deposited.
      3.   In the event that any temporary occupancy permit issued pursuant to
this Section expires before all outstanding construction items have been
completed and a permanent occupancy permit has been granted, all occupancy of
the structure in question must immediately cease. Continued occupancy of the
structure following expiration of the temporary occupancy permit and prior to
the issuance of a permanent occupancy permit is a violation of this Code, and
the penalty for the same is seven hundred and fifty dollars ($750.00). Each day
that the violation continues is and shall be deemed a separate offense.
      4.   No temporary occupancy permit may be extended beyond six (6) months
except upon good cause shown, and then only if approved by resolution of the
Corporate Authorities of the Village.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1996-18, 7-9-1996; Ord. 2024-18, 4-23-2024)
5-11-6: VARIATIONS:
   A.   Authority: The Board of Trustees shall decide all applications for
variations of the provisions of this Title after a public hearing held before
the Planning and Zoning Commission 1. See Title 2, Chapter 1 of this Code.1 .
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold public hearings upon all
applications for variations and shall report its recommendations to the Board
of Trustees. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall recommend a variation
only after they have made a finding of fact specifying the reason or reasons
for recommending the variation. Such findings shall be based upon the standards
prescribed in subsection D of this Section. No variation shall be granted to
the Board of Trustees without such findings of fact. When the Planning and
Zoning Commission fails to recommend a variation, it can only be adopted by an
ordinance with the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Board of Trustees.
The Planning and Zoning Commission shall review all applications for variations
for conformity of the applications with the Comprehensive Plan, the provisions
of this Title, and to generally accepted standards of land use policy. (Ord.,
5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1988-19, 12-12-1988; Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   B.   Initiation: An application for a variation may be made by any
governmental office, department, board, bureau or commission or by any person
having a freehold interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive
possession, a contractual interest which may become a freehold interest, an
option to purchase, or any exclusive possessory interest applicable to the land
or land and improvements described in the application for a variation. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
   C.   Application For Variation And Notice Of Hearing: An application for a
variation shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who shall forward a copy of
the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board of
Trustees without delay. The application shall contain such information as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time by rule provide. No
application shall be considered complete until all exhibits called for in the
application have been filed, and the filing fee paid. No more than ninety (90)
days after the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held on the
application, except that if the application is not complete at least twenty
(20) days prior to the scheduled hearing, the hearing shall be continued over
to another scheduled meeting. Notice of such hearing shall be published at
least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the village.
The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as
the planning and zoning commission may by rule provide. The filing fee for the
application shall be in the amount of one hundred twenty five dollars
($125.00), and shall be paid at the time an application for variation is filed.
The filing fee, once paid, is nonrefundable. (Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
   D.   Standards For Variations: The planning and zoning commission shall not
recommend a variation of the regulations of this title, as authorized herein
unless it shall have made findings of fact based upon the evidence presented to
it in each specific case that:
      1.   The property in question cannot yield a reasonable return if
permitted to be used only under the conditions allowed by the regulations in
the district in which it is located;
      2.   The plight of the owner is due to unique circumstances;
      3.   The variation, if granted, will not alter the essential character of
the locality; and
      4.   For the purpose of implementing the above rules, the planning and
zoning commission shall also, in making its determination whether there are
practical difficulties or particular hardships, take into consideration the
extent to which the following facts favorable to the applicant have been
established by the evidence: (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
         a.   The particular physical surroundings, shape or topographical
condition of the specific property involved would result in a particular
hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from a mere inconvenience, if the
strict letter of the regulations were carried out;
         b.   The conditions upon which the petition for variation is based
would not be applicable, generally to other property within the same zoning
classification;
         c.   The purpose of the variation is not based exclusively upon a
desire to make more money out of the property;
         d.   The alleged difficulty or hardship has not been created by the
owner of the property, or by a previous owner;
         e.   The granting of the variation will not be detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the
neighborhood in which the property is located; and
         f.   The proposed variation will not impair an adequate supply of
light and air to adjacent property, or substantially increase the congestion in
the public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public
safety, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the
neighborhood. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   The planning and zoning commission may recommend and the board of trustees
may require such conditions and restrictions upon the premises benefited by a
variation as may be necessary to comply with the standards set forth in this
section to reduce or minimize the injurious effect of such variation upon other
property in the neighborhood, and better to carry out the general intent of
this zoning title. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   The planning and zoning commission shall file its written recommendations on
each application for variation with the village clerk. The village clerk shall
forward a copy of the written recommendations to the board of trustees, and the
applicant. (Ord. 1988-19, 12-12-1988; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   E.   Authorized Variations: Variations from the regulations of this zoning
title shall be granted by the planning and zoning commission only in accordance
with the standards set out in this section and may be granted only in the
following instances, and in no others: (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-
24-1993)
      1.   To permit any yard or setback less than a yard or a setback required
by the applicable regulations;
      2.   To permit the use of a lot or lots of record on the effective date
hereof for a use otherwise prohibited solely because of insufficient area or
width of the lot or lots;
      3.   To permit the same off street parking facility to qualify as
required facilities for two (2) or more uses, provided that substantial use of
such facility by each user does not take place at approximately the same hours
of the same days of the week; and
      4.   To reduce the applicable off street parking or loading facilities
required by ten percent (10%) of the applicable regulations. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      5.   To permit the construction of:
         a.   Signs with a total aggregate sign area per lot in excess of that
permitted by Section
5-13-6, provided that the total such sign face area permitted shall not exceed
an aggregate total of 1,320 square feet per lot; and
         b.   commercial ground or pole signs with a height in excess of that
permitted by Section
5-13-6, provided that under no circumstances shall any ground sign be permitted
to exceed a total height of twenty feet (20') above the normal finished grade
beneath it to the top of the sign or any pole sign be permitted to exceed a
total height of eighty feet (80') above the normal finished grade beneath it to
the top of the sign; and
         c.   commercial ground and pole signs with aggregate sign areas (per
sign) in excess of those permitted by Section
5-13-16, provided that under no circumstances shall any ground sign be
permitted to have an aggregate sign face (per sign) in excess of (200) square
feet or any pole sign to have an aggregate sign face (per sign) in excess of
six hundred thirty-six square feet (636 ft2).
   But only if such signs are located in B or M zoning districts and located
within one thousand seven hundred fifty feet (1,750') of the right of way of
Interstate 80.
      6.   To permit patios, terraces and decks in front or side yards for
property located in the residential zoning districts, provided the patios,
terraces and decks do not interfere with existing public utility and drainage
easements.
      7.   To permit the construction and maintenance of fences in residential,
business and industrial districts that are taller than permitted by the rules
and regulations of Chapter 12 of this Title, provided that no such fence may be
permitted to be in excess of eight feet (8').
      8.   To permit variances to the maximum height of nonresidential
structures, not to exceed fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2007-42, 9-11-2007; amd. Ord.
2014-23, 7-22-2014; Ord. 2022-27, 7-19-2022; Ord. 2023-19, 4-25-2023; Ord.
2024-61, 12-17-2024; Ord. 2025-5, 5-27-2025)
5-11-7: APPEALS, SCOPE OF:
An appeal to the Planning and Zoning Commission may be made by any person or by
any office, department, board or bureau aggrieved by a decision of the Building
Officer and Inspector under this Title in accordance with Illinois statutes and
the following:
   A.   An application for an appeal shall be filed with the Village Clerk
within twenty (20) days of the date of the action from which the appeal is
being filed, and thereafter the Village Clerk shall forward such application to
the Planning and Zoning Commission for processing. The Village Clerk shall
forward to the Building Officer and Inspector a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof and he shall forthwith transmit to the Planning and Zoning
Commission all the papers constituting the record upon which the action
appealed from was taken.
   B.   An appeal stays all the proceedings in furtherance of the action
appealed from, unless the officer from whom the appeal is taken certifies to
the Planning and Zoning Commission, after the notice of appeal has been filed
with him, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in
his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property in which case proceedings
shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted
by the Planning and Zoning Commission or by a court of record on application,
on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown.
   C.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall fix a reasonable time, not to
exceed ninety (90) days, for the hearing of the appeal and give due notice
thereof to the parties and decide the same within a reasonable time. The
Planning and Zoning Commission may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may
modify the order, requirement, decision or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made on the premises and to that end shall have all the powers of
the officer from whom the appeal was taken. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-
12, 8-24-1993)
5-11-8: AMENDMENTS:
   A.   Authority: The regulations imposed and the districts created under the
authority of this Zoning Title may be amended, from time to time, by ordinance
in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes. An amendment shall be granted
or denied by the Board of Trustees only after a public hearing before the
Planning and Zoning Commission and a report of its findings and recommendations
has thereafter been submitted to the Board of Trustees.
   B.   Initiation Of Amendments: Amendments may be proposed by the Board of
Trustees, Planning and Zoning Commission and by any person having a freehold
interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase, or any
exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land
which is described in the application for an amendment. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd.
Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   C.   Application For An Amendment And Notice Of Hearing: An application for
an amendment shall be filed with the Village Clerk, who shall forward a copy of
the same to the Planning and Zoning Commission and the Village Board of
Trustees without delay. The application shall contain such information as the
Planning and Zoning Commission may from time to time by rule provide. No
application shall be considered complete until all exhibits called for in the
application have been filed, and the filing fee paid. No more than ninety (90)
days after the filing of such application, a hearing shall be held on the
application, except that if the application is not complete at least twenty
(20) days prior to the scheduled hearing, the hearing shall be continued over
to another scheduled meeting. Notice of such hearing shall be published at
least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days
before the hearing, in a newspaper of general circulation within the village.
The published notice may be supplemented by such additional form of notice as
the planning and zoning commission may by rule provide. The filing fee for the
application shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), and shall
be paid at the time an application for amendment is filed. The filing fee, once
paid, is nonrefundable. (Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
   D.   Decisions:
      1.   The board of trustees, upon report of the planning and zoning
commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed
amendment in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or may refer it back
to the planning and zoning commission for further consideration. (Ord., 5-15-
1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
      2.   In case a written protest against any proposed amendment is signed
and acknowledged by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage proposed to
be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom, or by owners of twenty
percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be altered, is
filed with the village clerk, the amendment cannot be passed except on the
favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of the board of trustees.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
5-11-9: CONDITIONAL PERMITTED USES:
   A.   Purpose: The formulation and enactment of a comprehensive ordinance is
based on the division of the entire village into districts in each of which are
permitted specified uses that are mutually compatible. In addition to such
permitted, compatible uses, however, it is recognized that there are other uses
which it may be necessary or desirable to allow in a given district but which,
on account of their potential influence upon neighboring uses or public
facilities, need to be carefully regulated with respect to location or
operation for the protection of the community. Such uses are classified in this
title as "conditional permitted uses" and fall into two (2) categories:
      1.   Uses either municipally operated or operated by publicly regulated
utilities, or uses traditionally affected by public interest;
      2.   Uses entirely private in character which, on account of their
peculiar locational need, the nature of the service they offer to the public,
and their possible damaging influence on the neighborhood, may have to be
established in a district or districts in which they cannot reasonably be
allowed as an unrestricted permitted use under the zoning regulations. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
   B.   Initiation: Conditional permitted uses may be proposed by the Board of
Trustees, Planning and Zoning Commission and by any person having a freehold
interest, a possessory interest entitled to exclusive possession, a contractual
interest which may become a freehold interest, an option to purchase or any
exclusive possessory interest which is specifically enforceable on the land
which is described in the application for a conditional permitted use. (Ord.,
5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   C.   Application For Conditional Permitted Use And Notice Of Hearing: An
application for a conditional permitted use shall be filed with the Village
Clerk, who shall forward a copy of the same to the Planning and Zoning
Commission and the Village Board of Trustees without delay. The application
shall contain such information as the Planning and Zoning Commission may from
time to time by rule provide. No application shall be considered complete until
all exhibits called for in the application have been filed, and the filing fee
paid. No more than ninety (90) days after the filing of such application, a
hearing shall be held on the application, except that if the application is not
complete at least twenty (20) days prior to the scheduled hearing, the hearing
shall be continued over to another scheduled meeting. Notice of such hearing
shall be published at least once, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than
fifteen (15) days before the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation
within the Village. The published notice may be supplemented by such additional
form of notice as the Planning and Zoning Commission may by rule provide. The
filing fee for the application shall be in the amount of five hundred dollars
($500.00), and shall be paid at the time an application for conditional
permitted use is filed. The filing fee, once paid, is nonrefundable. (Ord.
1994-4, 1-11-1994)
   D.   Decisions:
      1.   The Board of Trustees, upon report of the Planning and Zoning
Commission and without further public hearing, may grant or deny any proposed
conditional permitted use in accordance with applicable Illinois statutes, or
may refer it back to the Planning and Zoning Commission for further
consideration. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
      2.   In case a written protest against any proposed conditional permitted
use signed and acknowledged by owners of twenty percent (20%) of the frontage
proposed to be altered, or by the owners of twenty percent (20%) of the
frontage immediately adjoining or across the alley therefrom, or by owners of
twenty percent (20%) of the frontage directly opposite the frontage to be
altered, is filed with the Village Clerk, the conditional permitted use cannot
be passed except on the favorable vote of two-thirds (2/3) of all members of
the Board of Trustees. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   E.   Effective Period: No conditional use permit shall be valid for a period
longer than one year from the date it is granted, unless a building permit or
certificate of occupancy is obtained within such period and the erection or
alteration of a building is started or the use is commenced within such period.
The Board may grant one extension of this period, valid for no more than one
hundred eighty (180) additional days, upon written application to the Board for
the request for extension to be placed on a Village Board agenda for action and
good cause shown by the applicant. No notice or hearing is required for the
granting of such an extension. If any conditional use is abandoned or
discontinued for a continuous period of one year, the conditional use permit
for such use shall become void, and such use shall not thereafter be
reestablished unless a new conditional use permit is obtained. (Ord. 1997-08,
5-27-1997)
5-11-10: PENALTY, ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects, refuses to comply
with, or who resists enforcement of any of the provisions of this Zoning Title
shall, upon conviction, be fined as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
   B.   The Building Officer and Inspector is hereby designated and authorized
to enforce this Title. However, it shall also be the duty of all officers,
citizens and employees of the Village to assist the Building Officer and
Inspector by reporting to him any new construction, reconstruction, improved
land uses, or upon any seeming violation. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
CHAPTER 12
FENCES AND HEDGES
SECTION:
5-12-1 Fence Permit Required
5-12-2 Private Fences On Public Property
5-12-3 Prohibited Materials Of Construction
5-12-4 Maintenance And Repair
5-12-5 Fences In Residential Districts
5-12-6 Business And Manufacturing Zones
5-12-7 Adjoining Districts
5-12-8 Nonconforming Fences
5-12-9 Hedges
5-12-10 Nuisance Declared; Abatement
5-12-1: FENCE PERMIT REQUIRED:
No fence shall be erected or substantially altered in the village without a
building permit issued therefor by the village building department upon payment
of the required permit fee. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-2: PRIVATE FENCES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
No private fence(s) shall be allowed or constructed on public streets or
highway rights of way. Fences may, by permit, be placed on public utility
easements so long as the structures do not interfere in any way with existing
underground, ground or overground utilities. Further, the village or any
utility company having authority to use such easements shall not be liable for
repair or replacement of such fences in the event they are moved, damaged or
destroyed by virtue of the lawful use of said easement. Fences in violation of
this section may be summarily removed. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-3: PROHIBITED MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   No barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall be allowed on private
property in residential zones or on lots in any zone being used for single- or
multiple-family dwelling purposes. No barbed wire or barbed wire fences shall
be allowed on private property in business or industrial zones where the
property lines of such property abut lots or parcels zoned or being used for
single- or multiple-family purposes or on fences in front yards.
   B.   No fence shall be constructed of material obviously intended to inflict
great bodily harm should a person or animal attempt to climb or scale it. Such
material includes, but is not limited to, electrically charged wires or other
electrical conduit, broken glass, razor blades and sharp or ragged metal spikes
or spears. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-4: MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR:
All fences shall be maintained in good, structurally sound repair and in a
neat, clean, presentable and attractive condition. If, on inspection by the
zoning officer, any fence, in his determination, does not meet the requirements
of this section, he shall order the owner or occupier of the premises, by
registered or certified mail, to make the necessary repairs or improvements as
directed or he shall be in violation of this code, and the village attorney
shall cause a complaint to be issued and processed against said owner or
occupier in accordance with rules of the circuit court of Grundy County or Will
County, Illinois, where applicable. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-5: FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   In single- and multiple-family residential zones, no fence may exceed
four feet (4') in height above ground level in front yards. Fences along the
side lines to the rear of the front yard and along the rear lot line may not
exceed six feet (6') in height above ground level. On lot lines abutting the
public right of way or residential property, the fence must face outward with
support posts on the inside.
   B.   When any fence of six feet (6') in height is installed on any interior
lot the fence shall not extend beyond the front building setback line as shown
on the final plat of the subdivision. A fence extending beyond the building
setback line into the front yard shall be a decorative fence. The fence shall
be set back a minimum of one foot (1') from the sidewalk.
   C.   When any fence is installed in the front, side or rear yard, it shall
not extend beyond the property line or encroach upon adjoining property.
   D.   On all corner lots, any fence other than a decorative fence shall not
extend beyond the building setback lines as established and recorded on the
final plat(s) of all residential subdivisions. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-6: BUSINESS AND MANUFACTURING ZONES:
   A.   Except as permitted in subsections
5-7-2B4 and
5-8-2B3 of this title and subsection E of this section, fences may not exceed
six feet (6') in height above ground level, and the use of barbed wire is
prohibited; except, that one foot (1') additional of any fence along side or
rear lot lines in these zones may be constructed of barbed wire. Barbed wire
shall not be used, installed or constructed on fences fronting on any street.
   B.   When any fence is installed in the front, side or rear yard, it shall
not extend beyond the property line or encroach upon adjoining property.
   C.   No fence or wall shall be erected, constructed or maintained within the
first fifty feet (50') from the front lot line. However, a decorative fence may
be erected within the first fifty feet (50').
   D.   Fences shall be permitted in the required interior side yard or rear
yard; provided, that the fence does not extend nearer to a lot line adjoining a
street than the longest distance between such lot line and the nearest wall of
the principal building or structure; in the case of corner lots, not beyond the
front or street side line of the building or structure; and does not exceed a
height of six feet (6'), except as permitted in subsections
5-7-2B4 and
5-8-2B3 of this title and subsection E of this section.
   E.   Screening which is required for swim and/or tennis clubs, private and
public, shall not exceed a height of twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 2006-44, 11-28-
2006)
5-12-7: ADJOINING DISTRICTS:
   A.   Fences installed as a screening between commercial and residential or
between industrial and residential districts shall be of the same design,
construction material, height and color. Height requirement is six feet (6')
with a solid effect.
   B.   Where no fence exists at time of construction, the first developer to
install such a fence will set the established guideline for both adjoining and
other fences in the same district to follow.
   C.   All fences shall join together to provide continuity along the common
lot line of commercial and residential or industrial and residential districts
where a fence for screening is required.
   D.   All fences other than those intended for decorative or screening
purposes shall be buffered with berming and/or landscaping.
   E.   Screening which is required for swim and/or tennis clubs, private and
public shall not exceed a height of twelve feet (12'). (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-8: NONCONFORMING FENCES:
Fences existing at the effective date hereof which are not in violation of
section
5-12-4 of this chapter and are not located on public street and highway rights
of way, but which violate any other section of this chapter may continue to be
maintained and to exist but may not be replaced, if destroyed or removed, to
the extent that the violations would be continued. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-9: HEDGES:
Hedges, plantings, shrubbery, etc., when used as a screening, shall in no way
obstruct the view of traffic at any intersection. On corner lots, no
obstruction higher than thirty inches (30") above curb level shall be located
within thirty feet (30') of the lot corner formed by the intersection of any
two (2) street lines. If it is deemed to create a hazard, the owner must remove
same upon notice from the zoning officer or chief of police within thirty (30)
days of such notification. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
5-12-10: NUISANCE DECLARED; ABATEMENT:
Any fence which shall be erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of
this chapter is deemed a nuisance, and it shall be the duty of the zoning
officer and the chief of police to abate the same. (Ord. 1996-20, 7-9-1996)
CHAPTER 13
SIGNS
SECTION:
5-13-1 Scope Of Regulations
5-13-2 Interpretation
5-13-3 Rules
5-13-4 Definitions
5-13-5 Limit On Number Of Signs
5-13-6 Limit On Sign Area
5-13-7 Permits For Permanent Signs
5-13-8 Permits For Temporary Signs
5-13-9 Prohibited Signs
5-13-10 Placement Of Signs On Corner Lots
5-13-11 Placement Of Signs On Lots
5-13-12 Illumination Of Signs
5-13-13 Safety And Maintenance
5-13-14 Certain Signs Permitted In All Districts
5-13-15 Signs Permitted In Residential And Agricultural Districts
5-13-16 Commercial Districts
5-13-17 Industrial Districts
5-13-18 Off-premises Signs Prohibited; Conditional Use Permit For Combination
Signs
5-13-19: Nonconforming Signs
5-13-20: Duties
5-13-21: Sign Area Of A Sign Versus Measurement Distance Table
5-13-22: Penalty
5-13-1: SCOPE OF REGULATIONS:
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all signs and
portions of signs erected, altered with respect to height and area of sign
face, added to, or relocated in the village shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this chapter. Any existing sign not in conformity with the
regulations herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming. (Ord. 1998-1,
1-13-1998)
5-13-2: INTERPRETATION:
   A.   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to be an expression of
the maximum allowable number and size of signs which cause the least potential
conflict with surrounding uses and which promote an improved physical
appearance and aesthetics within the village.
   B.   Where the conditions imposed by any provision of this chapter upon the
control of signs are either more restrictive or less restrictive than
comparable conditions imposed by the provisions of any other law, code,
ordinance, statute, resolution, rule or regulation of any governmental body,
the regulations which are more restrictive or which impose higher standards
shall govern.
   C.   When a sign type is not specifically listed in the sections devoted to
permitted signs, it shall be assumed that such signs are hereby expressly
prohibited. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-3: RULES:
The language set forth in this chapter shall be interpreted as follows:
   A.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the plural the
singular.
   B.   The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
   C.   The word "may" is permissive.
   D.   All measured distances or standards shall be to the nearest integer; if
a fraction is one-half (1/2) or less, the integer next below shall be taken.
   E.   Height of signs shall be measured to the highest point thereon, from
the crown of the street directly opposite the sign, or from the average normal
grade level directly below the sign, whichever is higher. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-
1998)
5-13-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following terms when used in this chapter shall be construed as follows:
COMBINATION SIGN: A ground or pole sign located in a commercial district
constructed with multiple sign cabinets designed for use by multiple lots as an
on- or off-premises sign.
CORNER LOT: A lot with property lines of two (2) streets bisecting on an angle.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: A sign or portion of a larger sign capable of
displaying letters, numbers, words, symbols, figures, images, or characters
electronically or electrically to provide a message or picture. Electronic
message centers do not include temporary electronic speed limit signs,
temporary electronic signboards displaying emergency information, or temporary
signs utilized to direct traffic, such as electronic arrow boards or electronic
signs providing traffic information.
FACADE: The face or wall of a building as it is presented to view; the apparent
width and/or height of a building as viewed from streets, driveways, and
parking lots. Minor changes in wall elevations do not constitute the creation
of additional facades.
GROUND SIGN: A permanent sign which is supported by uprights or braces securely
anchored in the ground, with no more than two feet (2') of clear space between
the bottom of the face of the sign and the grade beneath the sign face.
PERMANENT SIGN: Any sign which is permanently attached to a structure or
foundation.
POLE SIGN: Any sign having a supporting structure with a size less than twenty
five percent (25%) of the total width of the sign with more than five feet (5')
of clear space between the bottom of the face of the sign and the grade beneath
the sign face.
REAL ESTATE SIGN: A sign placed upon a property advertising that particular
property for sale or lease.
RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT SIGN: A permanent ground sign placed at the major
entrances to and identifying a residential development.
RESIDENTIAL MARKING SIGN: A temporary sign advertising a residential
development.
SHOPPING CENTER: A commercial development in excess of ten (10) acres of land
improved with a structure of at least fifty thousand (50,000) square feet
containing five (5) or more distinct and separate retail businesses.
SHOPPING PLAZA: A commercial development in excess of one acre of land,
improved with a structure containing three (3) or more distinct and separate
retail businesses, also sharing common parking areas and access drives.
SIGN: Any structure, vehicle, device, or any part thereof, which shall be used
to identify, advertise, or attract attention to any object, product, place,
activity, person, institution, organization, firm, group, commodity,
profession, enterprise, industry, or business and which shall display or
include any letter, word, model, number, banner, flag, pennant, insignia,
device or representation used as announcement, direction, or advertisement, and
which is intended to be seen by persons in the public right of way.
SIGN AREA: Unless otherwise specified, the area of the smallest triangle,
rectangle, or circle which can wholly enclose the surface area of the sign. In
the event that individual letters or insignia of a wall sign are attached
directly to the wall and vary significantly in size, sign area may be computed
using not more than two (2) triangles, rectangles or circles per word or
insignia, visible faces of a multifaced sign shall be treated as if it were a
single faced sign with only the area of the largest single faced sign visible
at any one time being computed to determine sign area.
SIGN FACE: The surface of a sign or signboard upon, against or through which a
message is displayed.
SIGN PANEL: An individual sign placard for use in a sign plaza displaying
directional information relating to residential subdivisions under development
and public facilities.
SIGN PLAZA: A freestanding structure not more than eight feet (8') above grade,
located in the public right of way, containing individual sign panels intended
to provide direction to homebuyers to the location of residential subdivisions
under development and to provide direction to public facilities, and not for
any other purpose.
SNIPE SIGN: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, utility pole
and the like or self-supported by posts or other supports, independent of any
building or other structure and anchored in or upon the ground, advertising
residential subdivisions.
TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign intended to be displayed a limited length of time and
not permanently attached to a structure or a foundation.
WALL SIGN: A sign attached directly to a building wall which does not extend
more than twelve inches (12") therefrom, nor extend above the eaves line of a
gable, hip or gambrel roof, nor extend above the facade of a flat roof, nor
above the deck line of a mansard roof.
WINDOW SIGN: A temporary or permanent wall sign which is visible to persons in
the public right of way and which is placed within or on the outside of a
window or on the inside of a glass window, or on the inside of a building and
within one foot (1') of a window. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27,
11-9-1999; Ord. 2005-58, 11-22-2005; Ord. 2005-59, 11-22-2005; Ord. 2009-08, 1-
27-2009; Ord. 2025-6, 5-27-2025)
5-13-5: LIMIT ON NUMBER OF SIGNS:
The number of signs which may be maintained on any premises is governed by the
zoning district in which the property is located. A double faced sign shall
count as a single sign. When a premises or where a building has both a front
and rear public entrance, a rear sign may be erected. The rear sign shall not
exceed in size the front sign. Signs described in section
5-13-14 of this chapter shall not be counted in calculating the total number of
signs. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-6: LIMIT ON SIGN AREA:
Each premises shall be allowed an aggregate total of four (4) square feet of
signage per linear foot of building frontage, for all signs located on the
property. Premises having frontage on more than one dedicated street will be
allowed signage for frontage on each street in accordance with the above
formula. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-7: PERMITS FOR PERMANENT SIGNS:
   A.   No permanent sign shall hereafter be erected, altered, or moved until
the person proposing to erect, alter, or move such sign shall have obtained a
permit therefor from the building commission. Such permit shall be issued only
when the sign complies with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Any person desiring such a permit shall file application therefor upon
a form which shall contain the following information:
      1.   Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant;
      2.   A plot plan drawn to scale showing the location of the building,
structure or lot to which the sign is to be attached or erected, and showing
the position of the sign in relation to nearby buildings and thoroughfares;
      3.   A plan drawn to scale showing the design of the sign, materials
used, method of construction, and means of attachment to the building or
ground;
      4.   The name of the person erecting, altering, or moving said sign;
      5.   Written consent of the owner of the land on which the sign is to be
erected, altered, or relocated;
      6.   Any other information as the building and zoning officer shall
require in order to show full compliance with this and all other applicable
codes of the village. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-8: PERMITS FOR TEMPORARY SIGNS:
   A.   No temporary sign, except those enumerated in section
5-13-14 of this chapter, shall be placed or erected until a permit therefor
shall have been issued by the village clerk. A temporary sign permit shall
entitle the holder thereof to display such sign for the time period specified
therein. No temporary sign, including signs for political candidates, shall be
permitted or placed in a public right of way. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd.
Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
   B.   Duration of temporary signs shall be as follows:
      1.   Residential Marketing Signs, On And Off Site: Twelve (12) months,
renewable on a six (6) month basis thereafter.
      2.   Commercial Or Industrial Real Estate Signs: Commercial or industrial
real estate signs, exceeding six (6) square feet in area, six (6) months,
renewable on a six (6) month basis.
      3.   Temporary Mobile Signs: Advertising a special sale or event not to
exceed thirty (30) days and not more than three (3) times per year with at
least thirty (30) days between such advertising periods.
   C.   Application for a permit for temporary sign shall be made on a form
provided by the village. Permits for temporary signs must be kept on the
premises where signs are displayed. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   D.   Every applicant for a temporary sign, searchlight and inflatable
balloons shall pay a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). No fee shall be
charged for temporary sign permits for not for profit activities or
organizations. The use of searchlights for grand openings shall not exceed
seventy two (72) hours in duration and the permit fee shall be established by
village ordinance. The use of large inflatables (i.e., hot air balloons) for
special events shall not exceed seventy two (72) hours in duration and the
permit fee shall be established by village ordinance. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998;
amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
5-13-9: PROHIBITED SIGNS:
The following signs are prohibited:
   A.   Moving, rotating or animated signs, except traditional barber poles,
not exceeding two feet (2') in height and projecting not more than twelve
inches (12") from the building, utilized only to identify a haircutting
establishment. In authorizing the latter exemption, the corporate authorities
find it in the public interest to retain this historic symbol of American
commerce.
   B.   Searchlights other than for grand openings. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   C.   Sign illumination that is not steady and constant, except electronic
message centers may display messages at intervals not less than five (5)
seconds. (Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
   D.   Windows painted or posted in excess of fifty percent (50%) of the
viewing area. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   E.   (Rep. by Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
   F.   Freestanding panels, flags or banners used to advertise products,
prices and services or attract attention. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   G.   Advertising or signage of any type on a satellite antenna. (Ord. 1985-
21, 11-25-1985; amd. Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   H.   Signs not listed in sections
5-13-14,
5-13-15,
5-13-16,
5-13-18, and
5-13-19 of this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited, even though such
signs are not specifically listed in this section. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   I.   Snipe signs. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
subsection shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) per sign for the first
violation, two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per sign for the second
violation and five hundred dollars ($500.00) per sign for three (3) or more
violations; and a separate violation shall be deemed committed on each day
during and on which a violation occurs or continues. (Ord. 2005-58, 11-22-2005)
   J.   Temporary signs which contain one or more electronic message centers.
(Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009; amd. Ord. 2025-6, 5-27-2025)
5-13-10: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON CORNER LOTS:
No sign having a height of more than thirty inches (30") above the crown of the
adjacent streets shall be constructed or placed within the part of the yard or
open area of a corner lot which is included within a triangular area of twenty
five feet (25') from the point of intersection of the two (2) street right of
way lines forming such corner lot. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-11: PLACEMENT OF SIGNS ON LOTS:
With the exception of wall mounted signs not projecting more than twelve inches
(12") from wall, no sign shall be placed closer than five feet (5') from any
lot line. Gasoline price signs shall be located on poles, one per street
frontage, not to exceed twenty four (24) square feet in area. Such gasoline
price signs may be placed within one foot (1') of the lot line if it does not
obstruct the view of traffic nor exceed fifteen feet (15') in height when
mounted on light standards. Temporary mobile signs shall be located not less
than one foot (1') from the property line and shall not obstruct the view of
traffic. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-12: ILLUMINATION OF SIGNS:
   A.   Illumination shall be constant in intensity and color. Illumination
shall be installed or applied only through a translucent surface, recessed into
the sign structure, or if the light source is external to the sign, directed to
and concentrated on the sign. Floodlights, gooseneck reflectors or other
external sources of illumination shall be contained within a protective casing.
The illumination of signs shall be located or shielded in such a way that
direct rays do not reflect into a public way or any adjacent property.
   B.   The following illumination shall be prohibited: changing light
intensity, brightness, exposed light bulbs, flashing, blinking, or traveling
and similar illumination, beacon lights, red, green and amber lights.
   C.   All illuminated signs within one hundred feet (100') of any residential
use shall be turned off between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and five
o'clock (5:00) A.M. unless the establishment is engaged in the operation of
business during the period, in which case the sign may be lit during the hours
of operation only.
   D.   In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any
internal or external light source, exceed fifty (50) foot-candles when measured
with a standard light meter held perpendicular to the sign face at a distance
of four feet (4') from the sign, or exceed one-half (1/2) foot-candle in a
residential district. (Ord. 2009-08, 1-27-2009)
5-13-13: SAFETY AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   Every sign and all parts thereof, including framework, supports,
background, anchors, and wiring systems shall be constructed and maintained in
compliance with the building, electrical and fire protection codes of the
village.
   B.   All signs and all parts thereof shall be kept in a good state of
repair. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-14: CERTAIN SIGNS PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS:
Unless otherwise stated, signs listed in this section are permitted in all
zoning districts and shall not require a sign permit nor be counted when
calculating the number of signs or square footage on a premises. However, such
signs shall conform to all other general regulations in this chapter, for
example, height, area, setback, clearance, etc.:
   A.   Name and address plates which give only the name and address of the
resident of the building, and which are not more than one square foot in sign
area.
   B.   Memorial signs or tablets and signs denoting the date of erection of
buildings, no larger than five (5) square feet.
   C.   No trespassing signs or other such signs regulating the use of a
property, not more than two (2) square feet in sign area in residential
districts and six (6) square feet in all commercial and industrial districts.
   D.   Real estate signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet per side in all
districts. Such real estate signs shall be removed within fifteen (15) days
after the premises so advertised has been sold, or leased.
   E.   Signs regulating on premises traffic and parking, and signs denoting
building facilities such as lavatories and public telephone areas, when less
than six (6) square feet in area and bearing no commercial advertising.
   F.   Signs erected by a governmental body, or under the direction of such a
body, and bearing no commercial advertising, such as traffic signs, railroad
crossing signs, safety signs, and signs identifying public schools and
playgrounds.
   G.   The flag, pennant, or insignia of any government, or of any religious,
charitable, or fraternal organization.
   H.   One logo flag of a company shall be allowed provided it is flown with
and is not larger than the American flag.
   I.   Garage sale signs, not exceeding six (6) square feet in area, may be
placed at the curb in residential areas not to exceed ten (10) days. (Ord.
1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   J.   Temporary signs no larger than thirty two (32) square feet in area
advertising the sale of edible farm products, advertising auctions or special
events of charitable or public service groups. Such signs may remain for thirty
(30) days, must be located entirely on privately owned property and must be
removed upon close of the event. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27,
11-9-1999)
   K.   Window signs of paper or similar material shall be allowed in
commercial districts, provided that such signs are to be used to notify the
public of special sales or current prices, and further provided that such signs
do not take up more than fifty percent (50%) of the total window area. (Ord.
1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   L.   Temporary residential marketing signs, off site shall be allowed at not
more than four (4) off site locations within the village to call attention and
give directions to the development. Each sign shall be located entirely on
private property, shall not exceed thirty two (32) square feet in area and
shall not have a total height of more than ten feet (10'). Location and
construction shall be approved by the village board upon recommendation of the
plan commission. Such signs shall be considered temporary and have a temporary
sign permit as outlined in section
5-13-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord. 1999-27, 11-9-1999)
   M.   Sign plazas, as follows:
      1.   The village may grant the right to design, erect, and maintain sign
plazas pursuant to a duly executed license agreement.
      2.   Sign plazas shall be ladder type with individual sign panels of
uniform design, and shall not include pennants, flags, or other devices for
visual attention.
      3.   The location and construction of all sign plazas shall be approved
by the village board.
      4.   Sign plazas shall have a sign permit as outlined in section
5-13-7 of this chapter.
      5.   Fees for the sign plazas and sign panels shall be as set forth in a
duly executed license agreement or as set by the village board.
      6.   In the event a sign plaza is not constructed within one hundred
twenty (120) days after the date of issuance of a permit, such permit shall
expire.
      7.   Sign panels shall contain only the name of a residential community,
subdivision, neighborhood, homebuilder and/or developer, the respective logo
and recognized color scheme, the name and/or location of public facilities, and
an appropriate uniform directional arrow. A line of text at the bottom of the
sign panel with directional information is permissible if circumstances so
warrant.
      8.   The name of the village shall be displayed prominently at the top of
each sign plaza. (Ord. 2005-59, 11-22-2005)
5-13-15: SIGNS PERMITTED IN RESIDENTIAL AND AGRICULTURAL DISTRICTS:
   A.   All signs enumerated in section
5-13-14 of this chapter.
   B.   Name and address plates for buildings containing more than two (2)
dwelling units, provided that such signs shall not be more than three (3)
square feet in area.
   C.   Identification signs for nonresidential uses, i.e., schools, churches,
cemeteries, golf courses, private nonprofit recreational areas, provided that
such signs are limited to one sign per building entrance, and provided that
each such sign be limited to forty-two (42) square feet of area, and seven feet
( 7') in height if a ground sign. Ground and pole signs permitted under this
subpart (C) may incorporate electronic message centers, subject to the
following requirements:
      1.   Signs containing electronic message centers shall otherwise conform
to all other regulations applicable to signs as regulated by the zoning
district of the subject property.
      2.   The electronic message shall remain fixed for a minimum of five (5)
seconds to avoid a flashing or blinking effect. The electronic message shall
change only through dissolve or fade transitions, or with the use of other
subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the appearance of moving
text or images.
      3.   An electronic message center is not an off-premises sign and cannot
be used to advertise off-site businesses.
      4.   Electronic message centers shall not produce any sounds.
      5.   Illumination Measurement Criteria: The illuminance of an electronic
message center shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot-
candles accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with
the electronic message center off, and again with the electronic message center
displaying a white image for a full color-capable electronic message center, or
a solid message for a single-color electronic message center. all measurements
shall be taken as close as practical to a perpendicular plane of the sign at
the distance determined by the total square footage of the electronic message
center as set forth in the accompanying sign area of a sign versus measurement
distance table in section 5-13-21 of this chapter.
      6.   Illumination Limits: The difference between the off and solid-
message measurements using the electronic message center measurement criteria
shall not exceed zero point three (0.3) foot-candles over ambient lighting
conditions. In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any
internal or external artificial light source, exceed one hundred (100) foot-
candles at the sign face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed,
located, shielded, and directed as to prevent the casting of direct light upon
adjacent property or streets.
      7.   Dimming Capabilities: Electronic message centers must be equipped
with a light detector/photocell that automatically adjusts the display's
brightness according to natural ambient light conditions to comply with the
zero point three (0.3) foot-candle maximum measurement over ambient lighting
conditions.
      8.   Location Specific Restriction: An electronic message center located
within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use, or as otherwise
determined by the Planning Commission, may not operate between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, or shall
hold static on a single image which may include the current date, time, and
temperature, and shall not cause illuminance in excess of three tenths (0.3)
foot-candles over ambient lighting conditions as measured at a point
perpendicular to the electronic sign face at a distance in feet calculated in
the table provided in Section 5-13-21 of this chapter.
      9.   Regulations governing electronic message centers are subject to
ongoing monitoring and future modification in the exercise of the village's
police powers. No vested right is ever created in an existing digital message
board. If regulations governing operational aspects of electronic message
centers (i.e. dwell time, transitions, illumination/brightness, etc.) are
modified by the village, sign owners and operators are required to bring
digital message boards into compliance with all applicable regulations.
   D.   Permanent residential development signs at entrances to a residential
development or a residential planned unit development and containing no
commercial advertising, constructed entirely upon privately owned property,
constructed of material which is the same or of a more permanent nature than
the material used in the buildings and as approved by the plan commission and
village board.
   E.   Temporary residential marketing signs at major entrances to planned
unit developments or residential subdivisions, not to exceed one hundred twenty
eight (128) square feet in area or fifteen feet (15') in height, containing the
name of the development and the names of builders or units therein.
   Such signs shall be considered temporary and have a temporary sign permit as
outlined in section 5-13-8 of this chapter. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998; amd. Ord.
2025-4, 4-22-2025)
5-13-16: COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS:
All signs are prohibited in the commercial districts except:
   A.   All signs permitted in the residential districts, sections
5-13-14 and
5-13-15 of this chapter.
   B.   Ground or pole signs as follows:
      1.   Single Or Combined Use Building And Lot: One per street frontage,
not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet in area or four feet (4') in height
for a ground sign or twenty five feet (25') in height for a pole sign.
      2.   Shopping Plaza: One per street frontage, not to exceed one hundred
fifty (150) square feet in area or six feet (6') in height for a ground sign
and twenty five feet (25') in height for a pole sign.
      3.   Shopping Center: One ground sign per street frontage, not to exceed
one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area or six feet (6') in height; plus
one pole sign per street frontage, not to exceed two hundred twenty (220)
square feet in area per sign face, or thirty feet (30') in height, provided
that advertising displayed thereon shall be limited to business, merchandise,
and services found within the shopping center.
      4.   Real Estate Signs: One per street frontage except as defined in
subsection
5-13-14D of this chapter, not to exceed thirty two (32) square feet of sign
area per face for each one acre of land area up to a maximum of one hundred
(100) square feet of sign area per face; not to exceed ten feet (10') in
height. Such signs shall be considered temporary and have a temporary sign
permit as outlined in section
5-13-8 of this chapter.
      5.   Gasoline Price Signs: No more than one gasoline price sign per
street frontage with a maximum sign size of fifteen (15) square feet if
attached to poles. The sign must be permanently mounted on a pole and will not
be included in the computation of the total signage requirement.
   6.   Combination Signs. Subject to section
5-13-18, up to one (1) sign, whether ground or pole sign, on a single lot. Each
approved sign cabinet shall not exceed one hundred square feet (100 ft2) in
area. Combination ground signs shall not exceed six feet (6') in height.
Combination pole signs shall not exceed twenty- five feet (25') in height.
   C.   Wall sign as follows:
      1.   Single Use Building And Lot: Two (2) signs per facade, but not to
exceed a total of four (4) such signs.
      2.   Combined Use Building And Lot: Three (3) signs per facade, but not
to exceed a total of six (6) such signs. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
      3.   Shopping Plaza: One sign per individual business or other
enterprise, two (2) signs per corner unit, one on each facade. For purposes of
this subsection C3, a wall sign may be constructed of individual sign elements
that together convey a single, complete message, and the totality of the sign
elements shall be considered a single wall sign. Sign elements are graphics,
taglines or the individual letters that comprise the main text of a wall sign.
The total wall sign area shall be determined by adding the area of the smallest
rectangle, circle, triangle, or parallelogram drawn around each individual sign
element. (Ord. 2011-04, 1-25-2011)
      4.   Shopping Center: Same as shopping plaza, subsection C3 of this
section.
      5.   Area Limitation: The above signs are limited to an area equal to ten
percent (10%) of the facade of the building containing the business or other
enterprise of the facade upon which the sign is to be mounted.
   D.   Total sign area per lot: See section
5-13-6 of this chapter.
   E.   Awning sign as follows:
      1.   Awning shall not project more than forty eight inches (48") from the
wall of the building.
      2.   Awning shall not project beyond the lot line.
      3.   Awning signs shall have a bottom elevation of at least eight feet
(8') above sidewalk or grade below.
      4.   Awning signs shall comply with all other requirements of wall signs.
(Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
   F.   Electronic message centers may be incorporated into ground or pole
signs and gasoline price signs, as follows:
      1.   Signs containing electronic message centers shall otherwise conform
to all other regulations applicable to signs as regulated by the zoning
district of the subject property.
      2.   The electronic message shall remain fixed for a minimum of five (5)
seconds to avoid a flashing or blinking effect. The electronic message shall
change only through dissolve or fade transitions, or with the use of other
subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the appearance of moving
text or images.
      3.   The electronic message center portion of a sign shall comprise no
more than fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the sign.
      4.   An electronic message center is not an off-premises sign and cannot
be used to advertise off-site businesses.
      5.   Electronic message centers shall not produce any sounds.
      6.   Illumination Measurement Criteria: The illuminance of an electronic
message center shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot-
candles accurate to at least two (2) decimals. Illuminance shall be measured
with the electronic message center off, and again with the electronic message
center displaying a white image for a full color-capable electronic message
center, or a solid message for a single-color electronic message center. All
measurements shall be taken as close as practical to a perpendicular plane of
the sign at the distance determined by the total square footage of the
electronic message center as set forth in the accompanying sign area of a sign
versus measurement distance table in section 5-13-21 of this chapter.
      7.   Illumination Limits: The difference between the off and solid-
message measurements using the electronic message center measurement criteria
shall not exceed zero point three (0.3) foot-candles over ambient lighting
conditions. In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any
internal or external artificial light source, exceed one hundred (100) foot-
candles at the sign face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed,
located, shielded, and directed as to prevent the casting of direct light upon
adjacent property or streets.
      8.   Dimming Capabilities: Electronic message centers must be equipped
with a light detector/photocell that automatically adjusts the display's
brightness according to natural ambient light conditions to comply with the
zero point three (0.3) foot-candle maximum measurement over ambient lighting
conditions.
       9.   Location Specific Restriction: An electronic message center located
within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use, or as otherwise
determined by the planning commission, may not operate between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, or shall
hold static on a single image which may include the current date, time, and
temperature, and shall not cause illuminance in excess of three tenths (0.3)
foot-candles over ambient lighting conditions as measured at a point
perpendicular to the electronic sign face at a distance in feet calculated in
the table in section 5-13-21 of this chapter.
      10.   Regulations governing electronic message centers are subject to
ongoing monitoring and future modification in the exercise of the village's
police powers. No vested right is ever created in an existing digital message
board. If regulations governing operational aspects of electronic message
centers (i.e. dwell time, transitions, illumination/brightness, etc.) are
modified by the village, sign owners and operators are required to bring
digital message boards into compliance with all applicable regulations. (Ord.
2009-08, 1-27-2009; amd. Ord. 2025-4, 4- 22-2025; Ord. 2025-6, 5-27-2025)
5-13-17: INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS:
All signs are prohibited in the industrial districts except:
   A.   Permitted Signs: All signs enumerated in sections
5-13-14 and
5-13-15 of this chapter.
   B.   Wall Signs: Wall signs are limited to an area equal to twelve percent
(12%) of the facade upon which the sign is to be mounted.
   C.   Ground Signs: One per street frontage; provided that the maximum size
of signs in the industrial zone shall be two hundred (200) square feet.
   D.   Real Estate Signs (Except As Defined In Subsection
5-13-14D Of This Chapter): One per street frontage, not to exceed thirty two
(32) square feet of sign area per face for each one acre of contiguous land
area, but not to exceed a maximum of two hundred (200) square feet of area per
sign face; not to exceed fifteen feet (15') in height. Such signs shall be
considered temporary and have a temporary sign permit as outlined in section
5-13-8 of this chapter.
   E.   Height: No sign shall project higher than thirty five feet (35') above
the normal finished grade beneath it.
   F.   Industrial Development Signs: Permanent industrial development signs at
entrances to industrial parks not exceeding two hundred (200) square feet,
constructed entirely upon privately owned property, constructed of material
which is the same or of a more permanent nature than the material used in the
buildings and as approved by the plan commission and village board. (Ord. 1998-
1, 1-13-1998)
   G.   Electronic message centers may be incorporated into ground signs,
gasoline price signs, and industrial development signs as follows:
      1.   Signs containing electronic message centers shall otherwise conform
to all other regulations applicable to signs as regulated by the zoning
district of the subject property.
      2.   The electronic message shall remain fixed for a minimum of five (5)
seconds to avoid a flashing or blinking effect. The electronic message shall
change only through dissolve or fade transitions, or with the use of other
subtle transitions and frame effects that do not have the appearance of moving
text or images.
      3.   The electronic message center portion of a sign shall comprise no
more than fifty percent (50%) of the total area of the sign.
      4.   An electronic message center is not an off-premises sign and cannot
be used to advertise off-site businesses.
      5.   Electronic message centers shall not produce any sounds.
      6.   Illumination Measurement Criteria: The illuminance of an electronic
message center shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot-
candles accurate to at least two (2) decimals. Illuminance shall be measured
with the electronic message center off, and again with the electronic message
center displaying a white image for a full color-capable electronic message
center, or a solid message for a single-color electronic message center. All
measurements shall be taken as close as practical to a perpendicular plane of
the sign at the distance determined by the total square footage of the
electronic message center as set forth in the accompanying sign area of a sign
versus measurement distance table in section 5-13-21 of this chapter.
      7.   Illumination Limits: The difference between the off and solid-
message measurements using the electronic message center measurement criteria
shall not exceed zero point three (0.3) foot-candles over ambient lighting
conditions. In no event shall the illumination of any sign, resulting from any
internal or external artificial light source, exceed one hundred (100) foot-
candles at the sign face. All artificial illumination shall be so designed,
located, shielded, and directed as to prevent the casting of direct light upon
adjacent property or streets.
      8.   Dimming Capabilities: Electronic message centers must be equipped
with a light detector/photocell that automatically adjusts the display's
brightness according to natural ambient light conditions to comply with the
zero point three (0.3) foot-candle maximum measurement over ambient lighting
conditions.
       9.   Location Specific Restriction: An electronic message center located
within three hundred feet (300') of a residential use, or as otherwise
determined by the planning commission, may not operate between the hours of ten
o'clock (10:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. of the following day, or shall
hold static on a single image which may include the current date, time, and
temperature, and shall not cause illuminance in excess of three tenths (0.3)
foot-candles over ambient lighting conditions as measured at a point
perpendicular to the electronic sign face at a distance in feet calculated in
the table in section 5-13-21 of this chapter.
      10.   Regulations governing electronic message centers are subject to
ongoing monitoring and future modification in the exercise of the village's
police powers. No vested right is ever created in an existing digital message
board. If regulations governing operational aspects of electronic message
centers (i.e. dwell time, transitions, illumination/brightness, etc.) are
modified by the village, sign owners and operators are required to bring
digital message boards into compliance with all applicable regulations. (Ord.
2009-08, 1-27-2009; amd Ord. 2025-4, 4-22- 2025)
5-13-18: OFF-PREMISES SIGNS PROHIBITED; CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT FOR COMBINATION
SIGNS:
   A.   In general, no sign authorized in any district under this chapter is or
shall be deemed a permitted principal use of a lot. Except as otherwise
provided in this Section, all signs permitted by this chapter must be installed
or constructed as an accessory to the existing use of the lot upon which the
sign is located.
   B.   As an exception to the foregoing, combination signs may be permitted in
the commercial districts as a conditional permitted use under section
5-11-9 of this title.
   C.   The planning and zoning commission shall not recommend, and the village
board shall not approve, a conditional use permit for a combination sign unless
it finds full compliance with all of the following in addition to any other
findings required by section
5-11-9 of this title:
      1.   Both the lot upon which the combination sign is proposed and all
other lot(s) served thereby (that is, lots that are authorized to place signage
on said sign) must be included in the zoning application for the conditional
use permit, and the owners of all such lot(s) must consent to approval.
      2.   Approval to place signage on a combination sign is in lieu of the
same type of sign on the served lots. That is, if a lot is authorized to
include signage on an off-premises ground or pole sign, the lot may not also
have a separate on-premises ground or pole sign (as appropriate).
      3.   The sign area of the sign cabinet assigned to and approved for any
particular served lot shall count against the aggregate signage allowed on that
served lot pursuant to section
5-13-6 of this chapter.
      4.   The nearest lot line of each served lot must be located within seven
hundred seventy-five feet (775') of the combination sign structure, measured
from the outside edge of its base.
      5.   The owner and/or occupant of every lot authorized to include signage
on a combination sign must be granted adequate rights to access and maintain
the combination sign. All such owners/occupants are and shall be jointly and
severally liable for the maintenance and code compliance of the entire
combination sign.
      6.   In the event that the owner or occupant of any lot having signage on
an approved combination sign ceases to operate its business, it shall remove
its signage from the sign within one hundred and eighty (180) days. In the
event that the owner/occupant in question fails to do so, all other users of
the combination sign shall be jointly and severally responsible and liable to
the removal and costs of removal. (Ord. 2025-6, 5-27-2025)
5-13-19: NONCONFORMING SIGNS:
   A.   All permanent signs which are legally in existence at the time of
passage of this chapter, but which do not conform to one or more provisions of
this chapter, shall be deemed to be a legal nonconforming use and may be
continued only as provided in this title.
   B.   Any nonconforming sign rendered nonconforming by the provisions of this
chapter may be continued in use, provided there is no physical change other
than necessary maintenance and repair, except as otherwise permitted herein.
   C.   Whenever a nonconforming sign has been discontinued for a period of six
(6) consecutive months, or whenever there is evidently a clear intent on the
part of the owner to abandon a nonconforming sign, such sign shall not, after
being discontinued or abandoned, be reestablished, and the sign thereafter
shall be brought into conformity with the regulations of this chapter. Any such
discontinued sign shall be taken down and removed by the owner, agent, or
person having the beneficial use of the structure upon which such sign may be
found within ten (10) days after written notification from the building
commissioner, and upon failure to comply with such notice within the time
specified in such order, the building commissioner may cause removal of such
sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of the
property to which such sign is attached.
   D.   Normal maintenance of a nonconforming sign is permitted, including
necessary nonstructural repairs or incidental alterations which do not extend
or intensify the nonconforming features of the sign.
   E.   No structural alteration, enlargement or extension shall be made in a
nonconforming sign, unless the alteration will result in eliminating the
nonconforming use.
   F.   If a nonconforming sign is damaged or destroyed by any means to the
extent of fifty percent (50%) or more of its replacement value at that time, or
fifty percent (50%) or more of the physical structure, whichever is least, the
sign can be rebuilt or used thereafter only for a conforming use and in
compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event the damage or
destruction is less than fifty percent (50%), the sign may then be restored to
its original condition and the use may be continued which existed at the time
of such partial destruction until the nonconforming sign is otherwise abated by
the provisions of this chapter. In either event, restoration or repair must be
started within a period of thirty (30) days from the date of damage or
destruction, and diligently prosecuted to completion.
   G.   Existing temporary mobile signs shall be removed or permitted hereunder
no later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter. (Ord.
1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-20: DUTIES:
The building commissioner shall examine all applications for permits for
erection of new signs to ensure conformity with the requirements of this
chapter, record and file all applications for permits with any accompanying
plans and documents, make a periodic inspection of all signs in the village,
and submit reports as directed by the village board. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
5-13-21:   SIGN AREA OF A SIGN VERSUS MEASUREMENT DISTANCE TABLE:
Area of Sign (sq. ft) Measurement (ft.)
Area of Sign (sq. ft) Measurement (ft.)
10                    32
15                    39
20                    45
25                    50
30                    55
35                    59
40                    63
45                    67
50                    71
55                    74
60                    77
65                    81
70                    84
75                    87
80                    89
85                    92
90                    95
95                    97
100                   100
110                   105
120                   110
130                   114
140                   118
150                   122
160                   126
170                   130
180                   134
190                   138
200                   141
220                   148
240                   155
260                   161
280                   167
300                   173
 
(Ord. 2025-4, 4-22-2025)
5-13-22:   PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies available to the village at law or equity,
any person or entity who violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions
of this chapter shall be fined not less than fifty dollars ($50.00) or not more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues. (Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
CHAPTER 14
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES1. See also Title 3, Chapter 9 of this Code.1
SECTION:
5-14-1 Definitions
5-14-2 Liquor License
5-14-3 Registration
5-14-4 Location
5-14-5 Exterior Display
5-14-6 Hours Of Operation
5-14-7 Stage Separation And Railing Requirements
5-14-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this Section, the words and phrases used herein shall have
the following meanings, unless otherwise clearly indicated by the context:
ADULT BOOKSTORE: An establishment having more than twenty five percent (25%)
its stock-in-trade in books, films, toys, devices or mechanisms, videocassettes
(whether for viewing off-premises or on-premises), or magazines and other
periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on
matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or
"specified anatomical areas" as defined herein.
ADULT CABARET: A cabaret which features topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic
dancers, strippers, male or female impersonators, or similar entertainers.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT: Any exhibition of any adult oriented motion pictures, live
performance, display or dance of any type, which has as a significant or
substantial portion of such performance any actual or simulated performing of
specified sexual activities or exhibition and viewing of specified anatomical
areas, removal of articles of clothing or appearing unclothed, pantomime,
modeling, or any other personal service offered customers.
ADULT MINI-MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of less
than fifty (50) persons regularly used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to
"specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined
herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: An enclosed building with a capacity of fifty
(50) or more persons regularly used for presenting material having as a
dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual
activities" or "specified anatomical areas", as defined herein, for observation
by patrons therein.
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, proprietorship,
or other legal entity.
RELIGIOUS INSTITUTION: A building in which persons regularly assemble for
religious worship intended primarily for purposes connected with such worship
or for propagating a particular form of religious belief.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: Any premises to which the public patrons or members
are invited or admitted and which are so physically arranged as to provide
booths, cubicles, rooms, compartments, or stalls separate from the common areas
of the premises for the purpose of viewing adult oriented motion pictures, or
wherein an entertainer provides adult entertainment to a member of the public,
a patron, or a member, when such adult entertainment is held, conducted,
operated or maintained for a profit, direct or indirect. A sexually oriented
business further includes, without being limited to, any adult bookstores,
adult motion picture theaters, adult mini- motion picture establishments, adult
cabaret, adult entertainment studio or any premises that is physically arranged
and used as such, whether advertised or represented as an adult entertainment
studio, rap studio, exotic dance studio, encounter studio, sensitivity studio,
modeling studio or any other term of like import.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS:
   A.   Less than completely and opaquely covered:
    1. Human genitals, pubic region;
    2. Buttocks;
    3. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola;
and
   B.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Human genitals in a state of sexual simulation or arousal;
   B.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy;
   C.   Fondling or erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttock or
female breasts. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-2: LIQUOR LICENSE:
No liquor license shall be issued and no liquor shall be sold or consumed on
the premises of any sexually oriented business. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-3: REGISTRATION:
The owner of a building or premises, his agent for the purpose of managing,
controlling or collecting rents, or any other person managing or controlling a
building or premises any part of which contains an adult use, shall register
the following information with the Village Clerk:
   A.   The address of the premises;
   B.   The name of the owner of the premises and names of the beneficial
owners if the property is in a land trust;
   C.   The address of the owner and the beneficial owners;
   D.   The name of the business or establishment;
   E.   The name(s) and address(es) of the owner, beneficial owner or the major
stockholders of the business or establishment;
   F.   The date of initiation of the sexually oriented business;
   G.   If the premises of building is leased, a copy of said lease must be
attached. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-4: LOCATION:
Sexually oriented businesses are permitted in M-1 or M-2 zoned districts,
provided that no person shall operate or cause to be operated a sexually
oriented business within one thousand feet (1,000') of the property boundary of
a preexisting:
   A.   Public or private elementary or secondary school; or
   B.   Licensed daycare center; or
   C.   Cemetery; or
   D.   Public park; or
   E.   Public housing; or
   F.   Place of religious worship; or
   G.   Residential zoning district; or
   H.   Other sexually oriented business.
For the purpose of this subsection, measurements shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises where
sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest property line of the
other specified use. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
5-14-5: EXTERIOR DISPLAY:
No sexually oriented business shall be conducted in any manner that permits the
observation of any material depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" from any public way or from
any property not registered as an adult use. This provision shall apply to any
display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-
1999)
5-14-6: HOURS OF OPERATION:
No sexually oriented business shall be open between the hours of two o'clock
(2:00) A.M. and eight o'clock (8:00) A.M. on Monday through Saturday and two
o'clock (2:00) A.M. and twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on Sunday. (Ord. 1999-13,
5-25-1999)
5-14-7: STAGE SEPARATION AND RAILING REQUIREMENTS:
Entertainers identified in the definition of "adult cabaret" or similar
entertainers shall perform upon a stage elevated at least eighteen inches (18")
above floor level. All parts of the stage, or a clearly designated area thereof
within which entertainers perform, shall be a distance of at least six feet
(6') from all parts of a clearly designated area in which patrons may be
present. The stage area, or the clearly designated area thereof within which
entertainers perform, shall be separated from the area in which patrons may be
located by a barrier or railing, the top of which is at least four feet (4')
above floor level. Entertainers shall additionally stay at least six feet (6')
from other entertainers on stage. (Ord. 1999-13, 5-25-1999)
CHAPTER 15
COMMERCIAL SOLAR FARMS
SECTION:
5-15-1: Height
5-15-2:    Setbacks
5-15-3:    Glare
5-15-4: Soil And Ground Cover
5-15-5: Security Barrier
5-15-6: Screening
5-15-7: Approved Solar Components
5-15-8: Lighting
5-15-9: On-Site Utilities
5-15-10: Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA)
5-15-11: Conservation Plan
5-15-12: Monitoring And Maintenance
5-15-13: Avoidance And Mitigation Of Damages To Public Infrastructure
5-15-14: Submittal Requirements
5-15-15: Prohibited Systems
5-15-1: HEIGHT:
   A.   Any and all buildings and structures constructed in connection with a
solar energy system are subject to the height limits of the subject zoning
district.
   B.   No part of any ground-mounted solar energy system may exceed twenty
feet (20') in height when oriented at maximum tilt.
   C.   No part of any roof-mounted solar energy system may exceed a height
when oriented at maximum tilt that is visible from the immediate adjacent
public street, nor exceed the maximum permitted height regulation of the zoning
district. (Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; amd. Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
5-15-2: SETBACKS:
   A.   Any and all buildings and structures constructed in connection with a
solar energy system are subject to the setback regulations of the subject
zoning district.
   B.   Ground-mounted Solar energy systems, excluding fences, are subject to
the following setbacks:
      1.   At least fifty feet (50') from the nearest edge of public right-of-
way; and
      2.   At least fifty feet (50') from every boundary of the parcel(s) of
property on which the solar energy system is constructed, all as depicted on an
approved site plan; and
      3.   At least one hundred fifty feet (150') from the nearest point of the
outside wall of any dwelling unit or occupied residential building, unless
waived by the written consent by each affected property owner.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; amd. Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
5-15-3: GLARE:
All solar energy systems, regardless of whether ground or roof mounted, must be
designed, constructed, and sited to minimize glare or reflections on adjacent
properties and roadways and to not interfere with traffic, including air
traffic, or otherwise create a safety hazard. All photovoltaic elements of the
system shall have a nonreflective finish. (Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; amd. Ord.
2024-39, 8-27-2024)
5-15-4: SOIL AND GROUND COVER:
   A.   Topsoils shall not be removed from the site during development unless
the removal is expressly approved as part of the conditional use permit.
   B.   Perennial vegetative ground cover must be maintained or established in
all areas where a ground-mounted solar energy system is located. The seed mix
selections for both temporary and long-term mixes shall be determined and
approved as part of the conditional use permit for the facility.
   C.   For ground-mounted solar energy systems, perennial vegetative ground
cover or farm crops must be maintained or established in required setbacks to
prevent erosion and manage run-off.
   D.   All solar energy systems must comply with all applicable County storm
water detention and drainage ordinances, as well as all corresponding Village
ordinances. All new impervious surfaces shall be analyzed on a parcel-by-parcel
basis.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; amd. Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
5-15-5: SECURITY BARRIER:
Ground-mounted solar energy systems must be enclosed by perimeter security
fencing or another village-approved barrier with a minimum height of at least
six feet (6') and no more than eight feet (8'). This security barrier may, but
is not required to, be incorporated into any screening requirements of this
Chapter. (Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; amd. Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
5-15-6: SCREENING:
All solar energy systems shall be adequately screened to the satisfaction of
the Village in substantial conformance with a screening plan approved by the
Village Board.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-7: APPROVED SOLAR COMPONENTS:
Electric system components must have a UL (Underwriters Laboratories Inc.), or
similar nationally recognized testing laboratory listing.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-8: LIGHTING:
Solar energy systems may not be permanently illuminated, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable government agency or authority.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-9: ON-SITE UTILITIES:
On-site power lines and utility connections must be placed underground unless
otherwise expressly approved as part of the conditional use permit.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-10: AGRICULTURAL IMPACT MITIGATION AGREEMENT (AIMA):
Prior to and as a condition on the conduct of any public hearing or the
issuance of any site development and/or building permits in connection with a
proposed solar energy system, the facility owner/operator shall:
   A.   Execute an Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) with the
Illinois Department of Agriculture and file a copy thereof with the Village;
and
   B.   Provide the Village with a letter of credit or other sufficient
financial surety, in a form and amount acceptable to the Village, to insure the
ultimate decommissioning of the solar energy system upon (i) termination or
discontinuance of its operation or (ii) the estimated end of life of said
system's various components (if not replaced).
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-11: CONSERVATION PLAN:
Prior to and as a condition of the conduct of any hearing and/or the issuance
of any site development and/or building permits in connection with a proposed
solar energy system, the facility owner/operator shall submit a conservation
plan addressing conformance with the Agricultural Impact Mitigation Agreement
(AIMA) then in effect, inspection schedule, soils, plantings/vegetation,
drainage, and maintenance, and shall further grant the Village, in writing, a
right of access to the site, at reasonable times and upon reasonable written
notice, to conduct visual inspections and assess the condition of the native
planting areas and soil erosion and sediment controls. The conservation plan
shall further address (1) maintenance of any creeks and waterways that cross or
adjoin the subject property (creek cutting is strictly prohibited) and (2) a
plan for the relocation or replacement (on the subject property or elsewhere in
the Village) of any trees that will be cleared from the subject property in
connection with the solar energy system.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-12: MONITORING AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   The owner and/or operator of the solar energy system shall be jointly
and severally responsible and liable for maintaining the system, the property
on which the system is located (including all property leased in connection
therewith, even if more extensive than the system itself), and all associated
buildings, structures, and improvements in a safe, sound, and well-maintained
condition according to the highest-applicable industry standards. this
specifically includes, without limitation, painting, grounds keeping (both
inside and outside the fence or security barrier), structural repairs,
maintaining internal access drives, and maintaining the integrity of security
measures. maintenance and grounds keeping shall include mowing, reseeding, and
weed management practices.
   B.   For roof-mounted solar energy systems, maintenance shall include but
not be limited to: periodic inspections and proper roof maintenance.
   C.   A written maintenance plan shall be approved by the Village and are
subject to the Village's existing ordinances including the Village's weed
ordinance.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023; amd. Ord. 2024-39, 8-27-2024)
5-15-13: AVOIDANCE AND MITIGATION OF DAMAGES TO PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE:
   A.   Roads: If the owner and/or operator of a solar energy system enters
into a road use agreement with the Illinois Department of Transportation, a
county, a road district, or any other unit of local government relating to a
solar energy system, the road use agreement shall require the facility owner
and/or operator to be jointly and severally responsible and liable for:
      1.   The reasonable cost of improving roads used by the facility owner to
construct the solar energy system, and
      2.   The reasonable cost of repairing roads used by the facility owner
and/or operator during construction of the solar energy system so that those
roads are in a condition that is safe for the driving public after the
completion of the facility's construction.
   Roadways improved in preparation for and during the construction of the
solar energy system shall be repaired and restored to the improved condition at
the sole and exclusive cost of the developer if the roadways have degraded or
were damaged as a result of construction-related activities.
   The road use agreement shall not require the facility owner to pay costs,
fees, or charges for road work that is not specifically and uniquely
attributable to the construction of the solar energy system. Road-related fees,
permit fees, or other charges imposed by the Illinois Department of
Transportation, a road district, or other unit of local government under a road
use agreement with the facility owner shall be deemed to be reasonably related
to the cost of administration of the road use agreement.
   B.   Roadway Dedication: Temporary access roads or drives utilized during
the construction of a solar energy system shall not be required to be dedicated
to the Village or any other governmental agency with jurisdiction, but the
Village may, in its discretion, require dedication of any permanent roads or
drives used for access and maintenance of the solar energy system.
   C.   Existing Road Conditions: Prior to construction, the owner/operator
must conduct a pre-construction survey, in coordination with the applicable
highway authority to determine existing road conditions. The owner/operator is
responsible for on-going road maintenance and dust-control measures resulting
from the construction and installation of the solar energy system as identified
by the applicable road authority during all phases of construction and
installation.
   D.   Drainage System: Prior to construction, the owner/operator is
responsible for identifying the location of all subsurface drainage systems.
The owner and/or operator are jointly and severally responsible and liable for
promptly repairing damage to drain tiles and other drainage systems that result
from construction, operation, or maintenance of the solar energy system that
negatively impact properties outside the subject property. Repair of subsurface
drainage systems shall, at a minimum, be in compliance with the Agricultural
Impact Mitigation Agreement (AIMA) then in effect.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-15-14: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All applications for conditional use permit approval for a solar energy
system must include the following information, in addition to any other
information required by this Title. An applicant may submit a single
application for the entire property to be used in connection with the project.
      1.   Completed conditional use permit application, on the Village’s
standard form.
      2.   Copy of recorded deed(s) showing ownership of the subject property.
      3.   Electronic copy of legal description that is editable.
      4.   Plat of survey (to scale) from a professional land surveyor. Survey
must include a scale, north arrow and dimensions of the subject property.
      5.   Affidavit of owner’s consent (if applicable).
      6.   Disclosure of beneficiaries (if applicable).
      7.   Application fee.
      8.   The results and recommendations from consultation with the Illinois
Department of Natural Resources obtained through the Ecological Compliance
Assessment Tool (EcoCAT) or a comparable successor tool.
      9.   FAA Notice of No Flight Hazard and/or application to the FAA for
Notice of Criteria Tool.
      10.   The results of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service’s
Information for Planning and Consulting environmental review or a comparable
successor tool.
      11.   Evidence of consultation with the Illinois State Historic
Preservation Office to assess potential impacts if any state-registered
historic sites under the Illinois State Agency Historic Resources Preservation
Act are present on-site or in the vicinity (if applicable).
      12.   Proof of compliance with noise regulations of the Illinois
Pollution Control Board (if applicable).
      13.   Preliminary site plan identifying the following:
         a.   Subject property including the property lines, setback lines, and
right-of-way lines.
         b.   Physical features including but not limited to roads, floodplain
(s) (if applicable), wetland(s) (if applicable), existing and proposed building
(s) (if applicable), solar panels and equipment (number, location, and spacing
of solar panels/arrays), proposed locations of underground or overhead electric
lines and utility poles, landscaping, and fencing.
         c.   Identification of proposed construction and ongoing maintenance
routes from the nearest arterial road as detailed on a map.
      14.   A certified letter with return receipt requested, evidencing a good
faith effort to contact the applicable road authority or affidavit evidencing
that contact has been made with the applicable road authority.
      15.   Proposed product cut-sheets.
      16.   Glare study report (if applicable).
      17.   Visual screening report that includes the following:
         a.   A map of homes within three hundred feet (300') of the facility;
and
         b.   Locations and type of existing vegetation that provides screening
of views of the facility; and
         c.   Topographic features that provide screening of the facility.
      18.   Interconnection service agreement or evidence of filing required
interconnection service applications with the electric utility.
      19.   Operation and maintenance plan for the solar energy system,
including measures for maintaining safe access to the installation, stormwater
controls, landscaping maintenance, as well as general procedures for operation
and maintenance of the installation.
      20.   Proof of liability insurance.
      21.   Preliminary emergency services plan, including but not limited to
the project summary, electrical schematic and means of shutting down energy
systems throughout the life of the installation, and a fire protection and
response plan.
      22.   Copies of all leases for the subject property (if applicable) (the
parties to and amount(s) of rent in any such lease may be redacted).
   23.   Executed copy of the owner/operator’s Agricultural Impact Mitigation
Agreement (AIMA) with the Illinois Department of Agriculture. (Ord. 2023-40,
10-24-2023)
5-15-15: PROHIBITED SYSTEMS:
Concentrated solar power systems are prohibited.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
CHAPTER 16
BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE FACILITIES
SECTION:
5-16-1: Utility Lines And Electrical Circuitry
5-16-2: Lot And Building Standards
5-16-3: Security Barrier
5-16-4: Screening
5-16-5: Submittal Requirements For Battery Energy Storage Facilities That Are
Subject To A Conditional Use Permit
5-16-1: UTILITY LINES AND ELECTRICAL CIRCUITRY:
All on-site utility lines shall be placed underground to the extent feasible
and as permitted by the serving utility, with the exception of the main service
connection at the utility company right-of-way and any new interconnection
equipment, including without limitation any poles, with new easements and
right-of-way.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-16-2: LOT AND BUILDING STANDARDS:
All buildings and structures are subject to all lot, building, and other
standards of the underlying zoning district.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-16-3: SECURITY BARRIER:
Battery energy storage facilities must be enclosed by perimeter security
fencing or other village-approved barrier with a minimum height of at least six
feet (6') and not more than eight feet (8'), unless housed in a secure, fully-
enclosed, dedicated-use building. This security barrier may, but is not
required to, be incorporated into any screening requirements of this Chapter.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-16-4: SCREENING:
All battery energy storage facilities shall be adequately screened to the
satisfaction of the Village in substantial conformance with a screening plan
approved by the Village Board.
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
5-16-5: SUBMITTAL REQUIREMENTS FOR BATTERY ENERGY STORAGE FACILITIES THAT ARE
SUBJECT TO A CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT:
All applications for conditional use permit approval for a battery energy
storage facility must include the following information, in addition to any
other information required by this Title. An applicant may submit a single
application for the entire property to be used in connection with the project.
   A.   Preliminary site plan identifying the following:
      1.   Subject property including the property lines, setback lines, and
right-of-way lines.
      2.   Physical features including but not limited to roads, floodplain(s)
(if applicable), wetland(s) (if applicable), existing and proposed building(s),
solar panels and equipment (number, location, and spacing of solar panels/
arrays), proposed locations of underground or overhead electric lines and
utility poles, landscaping, and fencing.
   B.   Identification of proposed construction and ongoing maintenance routes
from the nearest arterial road as detailed on a map.
   C.   A certified letter with return receipt requested, evidencing a good
faith effort to contact the applicable road authority or affidavit evidencing
that contact has been made with the applicable road authority.
   D.   Proposed product cut-sheets.
   E.   Visual screening report that includes the following:
      1.   A map of homes within three hundred feet (300') of the facility; and
      2.   Locations and type of existing vegetation that provides screening of
views of the facility; and
      3.   Topographic features that provide screening of the facility.
   F.   Interconnection service agreement or evidence of filing required
interconnection service applications with the electric utility.
   G.   Preliminary operation and maintenance plan of the battery energy
storage facility, including measures for maintaining safe access to the
facility, stormwater controls, landscaping maintenance, as well as general
procedures for operation and maintenance of the facility.
   H.   Proof of liability insurance.
   I.   Preliminary emergency services plan, including but not limited to the
project summary, electrical schematic and means of shutting down the battery
energy storage facility throughout the life of the installation, and a fire
protection and response plan.
   J.   Copies of all leases for the subject property (if applicable) (the
parties to and amount(s) of rent in any such lease may be redacted).
(Ord. 2023-40, 10-24-2023)
CHAPTER 17
DATA CENTERS
SECTION:
5-17-1: Preamble
5-17-2: General Provisions
5-17-3: Data Center District
5-17-1: PREAMBLE:
The regulations for data center districts are designed to provide for the
establishment of a full range of technological activities and to govern their
operations in a manner that will not have a deleterious effect on agricultural,
residential and business areas. It is essential that there are adequate
provisions for the expansion of data center facilities for attracting a
diversification of new industry. Adequate data center sites and data center
expansion will create growth and development of the village's economic and tax
base and provide a variety of employment for its labor force. (Ord. 2024-50,
11-26-2024)
5-17-2: GENERAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Use Regulations: All uses shall meet the data center design guidelines,
which guidelines by this reference are incorporated herein, a copy of which is
on file in the office of the village clerk.
   B.   Screening And Landscape Buffer: Screening and landscape buffer for the
DC data center district shall comply with the data center design guidelines.
   C.   Performance Standards: Any use established in the DC data center
district after the effective date hereof shall be so operated as to comply with
the performance standards as governing the M1 manufacturing district in section
5-8-2  of this Code.
   D.   Noise: All uses in the data center district shall be in compliance with
all applicable federal, state and local noise statutes and regulations and a
noise study demonstrating such compliance shall be conducted prior to the
issuance of a building permit. (Ord. 2024-50, 11-26-2024)
5-17-3: DATA CENTER DISTRICT:
   A.   Permitted Uses:
      Agriculture
      Business Services and Administrative Offices
      Data Centers
      Entrepreneurship Centers/Business Accelerator
      Fire stations
      Professional Offices
      Public open space
      Public utility, governmental service and similar uses as follows:
         Bus transit facilities, including shelters, passenger stations parking
areas, and service buildings.
         Compressor stations, well head stations, well separators and other
similar above-the-ground facilities customarily used for the distribution of
natural gas as a part of the operations of a natural gas company or nonexempt
operations of a public utility company.
         Electric distribution centers and substations.
         Gas regulator stations.
         Public utility and governmental service establishments, other,
including offices, storing, testing, repairing and servicing.
         Water filtration plants, pumping stations and reservoirs; sewage
treatment plants and lift stations, public or community.
      Restaurants (excluding drive thru)
      Accessory uses to the above permitted uses.
   B.   Conditional Permitted Uses 1 :
      Public utility, governmental service and similar uses as follows:
         Radio and television towers (no limit on height of towers).
         Telephone exchanges, microwave relay towers and telephone transmission
equipment and other such service buildings (no limit on height of towers).
   C.   Lot Coverage:
      1.   Floor area ratio: Not to exceed 0.5 for each level of building.
      2.   Impervious service ratio: Not to exceed 0.7.
   D.   Yards: Yards shall be provided in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Yard: Not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
      2.   Side Yards: a) Not less than fifty feet (50'); b) not less than two
hundred (200') when adjoining a residence district or residential use; b) not
less than twenty-five feet (25') wide when adjoining an interior lot line in
the DC data center district.
      3.   Rear Yard: Not less than fifty feet (50') in depth.
         a.   When adjoining a railroad right of way, the rear yard may be
measured from the centerline of the railroad right of way.
         b.   When adjoining a residence district or residential use, the rear
yard shall be not less than two-hundred feet (200') in depth.
   E.   Building Height: No building in the DC data center district shall
exceed sixty-five feet (65') in height.
   F.   Signs: The sign regulations for commercial district in section
5-13-16  of this code shall govern the DC data center district as well as any
other applicable sign regulations as set forth in
chapter 13  of this title.
   G.   Off Street Parking and Off-Street Loading: In accordance with
regulations set forth in
chapter 9  of this title.
   H.   One hundred percent (100%) of building facades in the DC data center
district facing a public right-of-way and fifty percent (50%) of other facades
shall be constructed of masonry, brick, stone, or decorative concrete block
(excluding plain concrete block), architectural steel and glass, or precast
panels. Aluminum or vinyl siding shall not be allowed as a primary building
material. (Ord. 2024-50, 11-26-2024; amd. Ord. 2025-29, 9-23-2025)
 
Notes
1 1. See section 5-11-9 of this title.
TITLE 6
SUBDIVISIONS
CHAPTER 1
SUBDIVISIONS PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
6-1-1 Purpose And Jurisdiction
6-1-2 Rules Of Word Construction
6-1-3 Definitions
6-1-4 Enforcement
6-1-5 Variations
6-1-6 Penalty
6-1-1: PURPOSE AND JURISDICTION:
Because each new subdivision accepted by the Village becomes a permanent unit
in the basic physical structure of the future community, and to which the
future community will, of necessity, be forced to adhere, all subdivisions
hereafter planned within the incorporated limits of the Village, and within the
unincorporated area lying one and one-half (11/2) miles beyond the corporate
limits, shall, in all respects, be in full compliance with the regulations
hereinafter contained in this Title. These regulations are designed to provide
for the orderly and harmonious development of the Village, for the coordination
of streets within new subdivisions with other existing or planned streets, and
to secure a uniform system of utilities and services, and otherwise to promote
realization of the comprehensive plan. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-1-2: RULES OF WORD CONSTRUCTION:
The language set forth in the text of this Title shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
   A.   The singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular.
   B.   The present tense includes the past and future tenses and the future
the present.
   C.   The word "shall" is mandatory, while the word "may" is permissive.
   D.   The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.
   E.   Whenever a word or term defined hereinafter appears in the text of this
Title, its meaning shall be construed as set forth in the definition thereof,
and any word appearing in parenthesis directly after a word herein defined
shall be construed in the same sense as that word. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Title, shall be
construed as herein defined.
ALLEY: A right of way which affords secondary means of access to properties
abutting upon a street.
BLOCK: A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a combination of streets and
public parks, railroad rights of way, or other similar natural boundaries. A
block may be located in part beyond the boundary lines of the corporate limits
of the Village.
BUILDING OFFICIAL: The Building Officer and Inspector of the Village or his
duly authorized representative.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE: A line within a lot or other parcel of land, which
denotes the area between such line and the adjacent street right-of-way line
where a building and other obstructions are prohibited, except those
obstructions that are permitted by zoning ordinance regulations.
COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to arterial
streets, including the principal entrance streets of residential developments
and the principal streets for circulation within such a development.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: Refers to the composite of the functional and geographic
elements of the comprehensive plan of the Village and environs or any segment
thereof, in the form of plans, maps, charts, text of reports, implementing
ordinances and the official map1. See Section
5-1-1 of this Code.1.
CUL-DE-SAC: A minor street with a single outlet.
EASEMENT: A quantity of land set aside over or under which a liberty, privilege
or advantage in land without profit is dedicated and is distinct from ownership
of the land or is granted either to the public, a particular person or a
combination of both.
FINAL PLAT: A map or plan of a subdivision and any accompanying material as
described in Section
5-12-6 hereof.
FRONTAGE ROAD: A minor street which is parallel to and either adjacent to or
within the right of way of a thoroughfare.
HALF STREET: A street of less than the total required width along one or more
property lines of a subdivision.
LAND IMPROVEMENT: Any sanitary sewerage system, storm sewer system, water
supply and distribution systems, roadway, side-strip, sidewalk, pedestrianway,
no-access strip, off-street parking area, lot grading or other improvement
which the Village may require under this Title.
LOT: A portion of a subdivision or other parcel of land intended for transfer
of ownership or for building development.
LOT, BUTT: A lot at the end of a block and located between two (2) corner lots.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE: A lot which has a pair of opposite lot lines along two
(2) substantially parallel streets.
MINOR STREET: A street of limited continuity. Its primary purpose is to serve
abutting properties.
NO-ACCESS STRIP: A land area at least twelve feet (12') wide along the rear lot
line of a double-frontage lot and abutting a thoroughfare within which no
vehicular driveway shall be permitted.
OFFICIAL MAP: The official map of Minooka, Illinois2. See subsection
5-4-2A of this Code.2.
OWNER OR SUBDIVIDER: Includes any person, firm, association, partnership,
private corporation, public or quasi-public corporation, or a combination of
any of them, or other legal entity having sufficient proprietary interest in
the land sought to be subdivided or divided to commence and maintain
proceedings under the provisions of this Title.
PEDESTRIANWAY: A right of way across or within a block designated for
pedestrian use.
PLANNING AND ZONING COMMISSION: The Village's Planning and Zoning Commission.
References in this Code to "Plan Commission" or "Planning Commission" shall be
deemed to mean the Village's Planning and Zoning Commission3. See Title 2,
Chapter 1 of this Code.3.
PRELIMINARY PLAT: A tentative map or plan of a proposed subdivision as
described in Section
5-12-4 hereof.
ROADWAY: That portion of the street designated for vehicular use.
SIDE-STRIP: The unpaved strip of land within a street right of way and is
parallel to the roadway.
SIDEWALK: That portion of the street designated for pedestrian use.
STREET: A right of way which affords primary means of access by pedestrians and
vehicles to abutting properties, whether designated as a street, avenue,
highway, road, boulevard, easement or however otherwise designated.
STREET WIDTH: The shortest distance between the right of way lines of a given
street.
SUBDIVISION: Is: a) a described tract of land which is to be or has been
divided into two (2) or more parcels of land; b) any division of land which
creates a lot for transfer of ownership and/or building development where a new
street is involved; or c) the dedication of streets, ways or other areas for
the use of the public. The division of a tract, parcel or lot into parcels or
lots all of which resultant parcels or lots exceed five (5) acres and if a new
street is not involved, or the division of land for the purpose of transfer of
ownership to adjoining property owners and such division does not create an
additional lot or lots, provided that a contract for sale requiring conformity
with this title may be entered into, shall not be deemed to be a subdivision. A
certified plat of survey, when required by the village board, shall be in
conformance with applicable provisions of this title and shall be required for
the division of land when a new lot is created for the purpose of transfer of
ownership and/or building development and a new street is not involved.
   The term "subdivision" includes "resubdivision" and, where it is appropriate
to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land
subdivided.
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS: The basic land planning principles established as
guides for the preparation of preliminary plats.
THOROUGHFARE: A street with a high degree of continuity and serving as an
arterial trafficway between various districts of the village and its environs.
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka, Illinois.
VILLAGE BOARD: The village board of the village of Minooka, Illinois.
VILLAGE CLERK: The village clerk of the village of Minooka, Illinois.
VILLAGE ENGINEER: A professional engineer, registered in the state of Illinois,
who has been duly appointed as the village engineer of the village, or who has
been hired by the village as its consulting engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd.
Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
No plat of any subdivision shall be entitled to record in the recorder's office
of the county having jurisdiction or have any validity until it shall have been
approved in a manner prescribed in this title. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. 1997
Code)
6-1-5: VARIATIONS:
The planning and zoning commission may recommend variations from the
requirements of this title in specific cases which, in its opinion, do not
affect the comprehensive plan or intent of this title. Such recommendations
shall be communicated to the village board or governing county authorities in
writing, substantiating the recommended variation. The village board may
approve variations from these requirements for subdivisions within the village
limits when, in its opinion, such variations will not adversely affect the
comprehensive plan or the spirit of this title. The planning and zoning
commission shall notify the owner or subdivider and other interested parties as
to the time and place of the planning and zoning commission meeting at which
the variation is being considered and where the owner or subdivider and other
interested parties will be afforded an opportunity of being heard. Such notice
shall be published, posted or delivered and in such form as prescribed by the
village attorney. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-1-6: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this title shall be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 2
PLATS AND PROCEDURES
SECTION:
6-2-1 General Procedures
6-2-2 Preliminary Plat
6-2-3 Plans And Specifications For Land Improvements
6-2-4 Final Plat
6-2-5 Agreements
6-2-6 Fee For Filing Preliminary Plat
6-2-7 Village Engineer's Services (Rep. by Ord. 2005-48, 10-25-2005)
6-2-8 Compliance With Regulations
6-2-9 Buildings Within Proposed Major Street Rights Of Way
6-2-10 Building And Occupancy Permit
6-2-11 Record Of Plats
6-2-1: GENERAL PROCEDURES:
Before subdividing any tract or parcel of land in the village and the
unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2) miles of the village
limits, an owner or subdivider shall submit a preliminary plan and a final plat
to be acted upon by the village authorities in accordance with the laws of the
state and the following provisions of this title. Prior to the preparation of a
preliminary plat it is recommended that: a) the owner or subdivider consult
with the planning and zoning commission and other village officials to secure
information relative to requirements of the comprehensive plan, official map,
zoning regulations, subdivision regulations and any other applicable village
ordinances; and b) subsequently submit to the planning and zoning commission a
sketch plan of the proposed subdivision prepared on a topographic survey of the
area showing the street system, arrangement of lots, and location of public use
areas that may be required to be reserved. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12,
8-24-1993)
   A.   Preliminary Plat:
      1.   The owner or subdivider shall file an application for approval of
the preliminary plat with the village clerk. Ten (10) copies of the preliminary
plat and the required filing fee shall accompany the application. The filing
fee for a preliminary plat shall be in the sum of two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00). (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1994-4, 1-11-1994)
      2.   The village clerk shall refer six (6) copies of the preliminary plat
to the planning and zoning commission, at least twenty (20) days in advance at
the next meeting of the planning and zoning commission.
      3.   The planning and zoning commission shall notify the owner or
subdivider as to the time and place of the planning and zoning commission
meeting at which he will be afforded an opportunity of being heard.
      4.   The planning and zoning commission shall approve or disapprove the
application for preliminary plat approval within ninety (90) days from the date
of filing the application or the filing by the applicant of the last item of
required supporting documents, whichever date is later, unless such time is
extended by mutual consent.
      5.   When the preliminary plat has been acted upon by the planning and
zoning commission, it shall be referred to the village board. If the planning
and zoning commission approves the plat, it shall so indicate on the plat, and
if it disapproves such plat, it shall furnish the village board and the
applicant a written statement setting forth the reason for disapproval and
specifying with particularity the aspects in which the proposed plat fails to
conform to this title and the official map, and with the intent of the
comprehensive plan. The village board shall accept or reject said plat within
thirty (30) days after its regular stated meeting following the action of the
planning and zoning commission.
      6.   Upon approval of the preliminary plat by the village board, the
following notice of approval shall be stamped upon four (4) prints thereof, and
required signatures affixed:
   NOTICE OF APPROVAL OF PRELIMINARY PLAT
   Notice is hereby given that the preliminary plat of a subdivision shown
hereon has received approval by the Village Board of the Village of Minooka,
Illinois, and upon compliance by the subdivider with requirements of
qualifications governing the approval of preliminary plats and with other
revisions and stipulations that may be required, the Village Board will receive
the final plat for consideration when submitted by the subdivider in such form
and within such time as required by the subdivision regulations of the Village
      The Village Board of the Village of Minooka, Illinois
         Date     19   
         By    
            Village President
         Attest    
            Village Clerk
 
      7.   Said prints of such approved preliminary plat shall be distributed
by the Village Clerk as follows:
         a.   Six (6) prints shall be sent to the Planning and Zoning
Commission;
         b.   One print shall be sent to the Village Engineer;
         c.   One print shall be retained by the Village Clerk for filing; and
         d.   One print shall be returned to the subdivider.
      8.   Approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and Village Board shall be conditioned upon stipulations as set
forth in Section
5-12-5 hereof. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   B.   Final Plat:
      1.   Within one year after approval of the preliminary plat by the
Village Board, the owner or subdivider shall file an application for approval
of the final plat with the Village Clerk. In case application for approval of a
final plat is made for a part or parts of an approved preliminary plat, the
Village Board may extend the time for application of approval of final plats
for other parts of the approved preliminary plat until a later date or dates
beyond the foregoing one year period. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      2.   The application for final plat shall include the original drawing,
drawn with ink on linen tracing cloth or its equivalent measuring twenty nine
inches by twenty nine inches (29" x 29") one transparency print and six (6)
prints of the final plat, six (6) copies of all supporting maps, plans and
other drawings, and all other required documents. The Village Clerk will refer
the application for approval of the final plat to the Planning and Zoning
Commission twenty (20) days in advance of the next meeting of the Planning and
Zoning Commission for recommendation and report relative to design
characteristics of the final plat. The final plat shall retain the design
characteristics of the approved preliminary plat, except that the Planning and
Zoning Commission may recommend and the Village Board may require such changes
or revisions as deemed necessary in the interest and needs of the community in
keeping with the provisions of this Title. The filing fee for each final plat
shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00). (Ord. 1982-5, 11-8-1982; amd. Ord.
1994-4, 1-11-1994; Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
      3.   When the subdivider or owner, submitting the application for final
plat approval, has filed with the Village Clerk all drawings, maps and other
documents required by this Title to be furnished in support thereof and when
all such material meets all requirements of this Title and other applicable
ordinances of the Village, the Village Board shall approve the proposed plat
within sixty (60) days from the date of filing the last required document or
other paper, or a period of time beyond such sixty (60) day period that is
mutually agreed upon by the applicant and the Village Board.
      4.   Upon approval by the Village Board, the Village Clerk shall secure
three (3) contact prints of the approved final plat, and three (3) copies of
the approved supporting documents. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
         a.   One contact print of the final plat, and when applicable, one
copy of the accompanying protective covenants and one copy of the supporting
documents shall be delivered to the Planning and Zoning Commission for the
files; (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
         b.   One contact print and all specifications, drawings and estimates
shall be delivered to the Village Engineer; and
         c.   One contact print and all other supporting documents shall be
retained by the Village Clerk. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      5.   The final plat in exact form as approved shall be filed for record
in the Recorder of Deed's office of Grundy and/or Will County, as required,
within twenty (20) days of acceptance thereof by the Village Board and the
receipt of approval from the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency for
construction of water and/or sewer lines. Immediately after recording, the
original or a duly certified copy of the recorded plat shall be filed with the
Village Clerk along with three (3) print copies of the required plat. The
subdivider shall pay recording fees and the cost of the original or a certified
copy of the recorded plat and print copies.
         a.   If, after the twenty (20) working day period has expired, the
final plat has not been properly recorded, then the final plat is null and void
and of no force and effect.
         b.   If, due to extenuating circumstances, the final plat cannot be
properly recorded within the twenty (20) working days, the subdivider may
submit a written request for an extension of time to record the final plat to
the Village Clerk. The request will be subject for review and consideration by
the Village Board of Trustees at its next regularly scheduled meeting. (Ord.
1996-30, 10-8-1996)
   C.   Land Division: Before dividing lots or blocks in any recorded
subdivision, which in any case does not involve new streets or easements of
access, or the sale or exchange of parcels or tracts of land following division
into no more than two (2) parts of a particular parcel or tract of land
existing on the effective date hereof, which does not involve any new street or
easement of access, the owner or divider shall file with the Village Clerk the
original drawing and four (4) contact prints of a certified plat of survey
showing the proposed division of such lots, blocks, parcels or tracts of land.
Three (3) prints of the plat of survey shall be forwarded to the Planning and
Zoning Commission at least ten (10) days before the next meeting of the
Planning and Zoning Commission. Not more than thirty (30) days after the
meeting at which the plat of survey is referred to the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the chairman of the Planning and Zoning Commission shall notify the
owner or divider whether a new street or easement of access is required. In the
event that a new street or easement of access is required, the notice shall
stipulate than an application for final plat approval containing such maps,
certifications and supporting documents as required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission shall be filed with the Village Clerk for processing as herein set
forth in this Section and Section
5-12-5 hereof. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-2-2: PRELIMINARY PLAT:
Where the preliminary layout covers only a part of the subdivider's entire
holding, a sketch of the prospective lot layout and street system of the
unsubmitted part shall be furnished and the street system of the submitted part
will be considered in the light of adjustments and connections with the street
system of the part not submitted.
The preliminary plat shall be drawn on tracing paper or tracing cloth having a
minimum size of twenty four inches by eighteen inches (24" x 18"), in a manner
that clear and legible prints can be made and shall show the following:
   A.   Identification And Description:
      1.   Proposed name of subdivision not duplicating name of any plat
heretofore recorded in the Village or in Grundy County and/or Will County,
Illinois.
      2.   Location by section, town and range, or by other approved legal
description.
      3.   An accompanying boundary line survey map with accurate distances and
angles prepared and certified by a registered surveyor and an accompanying
topographic map indicating source of survey shall accompany the preliminary
plat.
      4.   Names and addresses of the owner or subdivider of the proposed
subdivision and designer of such subdivision and date of preparation.
      5.   Graphic (engineering) scale, which shall not exceed one hundred feet
to one inch (1" = 100').
      6.   North point (designated as true north).
   B.   Existing Conditions:
      1.   Boundary lines of proposed subdivision in accordance with subsection
A3 above.
      2.   Total acreage therein.
      3.   Existing zoning districts in proposed subdivision and adjacent
tracts.
      4.   Location, widths and names of all existing or previously platted
streets or other rights of way showing type of improvement (if any), railroad
and utility rights of way, parks and other public open spaces, permanent
buildings and structures, easements and section and corporate lines within the
tract and to a distance of one hundred feet (100') beyond the tract.
      5.   Location and size of existing sewer lines, water mains, culverts or
other underground facilities within the tract and to a distance of one hundred
feet (100') beyond the tract; also locations of catch basins, manholes, valves
and hydrants, and indicating such data as surface and invert elevations. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
      6.   Location map shall be required by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, drawn at a scale of not less than one inch equals one thousand feet
(1" = 1,000'), showing boundary lines of adjoining unsubdivided or subdivided
land within an area bounded by nearest thoroughfare or other natural
boundaries, identifying type of use of surrounding land and showing alignments
of existing streets.
      7.   The Planning and Zoning Commission shall require topographic data
including existing contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet
(2'), except in unusual topographical conditions, such vertical intervals may
be required to be altered as determined by the Village Engineer, (topographic
data shall refer to United States Geodetic Survey or adjusted County datum);
and locations of watercourses, marshes and other significant features. Soil
boring data and seepage tests may be required at locations and depths as
determined by the Village Engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-
1993)
      8.   Locations of or references to locations of existing monuments or
survey markers used in preparation of survey and grade elevation of each
monument and marker.
   C.   Subdivision Design Features:
      1.   The preliminary plan shall be in substantial accord with the
comprehensive plan as amended from time to time.
      2.   Layout of streets showing right-of-way widths and street names (not
duplicating the name of any street heretofore used in the Village and its
environs unless such street is an extension of or in line with an already named
street, in which event that name shall be used) and showing proposed through
streets extended to boundaries of subdivision.
      3.   Location and width of alleys, pedestrianways and utility easements.
      4.   Layout, total number of lots and dimensions of the lot containing
the minimum width and depth and the lot containing the maximum width and depth.
      5.   Minimum front and side street building setback lines, indicating
dimensions.
      6.   Areas (other than those listed in subsection C2, 3 and 4 above), if
any, intended to be dedicated or reserved for nonresidential purposes,
indicating in each the approximate acreage. Such areas shall be designated by
letter or number.
      7.   Typical cross-section of streets and alleys, together with an
indication of the proposed storm water runoff. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      8.   When recommended by the Village Engineer and required by the
Planning and Zoning Commission, the subdivider shall submit proposed detailed
grading plans of blocks and lots. No land will be approved for subdivision
which is subject to periodic flooding, or is within a flood plain, or which
contains inadequate drainage facilities or other topographic conditions which
may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood
hazard unless the subdivider agrees to make improvements which will, in the
opinion of the Village Engineer and Planning and Zoning Commission, make such
land safe for development and occupancy. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12,
8-24-1993)
      9.   Land lying wholly or partially within a flood plain may be laid out
and slotted or divided as building lots; provided, that part of site to be used
for building location shall have an elevation of not less than one foot six
inches (1'6") above flood crest, and that said lots be filled in from the
building site to the curb in a gradual slope, and that the yard surrounding the
building site on the other three (3) sides be filled in to a reasonable slope,
to meet the existing elevation to be determined by the Building Officer. (Code
Change 1980)
6-2-3: PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR LAND IMPROVEMENTS:
After the approval of the preliminary plat and prior to filing an application
for approval of a final plat, the subdivider shall submit to the Village Clerk
two (2) complete copies of all preliminary plans and specifications (prepared
by a registered engineer) for required land improvements, and if required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, detailed grading plans for lots and blocks.
The Village Clerk shall forward one complete set of such copies of preliminary
plans and specifications for land improvements and grading plans to the
Planning and Zoning Commission and one such set of plans and specifications to
the Village Engineer. The Village Engineer and other public officials having
jurisdiction shall approve such preliminary plans and specifications or set
forth the revisions necessary for approval. Based upon the conditions of
approval of the preliminary plans and specifications, the subdivider shall have
prepared, by a registered engineer, final plans and specifications covering
such required land improvements. Such plans and specifications shall be
approved by the Village Engineer and other public officials having jurisdiction
and such approval shall be certified on the final plat. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd.
Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-2-4: FINAL PLAT:
   A.   General:
      1.   All information required on the preliminary plat as herein set forth
in Section
5-12-4, except those required therein in subsection B2 through 8 and subsection
C4, 7 and 8 shall be shown accurately and drawn at a scale of not more than one
hundred feet to the inch (100' to 1") with black waterproof drawing ink on
transparent linen tracing cloth on one or more sheets, each having a maximum
dimension of twenty nine inches by twenty nine inches (29" x 29"), in a manner
that clear and legible transparent or contact prints and photostatic copies can
be made.
   B.   Additional Delineation:
      1.   Accurate angular and lineal dimensions of all lines, angles and
curvatures, with functions used to describe all boundaries including: boundary
line survey of tract; streets; alleys; easements; areas to be reserved for
public use; and other important features. Error of closure of boundary-line
surveys shall not exceed one in ten thousand (1 foot for each 10,000 feet of
perimeter survey). Angular error shall not exceed plus or minus twenty (±20)
seconds. Lot lines to show dimensions in feet and hundredths, and when an angle
occurs in any lot line between lot corners, the measurement of the angle shall
be shown in degrees, minutes and seconds. The final plat shall show accurately
the location of all permanent lot markers as actually installed.
      2.   An identification system for all blocks and lots using consecutive
numbers.
      3.   True angles and distances to the nearest established street lines
and official monuments (not less than 3), which shall be accurately described
in the plat by location, size and elevation.
      4.   Municipal, township or section lines accurately referenced to the
lines of the subdivision by distances and angles of same are on the boundary or
within one hundred feet (100') of said subdivision.
      5.   Accurate location of all monuments which shall be placed at all
block corners, angle points and at intermediate points as shall be required by
the Village Engineer, and installed in such a manner that they may be located
by a registered surveyor. All USGS, State, County, Village or other official
benchmarks, monuments or triangulation stations in or adjacent to the property
shall be preserved in precise position.
      6.   Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated or reserved for
public use or for the exclusive use of property owners within the subdivision.
      7.   Protective covenants, or filed as an accompanying document.
   C.   Certificates: The application for approval of the final plat shall not
be deemed completed until the following certificates, other than the Village
Clerk certificate, have been duly executed:
      1.   OWNER'S CERTIFICATE*
   STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
       SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   This is to certify that the undersigned is the owner of the land described
in the annexed plat, and has caused the same to be surveyed and subdivided, as
indicated thereon, for the uses and purposes therein set forth, and does hereby
acknowledge and adopt the same under the style and title thereon indicated.
   The undersigned hereby dedicates for public use the lands shown on this plat
for thoroughfares, streets, alleys and public services; and hereby also
reserves for the Illinois Bell Telephone Company and the Commonwealth Edison
Company, and the Village, the easement provisions which are stated on their
standard form which is attached hereto.
                                    
   Title
                                    
   Address
   Dated this      day of            , 19   .
   *Corporate owner's certificate should be accompanied by a corporation form
of normal acknowledgement.
   2.   NOTARY CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS      )
       SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   I,                  , a Notary Public in and for said County, in the State
aforesaid, do hereby certify that                 , is personally known to me
to be the same persons whose names are subscribed to the foregoing instrument
as such owners, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that
they sign the annexed plat as their own free and voluntary act for uses and
purposes therein set forth.
   Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this      day of            19   .
                                    
   Notary Public
      3.      SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS      ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   This is to certify that I,                                  , Registered
Illinois Land Surveyor No.        , have surveyed and subdivided the following
described property:                            as shown by the plat which is a
correct representation of said survey and subdivision. All distances are shown
in feet and decimals thereof. I further certify that all regulations enacted by
the Village Board relative to plats and subdivisions have been compiled with in
the preparation of this plat.
   Also, I do further certify that no part of the property covered by this plat
or subdivision is situated within 500 feet of any surface drain or watercourse
serving a tributary area of 640 acres or more.
   Given under my hand and Seal at                               , Illinois,
this            day of                       19   .
      4.      PLAT CERTIFICATION
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   Approved by the Board of Supervisors of Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this
           day of                  , 19       .
                                            
   Plat Officer
 
      5.   COUNTY CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   I,                                   , County Clerk of Grundy/Will County,
Illinois, do hereby certify that there are no delinquent general taxes, no
unpaid forfeited taxes, and no redeemable tax sales against any of the land
included in the annexed plat.
   Given under my hand and Seal at Morris, Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this
                    day of                          , 19      .
                                            
   County Clerk
      6.   CERTIFICATE AS TO SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   I,                                 , Treasurer of the Village of Minooka do
hereby certify that there are no delinquent or unpaid current or forfeited
special assessments or any deferred installments thereof that have been
apportioned against the tract of land included in the plat.
   Dated at Minooka, Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this                      
day of                            , 19      .
                                            
   Treasurer
      7.   VILLAGE ENGINEER
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   I,                                         , Village Engineer of the Village
of Minooka, Illinois, hereby certify that the land improvements described in
the annexed plat and the plans and specifications therefor meet the minimum
requirements of said village and have been approved by all public authorities
having jurisdiction thereof.
   Dated at Minooka, Grundy/Will County, Illinois, this                    day
of                            , 19     .
                                            
   Village Engineer
      8.   VILLAGE CLERK'S CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   I,                                    , Village Clerk of the Village of
Minooka, Illinois, hereby certify that the annexed plat was presented to and by
resolution duly approved by the Village Board of said Village at its meeting
held on                                , 19     , and that the required bond or
other guarantee has been posted for the completion of the improvements required
by the regulations of the Village.
   In witness whereof I have hereto set my hand and Seal of the Village of
Minooka, Illinois this               day of                     , 19     .
                                            
   Village Clerk
   Note: Except as otherwise required by Statute, certification of final plats
of subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half
(11/2) miles beyond the Village limits shall be those required by the Grundy/
Will County subdivision regulations, except when the Village subdivision
regulations are more restrictive, the applicable certifications herein shall
also be required. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   D.   Easement Provisions: The final plat shall contain the following grant
of easements to the Village:
   EASEMENT PROVISION
      A permanent nonexclusive easement is hereby reserved for and granted to
the Village of Minooka, Illinois, Commonwealth Edison Company and to those
public utility companies operating under franchise from the Village of Minooka,
including, but not limited to, Ameritech Telephone Company, Northern Illinois
Gas Company, and to their successors and assigns, in, upon, across, over,
under, and through the areas shown by dashed lines and labelled "Easements" on
the attached Plat of Subdivision for the purpose of installing, constructing,
inspecting, operating, replacing, renewing, altering, enlarging, removing,
repairing, cleaning and maintaining electrical, gas, telephone, or other
utility lines or appurtenances, storm and flood water channels, basins, sewers,
storm sewers and sanitary sewers, water transmission mains and lines, valve
vaults and hydrants, and any and all manholes, hydrants, pipes, connections,
catch basins, buffalo boxes and without limitation, such other structures and
appurtenances as may be necessary or convenient for the furnishing of public
utility services, together with the right of ingress and egress across and
through the easements for persons and equipment to do any or all of the above
work. The right is also hereby granted to the Village and Utilities to cut
down, trim or remove any trees, shrubs or other plants on the easements that
interfere with the operation of the above or with the exercise of any rights
under this paragraph. No permanent buildings or trees shall be placed on said
easements, but the same may be used for gardens, shrubs, landscaping and other
purposes that do not then or later interfere with the aforesaid uses and
rights. Easements are hereby reserved for and granted to the Village of Minooka
over all of the easement areas for ingress, egress and for the performance of
municipal and other governmental services, including water, storm and sanitary
sewer service and maintenance. All the easements indicated shall be perpetual,
except those identified as "temporary". The easement areas shown as detention
or retention easements shall include, in addition to the above rights, the
right to flood such area with storm waters, and shall also include the right to
install and maintain storm water detention and retention structures. No fences,
permanent buildings or trees shall be placed in easements labeled "emergency
overland release routes".
(Ord. 1997-06, 3-11-1997)
6-2-5: AGREEMENTS:
   A.   Any owner or subdivider filing an application for approval of a final
plat shall submit a statement of agreement that: the land improvements required
by chapter 4 of this title shall be completed by the owner or subdivider in
accordance with plans and specifications approved by the village engineer and
village board and all inspection fees required and one set of plans and
specifications showing such improvements as installed shall be paid to or filed
with the village board following the approval of the final plat by the village
board. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   B.   A completion bond shall be posted by such owner or subdivider with the
village clerk prior to recording of the final plat. Insurance company
underwriting said completion bond shall have a minimum financial strength
rating of A- as rated by A.M. Best Company, Inc. Such completion bond shall be
a penal sum sufficient to cover the cost of the land improvements required by
chapter 4 of this title, or in lieu of a bond, a deposit of cash, or other
security or guarantee acceptable to the village board. Such cost for the
completion of the required land improvements shall be in accordance with cost
estimates prepared by the village engineer and approved by the village board.
Such bond, cash or security shall equal not less than one hundred twenty five
percent (125%) of the village engineer's estimate of the improvement. If a
completion bond, deposit of cash or other security or other guarantee is
posted, there shall be good and sufficient surety thereon, as approved by the
village board and said security shall be in such form as approved by the
village attorney, conditioned upon the installation of said improvements and
payment of inspection fees, within two (2) years following the approval of the
final plat. If cash or other security is deposited, it shall be used, insofar
as it is sufficient, for the cost of making such improvements, including
inspection fees. Any unused balance will be returned to the depositor. There
shall be no reduction of that portion of the bond or other guarantee or deposit
applying to a particular improvement unless or until that improvement is
complete and accepted or approved by the village board, except that upon the
completion of the subgrade, base course and one-half (1/2) of the thickness of
the wearing surface course of a street, alley or parking area, the village
board may reduce that amount of that portion of the bond or other guarantee or
deposit covering such land improvements, but such reduction shall not be more
than an amount equal to ninety percent (90%) of the estimated cost of
installation of the subgrade and base course. (Ord. 2003-17, 4-22-2003)
   C.   The completion bond shall be acknowledged before a notary public by the
principal and surety and shall be in substantially the same form.
      1. KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS, THAT:
   WE,                                                                      as
principal and as surety, are firmly bound to the Village of Minooka, Illinois,
in the penal sum of $                          , lawful money of the United
States of America, for the payment of such sum, well and truly to be made, we
bind ourselves, our heirs, executors, administrators and assigns, jointly and
severally, by these presents.
   The condition of the above obligation is such that:
                                                                         
WHEREAS,                                    has obtained, according to law and
ordinances of the Village, approval of the (Plat of                    ), being
a Subdivision of                               
   IN Grundy/Will County, Illinois, conditioned upon: (a) that by              
date the making of certain land improvements to-wit:
                                                               as more fully
described in plans dated                    and prepared by
                   ; and (b) the execution and delivery of this bond.
   NOW, if the said                       shall well and faithfully and in a
good and workmanlike manner of good materials according to law and the
ordinances of the Village, and in conformity with said plans dated
                         , construct said improvements, and pay all inspection
fees payable to the Village by reason of such construction.
   THEN THIS OBLIGATION shall be null and void; otherwise the same shall remain
in full force and effect.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands and Seal this           
day of                , 19     .
            Principal
            Surety
      2. NOTARY CERTIFICATE
   STATE OF ILLINOIS   ) SS
   COUNTY OF GRUNDY/WILL   )
   I,                                , a Notary Public in and for said County,
in the State aforesaid, do hereby certify that                          
personally known to me to be the same names are subscribed to the foregoing
instrument, appeared before me this day in person and acknowledged that they
signed the above instrument as their own free and voluntary act for the uses
and purposes therein set forth.
   Given under my hand and Notarial Seal this                 day of
               , 19        .
            Notary Public
   D.   The village clerk shall not certify the approval of the village board
on the final plat until the required bond, deposit, cash or other guarantee has
been filed as required by this section.
   Note: Such agreements, as set forth above shall not be required for
subdivisions located in the unincorporated areas within one and one-half (11/2)
miles beyond the village limits when there is evidence that agreements are
entered into between the owner or subdivider and Grundy/Will County, except
when the village standards of public improvements are of higher quality than
Grundy/Will County standards, such agreements may be required by the village.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-6: FEE FOR FILING PRELIMINARY PLAT:
   A.   A fee shall be paid to the village clerk at the time of submission of
the preliminary plat. No plat shall be forwarded to the planning and zoning
commission for review without a receipt from the village clerk being exhibited
showing full payment of the fee. Payment of the fee is in no way contingent on
whether the plat of subdivision submitted is approved or disapproved. The fee
shall be as follows: (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
      1.   Two dollars ($2.00) per lot for subdivisions containing fifty (50)
lots or less, with minimum fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00).
      2.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) plus one dollar ($1.00) for each
additional lot over fifty (50) in subdivisions containing more than fifty (50)
lots, but not more than one hundred fifty (150).
      3.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus fifty cents ($0.50) for each
additional lot over one hundred fifty (150) in subdivisions containing more
than one hundred fifty (150) lots.
   B.   In the event that the plat of subdivision calls for development of
residential property either as two-family or multiple-family or as business or
industrial property, then the fee shall be determined as two dollars ($2.00)
per each dwelling unit or business unit and two dollars ($2.00) per acre of
industrial land. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-7: VILLAGE ENGINEER'S SERVICES:
(Rep. by Ord. 2005-48, 10-25-2005)
6-2-8: COMPLIANCE WITH REGULATIONS:
No building permit as regulated by the building code shall be issued by any
governing official for the construction of any building, structure or
improvement of land or any lot within a subdivision, as defined herein, which
has been approved for platting until all requirements of this title have been
fully complied with. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-9: BUILDINGS WITHIN PROPOSED MAJOR STREET RIGHTS OF WAY:
After the effective date hereof, no permanent building or structure shall be
erected within the rights of way of major thoroughfares as shown on the
official map of the village. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-2-10: BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMIT:
   A.   Building Permits: No building permit shall be granted by any village
official for the use of any building, structure or land improvement within a
subdivision or planned unit development (PUD) approved for platting or
replatting until the following improvements have been installed, inspected, and
approved by the applicable village authority:
      1.   Sanitary sewer;
      2.   Water main;
      3.   Storm sewer, including sump pump collector lines;
      4.   Storm water detention;
      5.   Aggregate base course; and
      6.   Curb and gutter.
   B.   Building And Occupancy Permits For Model Homes: Building permits may be
issued for the construction of model homes, to be used for temporary sales or
construction offices, within a subdivision or planned unit development (PUD),
approved for platting or replatting, after recording of the final plat, and
after a site plan has been approved by the applicable village authorities.
Occupancy permits for such model homes shall not be issued, however, until
compliance with the following provisions:
      1.   No occupancy permit 1. See section
5-11-5 of this code. 1 shall be granted by any village official for the use of
any building or any dwelling unit contained therein, structure or land
improvement within a subdivision or planned unit development (PUD) until the
improvements as set forth in subsections A1 through A6 of this section have
been installed, inspected and approved by the applicable village authority, and
      2.   The following have been ordered from the applicable utility or
authority:
         a.   Streetlights; and
         b.   Street signs, including regulatory signs. (Ord. 1998-6, 5-12-
1998)
6-2-11: RECORD OF PLATS:
All of such plats of subdivision, after the same have been submitted and
approved as provided in this title and recorded in the office of the recorder
of deeds of Grundy and/or Will County, shall be filed and kept by the village
clerk among the records of the village. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
CHAPTER 3
SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS
SECTION:
6-3-1 Street Plan
6-3-2 Streets
6-3-3 Alleys And Pedestrianways
6-3-4 Easements
6-3-5 Block Standards
6-3-6 Lot Standards
6-3-7 Public Use Areas, Indicated On Official Map
6-3-8 Acceptance Of Streets
6-3-1: STREET PLAN:
The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets
shall conform to the comprehensive plan and official map and shall be
considered in their relation to existing and planned streets; to reasonable
circulation of traffic within the subdivision and adjoining lands; to
topographical conditions, to run-off of storm water; to public convenience and
safety; and in their appropriate relations to the proposed uses of the area to
be served. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-3-2: STREETS:
   A.   All rights-of-way widths shall conform to the following minimum
dimensions:
Type Of Street       Residential             Manufacturing Or
                     Subdivision             Business Subdivision
A Major street       100 feet                100 feet
B Collector streets* 80 feet                 80 feet
C Minor streets      66 feet                 70 feet
D Cul-de-sac streets 66 feet                 70 feet
Bubble               120 feet
E Half streets       Permitted, see Section  Not permitted
                     6-3-2G
F Frontage roads     40 feet                 50 feet
                     Right-of-way widths and other design standards of
                     thoroughfares, including freeways, expressways, parkways,
                     major and secondary thoroughfares, shall be in accordance
G Thoroughfares      with those designated on the official plan of the Village
                     and Environs, or by Federal, State, or County authorities
                     having jurisdiction, whichever has the greater width and
                     design standard requirements.
 
   *A collector street may be required by the Village Board or when recommended
by the Planning and Zoning Commission: 1) in a residential subdivision
containing twenty (20) acres or more in area and where the lots are one-half
(1/2) acre or less in area; 2) in any subdivision as an extension of an
existing or planned collector street in an adjacent subdivision; and 3) in any
manufacturing or business subdivision. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-
24-1993; 1997 Code)
   B.   Where there is a deflection in horizontal center lines within a given
block of any given point in excess of ten degrees (10°), a curve shall be
inserted with a radius of not less than:
 
Collector streets 300 feet
 
(Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
   C.   Different connecting street gradients shall be connected with vertical
curves. Minimum length in feet of these curves shall meet the requirements of
AASHTO's "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets" latest edition.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
   D.   Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than one hundred fifty
feet (150') shall be avoided.
   E.   It must be evidenced that all street intersections and confluences
encourage safe and efficient traffic flow, and in general, shall be at or near
right angles avoiding acute angles. An intersection of more than two (2)
streets shall be avoided unless specific conditions of design indicate
otherwise. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   F.   A cul-de-sac street in residential districts shall be not more than
five hundred feet (500') in length, measured along the center line from the
street of origin to the end of the right of way, or may be longer than five
hundred (500) lineal feet, provided not more than fifteen (15) lots abut upon
its right-of-way lines.
   G.   Half streets shall be prohibited except where an existing or dedicated
half street is adjacent to a tract to be subdivided, at which time the other
half of the street shall be platted or developed within such tract. (Ord., 5-
15-1974; 1997 Code)
   H.   Provisions shall be made for vehicular and pedestrian access to
residential property abutting a thoroughfare either by: 1) providing frontage
road; or 2) by backing lots to the thoroughfare and providing access by a
collector, minor or cul-de-sac street one lot depth removed and with a no-
access strip along the rear lot line. These standards are established for the
purpose of providing protection for the residential properties and to provide
for traffic safety and the efficient use of the thoroughfare for its intended
function of accommodating through traffic. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   I.   Gradients of streets shall be at least five-tenths percent (0.5%) and
shall not exceed on:
 
Collector streets 5%
Minor streets     7%
 
(Ord., 5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
   J.   Where streets are dedicated (whether used or not), but not improved to
the standards of this Title and border on or are wholly within the proposed
subdivision land, same shall be improved to the standards of this Title. (Ord.,
5-15-1974; 1997 Code)
6-3-3: ALLEYS AND PEDESTRIANWAYS:
   A.   Alleys, when permitted in residential subdivisions, shall be at least
twenty feet (20') wide, and alleys in commercial and manufacturing subdivisions
shall be not less than thirty feet (30') wide. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   B.   Pedestrianways, when recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission
and approved by the Village Board, shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-3-4: EASEMENTS:
   A.   Utility distribution of transmission installations serving the
subdivision and, when required, storm water drainage ways, shall be located in
easements as designated on the subdivision plat of record. Such easements shall
be located along the rear lot lines or side lot lines at locations of
extensions of utility installation between blocks or continuity of drainage
ways. They shall occupy not less than the rear ten feet (10') of lot depth or
ten feet (10') of lot width adjoining the applicable side lot line, or may be
of a greater width if recommended by the Village Engineer and approved by the
Village Board. Additional easements at other locations may be recommended for
specific conditions by the Village Engineer and required by the Village Board.
   B.   Where a subdivision is traversed by a natural drainage way, channel or
stream, there shall be provided a drainage easement conforming substantially
with the areas bordering such watercourse that are subject to flooding, unless
said watercourse is improved by deepening or dredging to provide the same
cross-sectional area or floor capacity, in which case the drainage easement may
be narrowed to accommodate the improved watercourse. The boundaries of such
areas subject to flooding shall be as designated by the Village Engineer.
(Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-3-5: BLOCK STANDARDS:
   A.   In residential subdivisions, the maximum length of blocks containing
any lots less than one hundred feet (100') in width shall be one thousand two
hundred (1,200) lineal feet, and the maximum length of blocks containing all
lots one hundred feet (100') and over in width shall be one thousand five
hundred (1,500) lineal feet. Pedestrianways, when deemed necessary to provide
circulation or access to schools, parks, transportation or other common
destinations, may be required by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   B.   In manufacturing and business subdivisions, maximum length of blocks
shall be as approved by the Planning and Zoning Commission.
   C.   The shape of blocks shall be determined by topographical features, the
basic street system and traffic pattern, lot depths and areas designated for
public and other nonresidential land uses.
   D.   Where a subdivision borders upon or is traversed by a railroad or
thoroughfare right of way, the Village Board may require, when recommended by
the Planning and Zoning Commission, a street on one or both sides of such right
of way, located approximately parallel to and at a distance removed suitable
for the appropriate use of the intervening land, i.e., park purposes, deep
residential lots fronting on it with a no-access strip along the rear property
lines, and off-street parking, business or other uses as permitted by the
zoning regulations of the Village. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-
1993)
6-3-6: LOT STANDARDS:
   A.   General:
      1.   In general, lots should be as nearly rectangular in shape as
practicable.
      2.   Width and area of lots shall conform with lot width and area
requirements set forth in the zoning regulations of the Village or that of
Grundy, Will or Kendall Counties in the unincorporated areas, or whichever is
most restrictive.
      3.   Side lines of lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street
line, or substantially so. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
      4.   Lots abutting upon a watercourse, drainage way, channel, stream,
railroad or thoroughfare shall have an additional depth or width as required by
the Planning and Zoning Commission in order to provide acceptable building
sites.
      5.   In the subdividing of any land, due regard shall be shown for all
natural features such as tree growth, watercourses, historic spots or similar
conditions.
   B.   Residential Subdivisions:
      1.   Depth of lots shall not be less than one hundred twenty five feet
(125').
      2.   All lots shall have frontage on a street, except lots which do not
contain single-family dwellings in a planned development, as allowed as a
conditional permitted use in accordance with regulations contained in the
zoning regulations of the Village, which may have frontage as an easement of
sufficient width for vehicular or pedestrian access to the lot from a street.
      3.   Double-frontage lots are not permitted, except where lots back upon
a thoroughfare or upon a body of water in separate or undivided ownership.
   C.   Industrial And Business Subdivisions:
      1.   Depth of lots in a manufacturing or business subdivision shall be as
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village
Board.
      2.   All lots for industrial development shall abut upon a public street.
      3.   Double-frontage lots are not permitted except when specifically
recommended by the Planning and Zoning Commission and approved by the Village
Board. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-3-7: PUBLIC USE AREAS, INDICATED ON OFFICIAL MAP:
When an area of land for public use (in addition to streets, alleys,
pedestrianways and utility easements) is recommended by the Planning and Zoning
Commission and required by the Village Board, to be located in whole or in part
in a subdivision, the subdivider shall designate on the preliminary plat and
final plat that such land is reserved for public use. If such land is not
acquired or arrangements made for acquisition by the Village, a school board or
other governmental body within one year after the date of acceptance of all
improvements, such land may thereafter be used by the subdivider for a use
permitted at its location by zoning regulations or, if applicable, in
accordance with more restrictive protective covenant requirements. (Ord., 5-15-
1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
6-3-8: ACCEPTANCE OF STREETS:
If any plat of subdivision contains public streets or thoroughfares which are
herein dedicated as such, whether located within the corporate limits of the
Village or in part outside thereof, or contains streets located outside of said
corporate limits, the approval of the plat by the Village Board of the
subsequent annexation of the property to the Village shall not constitute an
acceptance thereon or therein, for maintenance purposes, irrespective of any
act or acts by an officer, agent or employee of the Village with respect to
such streets or improvements. The acceptance of such streets or thoroughfares
for maintenance shall be made only by the adoption of a resolution by the
Village Board after there has been filed with the Village Clerk a certificate
by the Village Engineer certifying that all improvements required to be
constructed or installed in or upon such streets or thoroughfares, in
connection with the approval of the final plat of subdivision by the Village
Board, have been fully completed and the construction or installation thereof
has been approved by him. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
CHAPTER 4
REQUIRED LAND IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION:
6-4-1 Improvements Required
6-4-2 Standards And Specifications Of Design
6-4-3 Sanitary Sewerage System
6-4-4 Storm Sewer System
6-4-5 Water Supply
6-4-6 House Services
6-4-7 Streets And Alleys
6-4-8 Pedestrianways
6-4-9 Public Utilities
6-4-10 As-Built Plans
6-4-11 Protection And Repair Of Existing Improvements
6-4-1: IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED:
Before a final plat of subdivision is approved by the Village Board, the owner
or subdivider shall submit to the Village Engineer completed plans and
specifications, prepared by a registered engineer, covering the improvements
and utilities described in the subdivider's plat, and the Village Engineer
shall certify in writing to the Village Board that such improvements and
utilities meet the minimum requirements of the Village, County, State and other
authorities having jurisdiction, and comply with the following sections. (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
6-4-2: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS OF DESIGN:
Design, dimensions, materials and methods of construction of improvements shall
conform to the following general requirements:
   A.   For storm drainage, section 603 of the "Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction" adopted by the State of Illinois, Division of
Highways, latest edition thereof;
   B.   For public sanitary sewer system and/or sewage treatment works, "Rules
and Regulations Governing the Submission of Plan Documents and the Design of
Sewage Works" adopted by the Environmental Protection Agency; and other
regulations as may be imposed by the Village or health department of the county
having jurisdiction therein;
   C.   For subgrade preparation of streets, section 212 of the "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", latest edition thereof;
   D.   For base course of streets, section 301 of the aforementioned "Standard
Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction";
   E.   For surface course of streets, B-5 Specifications for Bituminous
Concrete Dense Graded Aggregate Type, Modified Plant Mix, as set forth in
section 405 of the aforementioned Illinois Road and Bridge Construction
Standards;
   F.   For curbs and gutters, section 616 of the aforementioned specifications
for Road and Bridge Construction; and
   G.   For sidewalks and crosswalks, section 624 of the aforementioned
"Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction", latest edition
thereof. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-3: SANITARY SEWERAGE SYSTEM  1 :
   A.   Public or community sanitary sewerage systems, including sewer stub
terminals to the lot line of each lot shall be installed to serve each lot in a
subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions or lot divisions containing no lots
less than one acre in area and located in the unincorporated areas within one
and one-half (1 1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village may be served
with individual sewage disposal systems, except that individual sewage disposal
systems shall be permitted in subdivisions annexed to the Village after the
effective date hereof only after the Village Board shall find that connection
with a public or community system is not practicable, or there is an agreement
between the subdivider and the Village and a guarantee by the subdivider that
all lots in the subdivision will be served with a public or community sewerage
system within a specified period of time. (Ord., 5-1 5-1974)
   B.   All sanitary sewer systems shall be constructed in accordance with
standards approved by the State of Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
All sewer design plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Village
Engineer for approval and filing. Each lot platted for the subdivision shall be
served by the sanitary sewer system. All sanitary sewers installed shall be
inspected by a reputable firm approved by the Village Engineer and a report
filed with the Village. All sanitary sewer manholes shall be pre-cast concrete
or other material approved by the Village Board. Wherever two (2) sewer lines
connect and there is a difference of vertical elevation of more than two feet
(2'), there shall be constructed a pre-cast, drop-type manhole as specified by
the Village Engineer. (Ord., 5-15-1974; 1977 Code)
   C.   Where sanitary sewer mains of larger capacity than required to serve
only the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plat is required by the
Village Board to serve future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision, the
subdivider shall pay for only his portion (based on ordinance requirements for
his subdivision) of the total cost of installation, balance to be borne by the
Village. The Village will pay the difference in cost between the size required
for the subdivision and the larger size required by the Village Board, pursuant
to an agreement entered into between the subdivider and the Village. (Ord., 5-
15-1974)
 
Notes
1 1. See subsection
  10-3-3C of this Code for connection fees.
6-4-4: STORM SEWER SYSTEM:
   A.   An adequate system of storm water drainage shall be constructed and
installed, consisting of natural watercourses, storm sewers and other necessary
facilities which will drain the subdivision and protect roadway pavements.
   B.   Storm drainage inlets shall be placed in street gutters at
intersections and elsewhere as required by the terrain, but shall not be spaced
more than five hundred feet (500') along the gutter. A four inch (4") storm
sewer shall be stubbed to the lot line, one for each two (2) lots, for sump
pump storm drainage.
   C.   Any outfall storm sewer that drains into an existing open ditch or
natural watercourse shall have a reinforced concrete headwall and a concrete
apron at least ten feet (10') in radius from the center point of the outfall.
   D.   Storm water shall not be directed into the sanitary sewer system and no
connection between the storm and sanitary sewer systems will be permitted at
any time before, during or after construction.
   E.   Where installation of storm sewer lines of larger capacity than
required to serve only the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plat is
required by the Village Board to serve future growth in the vicinity of the
subdivision, the subdivider shall pay for only his portion (based on ordinance
requirements for his subdivision) of the total cost of installation, pursuant
to an agreement entered into between the subdivider and the Village.
   F.   The storm sewer system must discharge into an outlet adequate for the
computed run-off from the development and adjacent watershed areas. In case an
adequate outlet is not available, on-site storm water detention will be
required. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-5: WATER SUPPLY1.
   See Section
10-3-3C of this Code.1:
   A.   Public or community water supply and distribution systems, including
water stub terminals to each lot, shall be installed to serve each lot in a
subdivision or lot divisions. Subdivisions or lot divisions containing no lots
less than one acre in area and located in the unincorporated areas within one
and one-half (1 1/2) miles of the corporate limits of the Village may be served
with water supply from individual wells, except that individual wells shall be
permitted in subdivisions annexed to the Village after the effective date
hereof only after being specifically approved by the Village Board when it is
determined that connection with a public or community water supply system is
not practicable, or there is an agreement between the subdivider and the
Village and a guarantee by the subdivider that all lots in the subdivision will
be served with a public or community water system within a specified period of
time.
   B.   All water distribution systems shall be constructed in accordance with
standards approved by the Environmental Protection Agency and the Village
Engineer.
      1.   There shall be no physical connection between a potable and non-
potable water supply.
      2.   Consideration shall be given to water reclamation and reuse in
commercial and industrial tracts for the purpose of conservation and relief of
demands on existing residential supply.
      3.   Evidence shall be presented by the subdivider that an adequate water
supply is available, or will be, in advance of occupancy for development of
individual lots and that the local utilities can satisfactorily serve the area
by the utility easements shown.
      4.   Water transmission mains shall be a minimum of six inches (6") in
diameter, and shall include installation shut-off valves and fire hydrants.
Fire hydrants shall be installed at maximum intervals of four hundred feet
(400') in a direct line in the parkway. The hydrants shall have a seven inch
(7") barrel and two (2) 2 1/2-inch base connections and one steamer connector.
   C.   Where installation of water mains of larger capacity than required to
serve only the subdivision as delineated in the preliminary plat is required by
the Village Board to serve future growth in the vicinity of the subdivision,
the subdivider shall pay for only his portion (based on ordinance requirements
for his subdivision) of the total cost of installation, pursuant to an
agreement entered into between the subdivider and the Village. (Ord., 5-15-
1974)
6-4-6: HOUSE SERVICES:
House services for sewer and water shall be constructed to connect each lot or
building site with the utility service mains for each utility as follows:
   A.   Such house services shall extend from the main to the property line;
   B.   House water service for each single-family residence shall be a minimum
of three-fourths inch (3/4"), type K, copper or approved equal and shall be
terminated at a shut-off valve and box of a type approved by the Village
Engineer and located in the parkway, one foot (1') from the sidewalk line. In
no case shall the buffalo box be located in the sidewalk or driveway or buried
underground;
   C.   Upon completion of the construction of all such house sewer and water
service connections with the utility mains, three (3) accurate maps showing the
exact location of all such sewer and water mains, together with manholes, shut-
off valves and similar facilities being a part thereof, by distances in feet
from street lines, and of all such house service connections in distances in
feet from side lot lines approved by the Village Engineer shall be filed with
the Village Clerk; and
   D.   The connection from the main to the sanitary house drain shall be six
inch (6") vitrified tile or other material approved by the Village Board. All
joints shall conform to ASTM C425 or ASTM D1869. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-7: STREETS AND ALLEYS:
   A.   Street Grading:
      1.   All stumps, trees that cannot be saved, boulders and similar items
in street rights of way shall be removed.
      2.   Before any paving work is commenced, all street grading shall be
properly completed as shown on the grading plan and approved by the Village
Engineer.
      3.   After grading of streets is completed and approved, and before any
base course of the roadway pavement is laid, all of the underground work such
as water, sewer and gas mains, house services connections therewith, and all
underground conduits for electric and telephone lines shall be completely
installed in place and approved.
      4.   When considered necessary by the Village Engineer, settlement of all
trench backfill shall be accelerated by means of water introduced through holes
jetted into backfilled trenches to a point approximately two feet (2') above
the top of the sewer pipe. The holes shall be jetted not greater than six feet
(6') apart unless otherwise directed by the Village Engineer. The jetting
process shall conform to the standards set forth in the State of Illinois
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction, section 603.08. Any
depressions which develop within the street right of way due to settlement of
backfilling material shall be refilled and repaved at the subdivider's expense
for the trenching, in a manner acceptable to the Village Engineer.
      5.   The surface course of the roadway pavement shall not be laid until
backfilling of all trenches dug across the roadway has completely settled or
compacted to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer. Said trenches shall be
backfilled with suitable material, mechanically tamped in eighteen inch (18")
lifts, and brought to the required grade. The surface course shall not be laid
until at least six (6) months after the base course is completed.
      6.   Corrings, at least three (3) per block, on request of the Village
Engineer, shall be taken under Village supervision after the paving has been
completed and after the subdivider has requested acceptance of the street.
   B.   Roadway Pavement:
      1.   All streets and alleys within the subdivision shall be improved with
a durable hard surface roadway. The pavement shall be equal to or superior to a
pavement consisting of a base course of crushed limestone, gravel or pozzolanic
mix of a total thickness of not less than eight inches (8") when thoroughly
compacted. The base course shall be constructed in two (2) 4-inch lifts,
watered and rolled with a ten (10) ton three-wheeled roller and vibratory
compactor. Materials and method of construction shall be in compliance with
State of Illinois Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge Construction for
Aggregate Base Course Type B and Bituminous Surface Plant Mix Class B, and
shall be sufficient, in the opinion of the Village Engineer, to withstand the
traffic that the roadways will presumably be subjected to.
      2.   All street shall be improved with roadway pavements to an overall
width in accordance with the following minimum dimensions:
   Pavement Width
   (between back of curbs or outer
   edges of roadway pavement)
 Type Of StreetResidential    Manufacturing Or      Row Right
                Subdivision    Business Subdivisions Of Way
Major           As Recommended As Recommended
Collector       36 feet        50 feet
Minor           32 feet        42 feet
Cul-de-sac      32 feet        42 feet
Frontage road   32 feet        45 feet               See
                In accordance with                   Section
Thoroughfar es  Federal, State, County,              6-3-2
                or local requirements
Half- streets   Permitted, see Section
                6-3-2G
Alleys          20 feet        30 feet
 
   Roadway pavements in cul-de-sac street turn-around areas shall have a
minimum diameter, measured from faces of the outside curb or outside edges of
roadway pavements of eighty feet (80') for residential subdivisions,
manufacturing and business subdivisions.
      3.   Roadway pavements shall be installed in accordance with the
following minimum requirements:
 
Base Course          Residential Manufacturing
                                 Or Business
Crushed stone Gr. 8  8 inches    10 inches
Crushed gravel Gr. 9 8 inches    10 inches
Pozzolanic mix       6 inches    8 inches
 
   (Ord., 5-15-74)
 
Bituminous Surface
Binder course      11/2 inches 11/2 inches
Surface course     1 inch      11/2 inches
 
   (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1987-12, 10-12-1987)
 
Portland Cement Concrete
Pavement                 6 inches 8 inches
 
   C.   Curbs And Gutters: Concrete curbs and gutters shall be constructed
along the outside edges of all street pavements of the type designated by the
Village Engineer and installed in accordance with Village standards and
specifications. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   D.   Access Driveways: An access driveway from the street lot line to the
street pavement shall be paved. Pavement shall be of concrete or bituminous
surface Class B construction installed in accordance with Village standards and
specifications. (Ord., 11-27-1978)
   E.   Side Strips (Parkway): Side strips shall be required on both sides of
all streets. They shall be graded and prepared for seeding by the subdivider
with at least four inches (4") of topsoil. Median strips shall be considered as
side strips unless paved. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   F.   Public Sidewalks:
      1.   Installation: Sidewalks shall be installed on both sides of the
street in residential subdivisions containing lots less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet in area. Sidewalks may be required by the planning and
zoning commission on one side or both sides of a street in subdivisions
containing lots one-half (1/2) acre or more in area. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd.
Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
      2.   Regulations: Sidewalks shall be located twelve inches (12") from the
street right of way lines and shall be constructed in accordance with the
following:
         a.   Materials: All sidewalks shall be constructed of portland cement
concrete with twenty eight (28) day compressive strength of three thousand
(3,000) pounds. Minimum slump, three inches (3"). All concrete shall be air
entrained. Other admixtures shall be approved by the village engineer; (Ord.,
5-15-1974)
         b.   Residential Districts: For subdivisions approved after the
effective date hereof: Minimum width, five feet (5'). For subdivisions approved
prior to the effective date hereof: Minimum width, four feet (4'). Minimum
thickness: Five inches (5"). (Ord. 2016-12, 3-22-2016)
      3.   Commercial Districts: Minimum width, five feet (5'). Minimum
thickness, six inches (6"). (Ord. 1992-13, 9-22-1992)
   G.   Street Lighting: A street lighting system shall be installed in
business, manufacturing and residential subdivisions. Location, type and method
of installation of streetlights shall be in accordance with standards and
specifications recommended by the planning and zoning commission and approved
by the village board. (Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1993-12, 8-24-1993)
   H.   Street Trees: Trees may be planted along all streets where trees do not
exist. Trees shall have a trunk diameter, measured twelve inches (12") above
the ground, of not less than two and one-half inches (21/2"), and shall be
spaced not more than fifty feet (50') apart. The plantings shall be restricted
to thornless honey locusts, sugar maples, hackberries, pin oaks, sycamores and/
or other trees approved by the village board. Chinese elm, box elder, willow,
poplar and similar brittlewood species are prohibited. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
   I.   Street Signs: An appropriate street sign shall be erected at each
street intersection within the subdivision. The type of sign and the location
thereof shall be subject to the approval and direction of the village board.
Sign regulations shall be as set forth in title 5, chapter 13 of this code.
(Ord., 5-15-1974; amd. Ord. 1998-1, 1-13-1998)
6-4-8: PEDESTRIANWAYS:
For subdivisions approved before the effective date hereof, paved walks shall
have a width not less than four feet (4') and shall be installed in accordance
with the village sidewalk specifications. For subdivisions approved after the
effective date hereof, paved walks shall have a width not less than five feet
(5') and shall be installed in accordance with the village sidewalk
specifications. (Ord. 2016-12, 3-22-2016)
6-4-9: PUBLIC UTILITIES:
   A.   All utility distribution lines for telephones, electric and gas service
in the subdivision shall be placed underground. Installation of such facilities
shall be made in compliance with the applicable orders, rules and regulations
of the Illinois commerce commission now or hereafter effective, and the
subdivider shall be responsible for compliance with rules and regulations now
and hereafter effective and filed with said commission pursuant to the Illinois
public utilities act, for any public utility whose service will be required for
the subdivision with respect to the provisions of such facilities.
   B.   Underground telephone, electric and gas service shall be placed within
easements or dedicated public ways in a manner which will not conflict with
other underground services. Further, all transformer boxes shall be located so
as not to be unsightly or hazardous to the public. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-10: AS BUILT PLANS:
Upon completion of the installation of improvements in a subdivision, one set
of tracings on cloth or equal material suitable for use in reproduction, which
shows all improvements as actually installed in the field, shall be filed with
the village clerk. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
6-4-11: PROTECTION AND REPAIR OF EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
The subdivider, his contractors and suppliers, shall be jointly and severally
responsible so that existing improvements and the property of the village are
not damaged or rendered less useful or unsightly by the operations of the
subdivider, his contractors or suppliers. This provision is intended to include
damage or nuisance with respect to the land, improvements or landscaping of the
village; damage to existing streets, sidewalks, curb and gutter, parkways by
passage thereover of equipment or trucks or by excavation for any purpose; the
spillage or tracking of earth, sand or rock onto existing streets, sidewalks,
curbs and gutters or parkways; the washing by stormwater of earth or sand onto
streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters or parkways into catch basins; damage to
water mains, sanitary sewers, culverts or storm sewers. To reduce or localize
the possibility of damage to streets by heavy trucking, the village president
shall instruct the subdivider as to the streets to be used for access to the
subdivision by equipment and trucks and the subdivider shall be responsible for
enforcement of this instruction upon his contractors and their suppliers. The
subdivider shall make provisions to prevent washing of earth or sand onto
sidewalks, streets, curbs and gutters and into catch basins by stormwater.
Where deemed advisable, the village president shall have the power to require,
either prior to commencement of construction or after construction is in
process, that the subdivider post a surety to guarantee repair or damages or
abatement of nuisances. Where need for surety becomes apparent after
construction is in process, the village president shall have the power to order
construction discontinued until surety has been posted. Expenses incurred by
the village in repairing damages, cleaning streets, catch basins and sewers
shall be deducted from the surety. (Ord., 5-15-1974)
CHAPTER 5
SCHOOL SITE DONATIONS
SECTION:
6-5-1 Dedication Of School Sites Or For Payments Of Fees In Lieu Thereof
6-5-2 Density
6-5-3 Reservation Of Additional Land For Public Purposes
6-5-4 Combination With Adjoining Development
6-5-5 Topography And Grading
6-5-6 Improved Sites
6-5-7 Prerequisite To Annexation Agreement
6-5-8 Time Of Payment
6-5-9 Method Of Payment
6-5-10 Indemnification, Hold Harmless And Release
6-5-11 Accounting Of Funds
6-5-12 Periodic Review
6-5-1: DEDICATION OF SCHOOL SITES OR FOR PAYMENTS OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each subdivider or
developer may be required to dedicate land for school sites to serve the
immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or cash
contributions in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both, at
the option of the village, when in the discretion of the village the
development will impact the applicable school districts, in accordance with the
following criteria and formula: (Ord. 2006-34, 8-22-2006)
   A.   Criteria For Requiring School Site Land Dedication:
      1.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate number of students to
be generated by the subdivision shall bear directly upon the amount of land
required to be dedicated for school sites. The land dedication requirement
shall be determined by obtaining a ratio of: a) estimated children to be served
in each school classification over the b) maximum recommended number of
students to be served in each school classification as stated herein, and then
applying such ratio to the c) minimum recommended number of acres for a school
site of each such school classification as stated herein. The product thereof
shall be the acres of land deemed needed to have sufficient land for school
sites to serve the estimated increased children in each such school
classification.
      2.   School Classification And Size Of School Site: School
classifications and size of school sites within or serving the village shall be
determined in accordance with the following criteria:
 
                                             Minimum
                           Maximum Number   Number Of
                           Students For     Acres Of Land
School Classification       Each Such School For Each School
By Grades                   Classification   Site For Such
                                             Classificati on
Elementary schools,
grades kindergarten through 600 students     17 acres
5 (K-5)
Junior high schools,        900 students     30 acres
grades 6 through 8 (6-8)
High schools, grades        1,500 students   60 acres
9 through 12 (9-12)
 
      3.   Location: The location of the site to be dedicated shall be
determined by the village board of trustees upon recommendation of the board of
education of the school district having or to have jurisdiction of the school
to be erected on the site taking into account the comprehensive school plan
and/or the standards adopted by the affected school district as a guideline in
locating sites. The village board of trustees shall not select the site without
allowing opportunity for the board of education of the school district affected
to make a recommendation with respect thereto. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
   B.   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of School Sites:
      1.   Requirement And Use Of Contributions: Where the development is
small, as used herein, and the resulting site is too small to be practicable or
when the available land is inappropriate for a school site, and it is
determined by the village not to require the dedication of land, the village
may require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of
the land dedication. In considering whether a development is small, as used
herein, the village may consider whether the total number of the proposed
dwelling units will produce less than the maximum number of students for one
school of each school classification in accordance with this chapter. The cash
contributions in lieu of school sites shall be paid to the village prior to the
issuance of building permits, and shall be determined based on the fair market
value of land, the demographic information and school site size requirements in
effect at the time of application for the building permit. The village shall
turn over any and all funds actually collected for such fees to the appropriate
school districts annually. Such contributions shall be used solely for the
acquisition of land for a school site to serve the immediate and future needs
of children from that subdivision or development or for the improvement to any
existing school sites and buildings which serve such needs. Improvement under
this section shall be liberally construed and shall include, but shall not be
limited to, the development of parking lots; sidewalks; traffic signals;
arterial streets; collector streets; internal roadways; connections with sewer,
water and electrical lines; playgrounds; recreation grounds; and athletic
fields. Improvement shall also include the purchase of any material, goods or
equipment necessary to said development and construction. Improvement shall
further include the construction of buildings; additions to existing school
buildings; remodeled or renovated noninstructional spaces in classrooms and the
purchase of prefabricated classroom units to be used at a school site. (Ord.
2006-34, 8-22-2006)
      2.   Fair Market Value As Basis Of Contribution: The cash contributions
in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in
the area improved as specified in this section that otherwise would have been
dedicated as school sites. It has been determined that the present fair market
value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is forty five
thousand dollars ($45,000.00) per acre and such figure shall be used in making
the calculation for school contributions unless the subdivider or developer
files a written objection thereto. In the event of any such objection the
subdivider or developer shall submit an appraisal showing the fair market value
of such improved land in the area of his subdivision or other evidence thereof
and final determination of said fair market value per acre of such improved
land shall be made by the village board based upon such information submitted
by the subdivider and from other sources which may be submitted to the village
board by the school districts or others. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995; amd. Ord.
2002-16, 5-28-2002; Ord. 2006-27, 6-27-2006; Ord. 2012-21, 8-28-2012)
   C.   Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication And A Contribution: There will
be situations in subdivisions when a combination of land dedication and a
contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise
when:
      1.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as the
location for a school site. That portion of the land within the subdivision
falling within the school location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid,
and a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional
land that would have been required to be dedicated.
      2.   A major part of the school site has already been acquired and only a
small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site. The
remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and a cash contribution in
lieu thereof shall also be required to fulfill the obligations of that
development. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-2: DENSITY:
The following table of population is generally indicative of current and short
range projected trends in family size for newly constructed residential units
as determined by the Illinois school consulting service and shall be used in
calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash
contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by
the subdivider. In the event a subdivider files a written objection to the
table of estimated ultimate population listed below, he shall submit his own
demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated
from the subdivision, and, in that event, final determination of the density
formula shall be based upon such demographic information submitted by the
subdivider, and from other sources which may be submitted to the village board,
and upon consideration of such information as most accurately and fairly
represents current demographic trends. It is recognized that population
density, age distribution, and local conditions change over the years, and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if
necessary.
   TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION
   Children Per Unit
              Preschool Elementary Junior Total     High
                                   High             School
                                   Grades Grades K- Grades 9-
   Type Of 0-4 Years Grades K-5 6-8    8         12        Adults Total Per
Unit                    5-10 Years 11-13  5-13      14-17     (18+)  Unit
                                   Years  Years     Years
              Preschool Elementary Junior Total     High
                                   High             School
                                   Grades Grades K- Grades 9-
   Type Of 0-4 Years Grades K-5 6-8    8         12        Adults Total Per
Unit                    5-10 Years 11-13  5-13      14-17     (18+)  Unit
                                   Years  Years     Years
Detached
single-family
2 bedroom     0.113     0.136      0.048  0.184     0.020     1.700  2.017
3 bedroom     0.292     0.369      0.173  0.542     0.184     1.881  2.899
4 bedroom     0.418     0.530      0.298  0.828     0.360     2.158  3.764
5 bedroom +   0.283     0.345      0.248  0.593     0.300     2.594  3.770
Attached
single-family
1 bedroom     --        --         --     --        --        1.193  1.193
2 bedroom     0.064     0.088      0.048  0.136     0.038     1.752  1.990
3 bedroom     0.212     0.234      0.058  0.292     0.059     1.829  2.392
4 bedroom +   0.323     0.322      0.154  0.476     0.173     2.173  3.145
Apartments
Efficiency    --        --         --     --        --        1.294  1.294
1 bedroom     --        0.002      0.001  0.003     0.001     1.754  1.758
2 bedroom     0.047     0.086      0.042  0.128     0.046     1.693  1.914
3 bedroom +   0.052     0.234      0.123  0.357     0.118     2.526  3.053
 
Note:   There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart. Because
of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family dwelling
units, only 1 category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus only
1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of
detached and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be
necessary.
(Ord. 2002-16, 5-28-2002)
6-5-3: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES:
Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to require
the designation and reservation of school sites, or other public lands as a
condition to approval of any plat of subdivision where such land is to be
acquired by condemnation within one year from final plat approval as set forth
under division 12 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal code1. 65 ILCS.1.
(Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-4: COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT:
Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, a school site which is to
be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with dedications from
adjoining subdivisions in order to produce usable school sites without hardship
on a particular subdivider. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-5: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purpose. Grading on sites
dedicated for school uses shall not differ greatly from surrounding land. (Ord.
1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-6: IMPROVED SITES:
All school sites donated pursuant to this chapter shall be fully improved by
the subdivider. All property dedicated shall be in a fully improved condition
ready for service of electricity, gas, water and sewer service; streets,
including sidewalks, enclosed drainage, curbs and gutters shall be installed in
compliance with the ordinances of the village. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-7: PREREQUISITE TO ANNEXATION AGREEMENT:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof or combination of
both as required by this chapter may also be required as a condition to the
annexation of any land to the village when in the discretion of the village the
development will impact the applicable school districts, and provisions
therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation agreement governing such land.
Additionally, the village shall notify the appropriate school districts when a
party submits a proposed annexation agreement to the village and the village
determines there will be an impact, so that the school districts may discuss
dedication issues with said party. (Ord. 2006-34, 8-22-2006)
6-5-8: TIME OF PAYMENT:
The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the
board of trustees of the proposed subdivision. Cash contributions shall be made
at the time of the issuance of the building permits for the subject residential
dwelling units. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-9: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
The cash contributions required hereunder shall be made by check payable to the
village and shall be deposited with the village. The village clerk shall keep a
record of these receipts. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-10: INDEMNIFICATION, HOLD HARMLESS AND RELEASE:
The village shall not collect funds under this chapter for any taxing body
which does not, prior to the effective date hereof, enter into an
intergovernmental agreement with the village which provides that such taxing
body will hold harmless, indemnify and release the village upon such terms and
conditions as are acceptable to the village. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-11: ACCOUNTING OF FUNDS:
Each district receiving funds under this chapter shall annually make a written
report to the village detailing the amount of funds received and how such funds
were expended. This report shall be provided to the village prior to December
31 of each year. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
6-5-12: PERIODIC REVIEW:
The village shall review this chapter every three (3) years to determine
whether the land value and demographic information herein set forth is
consistent with the current values. Additionally, three (3) years after the
effective date hereof, any or all affected school districts may submit a
demographic study based upon local information and data for the village's
consideration. The village may, at its sole option, adopt such a local study to
be used for calculations under this chapter. (Ord. 1995-29, 9-26-1995)
CHAPTER 6
PARK SITE DONATIONS
SECTION:
6-6-1 Dedication Of Park Lands Or For Payment Of Fees In Lieu Thereof
6-6-2 Density
6-6-3 Reservation Of Additional Land For Public Use
6-6-4 Combination With Adjoining Development
6-6-5 Topography And Grading
6-6-6 Improved Sites
6-6-7 Prerequisite To Annexation Agreement
6-6-8 Time Of Dedication Or Payment
6-6-9 Method Of Payment
6-6-1: DEDICATION OF PARK LANDS OR FOR PAYMENT OF FEES IN LIEU THEREOF:
As a condition of approval of a final plat of subdivision, each subdivider or
developer will be required to dedicate land for park and recreation purposes to
serve the immediate and future needs of the residents of the development, or
cash contributions in lieu of actual land dedication, or a combination of both,
at the option of the village in accordance with the following criteria and
formula: (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
   A.   Criteria For Requiring Park And Recreational Land Dedication:
      1.   Requirement And Population Ratio: The ultimate density of a proposed
development shall bear directly upon the amount of land required for
dedication. The total requirement shall be twenty five (25) acres of land per
one thousand (1,000) of ultimate population in accordance with the following
classifications:
 
Types Of           Size Range       Minimum Acres
Recreation Areas                    Per 1,000 People
a. Play lot        Minimum 12,000   Not applicable
                   square feet
b. School-park     Minimum park
(neighborhood      of 5 acres       5.83
playground)
c. Neighborhood    Minimum 31/2     4.17
park               acres
d. Districtwide    Minimum 4 acres  5.83
park or play field up to 30 acres
e. Community wide  Minimum 12 acres 9.17
recreation park    up to 30 acres                     
                                    25 acres of land
                                    per 1,000 people
 
   (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-18, 4-11-2006; Ord. 2013-25, 9-24-
2013)
      2.   Location: The location of the site to be dedicated shall be
determined by the board of trustees upon recommendation of the planning and
zoning commission taking into account the suitability of the site for park and
recreational purposes or development and its relationship to population
concentrations. A park site adjoining all elementary school sites of not less
than five (5) acres shall be considered a requirement. A central location which
will serve equally the entire development is more desirable. In large
developments these sites can be located throughout the development according to
the village of Minooka comprehensive plan.
      3.   Credit For Private Open Spaces And Recreation Areas: When
subdividers or developers provide their own open space for recreation areas and
facilities, it may have the effect of reducing the demand for local public
recreational services. The reason for this policy is understood to be the
village's concern that such private open space is difficult or impossible to
develop and maintain, irrespective of the developers' assurances, since
ownership usually is surrendered to the adjacent owners or a homeowners'
association, who may not have the personnel or the financial resources for
maintenance and improvement. There may, nevertheless, be instances in which the
public is better served by providing for private open space in lieu of public
open space. Credit for private open space may be allowed only where a
determination has been made by the village board of trustees that private open
space or recreational areas, in lieu of or in conjunction with publicly
dedicated open space or recreational areas will, by reason of the type of
development, better serve the interests of the public than where wholly public
dedications are required. Where allowed, a substitution of private open space
for dedicated parks will imply a substantially higher degree of improvement and
the installation of recreational facilities, including equipment by the
developer, as part of his obligation. Detailed plans of such areas, including
specifications of facilities to be installed, must be approved by the village,
and before any credit is given for private recreation areas, the subdivider or
developer must guarantee that these private recreation areas will be
permanently maintained for such use by the execution of the appropriate legal
documents. Private swimming clubs and any other private recreation facilities
are included in this provision. When an adjustment for private recreation acres
is warranted, it will be necessary to compute the total park land dedication
that would have been required from the subdivision and then subtract the credit
to be given. In all cases the extent of credit to be given by private open
space shall be determined by the village board of trustees.
   B.   Criteria For Requiring A Contribution In Lieu Of Park And Recreational
Land Dedication:
      1.   Requirement And Use Of Contributions: Where the development is small
and the resulting site is too small to be practicable or when the available
land is inappropriate for park and recreational purposes, the village shall
require the subdivider or developer to pay a cash contribution in lieu of the
land dedication required. The cash contributions in lieu of park and recreation
land dedication shall be paid to the village prior to or upon the issuance of
building permits for any building or structure in the subdivision, and shall be
determined based on the fair market value of land, the demographic information
and park site size requirements in effect at the time of application for the
building permit. Such contributions shall be used solely for the acquisition of
park and recreation land as hereinabove classified, which will be available to
serve the immediate or future needs of the residents of that subdivision or for
the improvement of other existing local park and recreation land which already
serves such needs. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
      2.   Fair Market Value As Basis Of Contribution: The cash contributions
in lieu of land shall be based on the fair market value of the acres of land in
the area improved as specified in this section that otherwise would have been
dedicated as park and recreation sites. It has been determined that the present
fair market value of such improved land in and surrounding the village is forty
five thousand dollars ($45,000.00) per acre and such figure shall be used in
making any calculation herein unless the subdivider files a written objection
thereto. In the event of any such objection the subdivider shall submit an
appraisal showing the fair market value of such improved land in the area of
his subdivision or other evidence thereof and the final determination of the
fair market value per acre of such improved land shall be made by the village
board based upon such information submitted by the subdivider and from other
sources which may be submitted to the village board. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003;
amd. Ord. 2005-60, 11-22-2005; Ord. 2012-21, 8-28-2012)
      3.   Criteria For Requiring Land Dedication And A Contribution: There
will be situations in subdivisions when a combination of land dedication and a
contribution in lieu of land are both necessary. These occasions will arise
when:
         a.   Only a portion of the land to be developed is proposed as a
location of a park site. That portion of the land within the subdivision
falling within the park location shall be dedicated as a site as aforesaid, and
a cash contribution in lieu thereof shall be required for any additional land
that would have been required to be dedicated.
         b.   A major part of the park site has already been acquired and only
a small portion of land is needed from the development to complete the site.
The remaining portions shall be required by dedication, and cash contribution
in lieu thereof shall be required. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-2: DENSITY:
The following table of population is generally indicative of current and short
range projected trends in family size for newly constructed residential units
as determined by the Illinois school consulting service and shall be used in
calculating the amount of required dedication of acres of land or the cash
contributions in lieu thereof unless a written objection is filed thereto by
the subdivider. In the event a subdivider files a written objection to the
table of estimated ultimate population listed below, he shall submit his own
demographic study showing the estimated additional population to be generated
from the subdivision, and, in that event, final determination of the density
formula shall be based upon such demographic information submitted by the
subdivider, and from other sources which may be submitted to the village board,
and upon consideration of such information as most accurately and fairly
represents current demographic trends. It is recognized that population
density, age distribution, and local conditions change over the years, and the
specific formula for the dedication of land, or the payment of fees in lieu
thereof, as stated herein, is subject to periodic review and amendment if
necessary.
   January 2007
   Village of Minooka   TABLE OF ESTIMATED ULTIMATE POPULATION
   Children Per Unit
              Preschool Elementary Junior Total  High
                                   High          School
                                   Grades Grades Grades 9-
   Type Of 0-4 Years Grades K-5 6-8    K-8    12        Adults    Total Per
Unit                    5-10 Years 11-13  5-13   14-17     (18 plus) Unit
                                   Years  Years  Years
              Preschool Elementary Junior Total  High
                                   High          School
                                   Grades Grades Grades 9-
   Type Of 0-4 Years Grades K-5 6-8    K-8    12        Adults    Total Per
Unit                    5-10 Years 11-13  5-13   14-17     (18 plus) Unit
                                   Years  Years  Years
Detached
single-family
2 bedroom     0.113     0.136      0.048  0.184  0.020     1.700     2.017
3 bedroom     0.292     0.369      0.173  0.542  0.184     1.881     2.899
4 bedroom     0.418     0.530      0.298  0.828  0.360     2.158     3.764
5 bedroom     0.283     0.345      0.248  0.593  0.300     2.594     3.770
plus
Attached
single-family
1 bedroom     --        --         --     --     --        1.193     1.193
2 bedroom     0.064     0.088      0.048  0.136  0.038     1.752     1.990
3 bedroom     0.212     0.234      0.058  0.292  0.059     1.829     2.392
4 bedroom     0.323     0.322      0.154  0.476  0.173     2.173     3.145
plus
Apartments
                                                                     1.294Ap
Efficiency    --        --         --     --     --        1.294     artment s
                                                                     (cont.)
1 bedroom     --        0.002      0.001  0.003  0.001     1.754     1.758
2 bedroom     0.047     0.086      0.042  0.128  0.046     1.693     1.914
3 bedroom +   0.052     0.234      0.123  0.357  0.118     2.526     3.053
 
Note:   There are only 3 significant categories provided in this chart. Because
of the similarity of yields of all types of attached single-family dwelling
units, only 1 category is provided. The same is true with apartments; thus only
1 category. Because of the relatively short history of some newer types of
detached and attached single-family units, individual evaluations may be
necessary.
(Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-3: RESERVATION OF ADDITIONAL LAND FOR PUBLIC USE:
Nothing herein contained shall limit the authority of the village to require
the designation and reservation of other recreational land, school sites, or
other public lands as a condition for approval of any plat of subdivision where
such land is to be acquired by condemnation within one year from final plat
approval as set forth under division 12 of article 11 of the Illinois municipal
code1. 65 ILCS.1. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-4: COMBINATION WITH ADJOINING DEVELOPMENT:
Where the subdivision is less than forty (40) acres, a park or recreational
site which is to be dedicated should, where possible, be combined with
dedications from adjoining subdivisions in order to produce usable park or
recreational sites without hardship on a particular subdivider. (Ord. 2003-07,
2-25-2003)
6-6-5: TOPOGRAPHY AND GRADING:
The slope, topography and geology of the dedicated site as well as its
surroundings must be suitable for its intended purposes. Grading on sites
dedicated for park and recreational uses shall not differ greatly from
surrounding land. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-6: IMPROVED SITES:
All sites shall be dedicated in a condition ready for full service of
electrical, water, sewer and streets (including enclosed drainage and curb and
gutter) as applicable to the location of the site, or acceptable provisions
made therefor, and all other improvements shall be made as may be required by
the subdivision code. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-7: PREREQUISITE TO ANNEXATION AGREEMENT:
The dedications of land or cash contributions in lieu thereof or combination of
both as required by this chapter shall also be a matter of policy of the
village and provisions therefor shall be incorporated in any annexation
agreement governing such land. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-8: TIME OF DEDICATION OR PAYMENT:
The dedication of land shall be made at the time of final plat approval by the
board of trustees for the proposed subdivision. Cash contributions shall be
made at the time of the issuance of the building permits for the subject
residential dwelling units. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
6-6-9: METHOD OF PAYMENT:
The cash contributions required hereunder shall be made by check payable to the
village and shall be deposited with the village clerk prior to the issuance of
a building permit. (Ord. 2003-07, 2-25-2003)
CHAPTER 7
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS
SECTION:
6-7-1 Purpose
6-7-2 Objectives
6-7-3 Permitted Uses In A PUD
6-7-4 Qualifications For Filing
6-7-5 Procedure
6-7-6 Requirements For Submission
6-7-7 Changes
6-7-8 Design Incentives
6-7-9 Design Requirements
6-7-10 Review Criteria
6-7-1: PURPOSE:
The provisions of this Chapter are intended for special situations in which:
   A.   Special amenities and benefits to the Village beyond those required by
this and other Village ordinances can be achieved by allowing more flexible
design than is otherwise permitted by such requirements; or
   B.   Properties with unique constraints such as environmentally sensitive
areas or infill parcels require a more flexible approach to land use control to
make possible development that is sensitive to such constraints. (Ord. 1997-08,
5-27-1997)
6-7-2: OBJECTIVES:
   A.   To promote flexibility in design and permit planned diversification in
the location of structures.
   B.   To promote an efficient use of land to facilitate sustainability in the
arrangement of buildings, circulation systems, utilities, open space and
natural resources.
   C.   To preserve existing natural resources and landscape features and to
utilize them in a manner harmonious with the development.
   D.   To provide for more usable and suitably located recreation facilities
and other public facilities than would otherwise be provided under conventional
development.
   E.   To provide for the aesthetic and functional harmony of various types of
buildings, land uses, and landscape elements. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-3: PERMITTED USES IN A PUD:
   A.   Residential PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter in
the R Districts and may include any uses permitted by right, conditional uses,
or accessory uses in the underlying R District. A maximum of ten percent (10%)
of the gross site in an R District may be devoted to commercial uses provided
these uses are permitted by right in the B1 District or as conditional
permitted uses in the B1 District.
   B.   Commercial PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter in
the B Districts and may include any uses permitted by right, conditional
permitted uses, or accessory uses as provided in the underlying B District.
   C.   Industrial PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter in
the I Districts and may include any uses permitted by right, conditional
permitted uses, or accessory uses as provided in the underlying I District.
   D.   Mixed use PUDs are permitted under the provisions of this Chapter,
provided that the underlying district boundaries conform with the uses being
proposed except that ten percent (10%) of the gross site area of an R zoned
portion of the PUD may be devoted to uses permitted in the B1 District.
   E.   Data Center PUDS are permitted under the provisions of this chapter in
the data center district and may include any uses permitted by right,
conditional permitted uses, or accessory uses as provided in the underlying
data center district.
   F.   The uses included in any proposed PUD are subject to the review and
approval procedures specified herein and shall not be deemed to be permitted by
right. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997; amd. Ord. 2025-3, 4-22-2025)
6-7-4: QUALIFICATIONS FOR FILING:
No development shall be filed as a planned unit development unless it:
   A.   Is at least one acre in size, and
   B.   Is initially under the same ownership or control. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-
1997)
6-7-5: PROCEDURE:
A planned unit development shall be granted as a conditional permitted use to
the zoning district(s) in which it is located. The process for a planned unit
development shall be as follows:
   A.   Pre-Application:
      1.   Prior to filing a formal application, the applicant thereof should
meet with the appropriate Village staff to discuss the proposed development.
The applicant should be able to provide a concept of the PUD at this time.
Staff will advise the applicant at this time of all applicable officially
adopted policies, standards, regulations and procedures.
      2.   A concept review before the Village Planning and Zoning Commission
may be directed at the discretion of Village staff or upon the request of the
applicant. A concept review provides the Commission an opportunity to determine
what additional information will be necessary concerning the application.
   B.   Preliminary Plat Of Planned Unit Development: Procedure for the
submission of the preliminary plat for a planned unit development shall be
identical to the preliminary plat procedure described in Section
6-2-1 of this Title except that it shall be accompanied by an application for a
conditional permitted use for a planned unit development in accordance with the
procedures for conditional permitted uses established in Section
5-11-9 of this Code.
   C.   Conditional Permitted Use For Planned Unit Development: Concurrent with
the application for preliminary plat for a planned unit development, the
applicant shall submit an application for a conditional permitted use for a
planned unit development. The conditional use permit shall be approved
contingent upon final PUD approval.
   D.   Final Plat Of Planned Unit Development: Procedure for submission of the
final plat of planned unit development shall be identical to the final plat
procedure described in Section
6-2-1 of this Title. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-6: REQUIREMENTS FOR SUBMISSION:
   A.   Pre-Application: The following items need to be provided by the
applicant for a pre- application conference review to occur:
      1.   General Site Information: Data regarding site conditions, land
characteristics, available community facilities and utilities, and other
related information.
      2.   Concept Plan: A drawing in simple sketch form showing the proposed
location, land uses, streets, buildings, and other related information.
   B.   Preliminary Plat Of Planned Unit Development:
      1.   Required Information: In addition to the requirements for
preliminary plat set forth in Section 6-2-2 of this Title, the following items
and information are required for the submission of a planned unit development:
         a.   Statement Of Objectives: A statement of the objectives to be
achieved by the PUD. This statement should provide the rationale behind the
assumptions and choices of the developer/applicant. This statement should
explain the benefits to the Village that will result from the PUD.
         b.   Statement Of Character: Explanation of the character of the PUD
and the manner in which it has been planned to take advantage of the
flexibility of these regulations.
         c.   List Of Variances: A list of the variances from the zoning and
subdivision ordinances that are being employed in the proposed PUD.
         d.   Design Schedule: A list of the area, lot width, yard, setback and
bulk requirements applicable to the PUD.
         e.   Preliminary Landscape Plan: A landscape plan showing all
landscape improvements (both plantings and hardscape) being proposed in the
PUD. Details should be provided for landscape design elements intended for
screening or buffering as well as for any unique landscape design features such
as entry features, parks, etc.
      2.   Optional Additional Information: In addition, the Planning and
Zoning Commission or Village Board may request at any time during the review
process that the applicant provide any of the following additional items:
         a.   Architectural Plans: If directed by the Planning and Zoning
Commission, the applicant shall submit preliminary architectural plans for all
primary buildings that shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow an
understanding of the style of the development except for single-family detached
structures proposed to be constructed on lots in compliance with all applicable
zoning district requirements.
         b.   School Impact Analysis: Provide information on the student count
to be generated by the PUD and the financial impact on the local school
districts.
         c.   Tax Impact Analysis: Provide information on the taxes to be
generated by the proposed project and the cost for the various taxing bodies to
provide the necessary services.
         d.   Traffic Analysis: Provide information on the traffic to be
generated by the PUD and the adequacy of the local transportation and
thoroughfare to handle the anticipated volumes. Also an analysis may be
necessary of the internal streets, drives, parking, sidewalks and pathways.
         e.   Covenants And Restrictions: Provide any proposed covenants and
restrictions, agreements or provisions that will govern the use, maintenance,
and continued protection of the PUD.
   C.   Final Plat Of Planned Unit Development: In addition to the requirements
for final plat set forth in Section 6-2-4 of this Title, the following items
and information are required for the submission of a final plat of planned unit
development:
      1.   Landscaping Plans: Final landscape plans and landscape details.
      2.   Covenants And Restrictions: Provide the final covenants and
restrictions, agreements or provisions that will govern the use, maintenance,
and continued protection of the PUD. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-7: CHANGES:
A planned unit development shall be constructed in complete accordance with the
approved preliminary and final plat of planned unit development and all
supporting data. Major changes to an approved preliminary or final plat of
planned unit development require the resubmission and reconsideration of the
planned unit development according to the process set forth herein for
preliminary and final plat approval. With the aid of the following criteria,
the Zoning Officer shall be responsible for determining whether a change is
classified as major or minor. Minor changes shall, at the direction of the
Zoning Officer, be brought before the Planning and Zoning Commission for final
action but shall not require a new public hearing.
   A.   Criteria For Major Change: A major change is one that alters the
concept or intent of the planned unit development. This includes, but is not
limited to:
      1.   For A Residential PUD:
         a.   Any change in the location, size or type of dwelling units or
land uses.
         b.   Any increase in the number of dwelling units from that in the
approved preliminary plat.
         c.   Any change, greater than ten percent (10%), in the height of any
building or structure in the PUD other than single-family detached dwelling
units.
         d.   Any change in the functional classification of a roadway.
         e.   Any reduction in the acreage of open space.
      2.   For A Nonresidential PUD Or Nonresidential Portion Of A PUD:
         a.   Any change in the location or type of land use.
         b.   Any change in the type, number or location of a building.
         c.   Greater than a ten percent (10%) increase in the height of a
building.
         d.   Any change in the functional classification of a roadway.
         e.   Any reduction in the acreage of open space.
         f.   A greater than ten percent (10%) increase in the gross floor area
of a nonresidential building.
         g.   A greater than ten percent (10%) increase in the total gross
floor area of all the nonresidential buildings in the PUD.
         h.   Any reduction in the total number of parking spaces for the
project.
   B.   Criteria For Minor Change: Minor changes are changes not defined as
major changes and which do not alter the concept or intent of a PUD. (Ord.
1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-8: DESIGN INCENTIVES:
To further creativity and excellence in design, the following incentives are
offered in planned unit developments:
   A.   Varied Zoning Requirements: Bulk requirements of the underlying zoning
district(s) may be varied provided that it can be demonstrated that the
variations conform to all of the review criteria contained herein as well as
those established for conditional uses and those established for subdivision
plats.
   B.   Varied Subdivision Requirements: Dimensional and design standards for
subdivisions and subdivision improvements such as streets, blocks, sidewalks,
and parkways may vary from Village and IDOT standards established or referenced
in the Village subdivision regulations provided that it can be demonstrated
that the variations conform to all of the review criteria contained herein as
well as those established for conditional permitted uses and those established
for subdivision plats. Required subdivision improvements may not vary from the
required construction improvement specifications.
   C.   Mixed Uses: A PUD may include a variety of land uses designed and
planned as part of a unified development provided that the underlying zoning
conforms to the uses being proposed. A residential PUD in an R District may
include up to ten percent (10%) of the gross site area devoted to uses
permitted in the B1 Zoning District.
   D.   On-Site Density Transfer: The density permitted in a given portion of a
total site may be transferred to another portion of the site in order to
preserve environmentally sensitive areas and to achieve excellence in design
provided that the gross density does not exceed the maximum allowed herein for
the underlying zoning district.
   E.   Density Bonuses: Design excellence in the provision of site amenities
such as exceptional landscaping, recreational facilities, preservation of
architectural and historic sites, and the preservation of environmentally
sensitive areas may allow the granting of an increase in density of up to five
percent (5%).
Flexibility to suspend requirements imposed by the Village's zoning and
subdivision regulations is not conferred upon the PUD applicant as a matter of
right, but in all cases subject to the finding by the Village that the
objectives of these provisions are being served by the PUD and that all
applicable review standards are being adhered to. Variations in a PUD from
normally applicable standards shall not be considered as variances as defined
in this Title and shall not be required to conform to the approval criteria
herein provided for variances. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
6-7-9: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Maximum Density:
      1.   Residential PUD: The gross maximum density of a residential PUD
shall not exceed the following standard for the district in which it is
situated:
 
R1  1 du/acre
R1A 3 du/acre
R2  4 du/acre
    4 du/acre for single-family detached dwellings
R3  6 du/acre for single-family attached
    12 du/acre for multi-family
R4  6 du/acre
R5  6 du/acre
R6  12 du/acre
 
      2.   Nonresidential PUD: As required in the underlying zoning district.
   B.   Spacing:
      1.   The minimum distance between single-family detached dwellings shall
be ten feet (10').
      2.   The minimum distance between buildings other than single-family
detached dwellings less than twenty four feet (24') in height shall be fifteen
feet (15').
      3.   The minimum distance between buildings greater than twenty four feet
(24') in height shall be equal to the height of the taller building.
   C.   Yards: The required yards along the periphery of the PUD shall be at
least equal to that of the underlying zoning district. (Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-
1997)
6-7-10: REVIEW CRITERIA:
The Planning and Zoning Commission's review of the preliminary and final PUD
applications shall be based on the following criteria:
   A.   The PUD shall not in any way be deemed to be detrimental to the public
health, safety, comfort or general welfare.
   B.   The plan of the area proposed for the PUD shall be in general
conformance with the adopted Comprehensive Plan of the Village.
   C.   The use or uses within the PUD shall be compatible with surrounding
land uses and will not be injurious to the use and enjoyment of other
properties in its vicinity.
   D.   Ingress and egress to the PUD shall be provided in a manner to
facilitate access by emergency vehicles and efficient and safe traffic
circulation in the vicinity and be consistent with any officially adopted plans
of the Village. Sidewalks, pedestrianways, bicycle paths and off-street parking
and loading are provided in a location and capacity appropriate to the planned
uses.
   E.   The quality or quantity of common open spaces and landscaping provided
are consistent with the higher standards of amenity and design required of a
PUD.
   F.   Adequate provision has been made in the form of deed restrictions,
homeowners' or condominium associations, or the like for the preservation and
maintenance of any open spaces, private roads or drives, utilities, and storm
water management facilities as well as for the control of architectural review
for individual structures if necessary to implement the PUD.
   G.   Adequate and safe location of play areas for children as well as other
recreational areas.
   H.   Buildings shall be located so as to ensure adequate light and air.
   I.   The PUD shall be of a superior design than would otherwise be permitted
by the strict adherence to otherwise applicable regulations and exceeding that
which is typical of conventional development.
   J.   The PUD meets the minimum requirements set forth in this Chapter as
well as the provisions of all other sections of this Ordinance as well as the
Village's Subdivision Ordinance, unless specifically excluded by this Chapter
or waived by the Village Board.
   K.   All construction shall conform to the requirements of the Village.
(Ord. 1997-08, 5-27-1997)
TITLE 7
HEALTH AND SANITATION
CHAPTER 1
NUISANCES
SECTION:
7-1-1 Nuisances Enumerated
7-1-2 Penalty, Notice To Abate
7-1-3 Abatement By Village
7-1-4 Burning Of Waste Materials
7-1-1: NUISANCE ENUMERATED:
Within the territorial jurisdiction of the Village, it is hereby declared to be
a nuisance for any person:
   A.   To so negligently conduct any business or use any premises as to create
an offensive smell as may taint the air and render it unwholesome and
disagreeable to other persons.
   B.   To cause or to suffer the carcass of any animal or other offal, filth
or noisome substance to be collected, deposited or remain in any place to the
prejudice of other persons.
   C.   To throw or deposit any offal or otherwise offensive matter or the
carcass of any animal in any watercourse, pond, spring or well.
   D.   To deposit any night soil, dead animal or other filthy, offensive or
noisome substance upon any lot, street, alley, highway, park or other place.
   E.   To obstruct or impede, without legal authority, the passage of any
gutter or natural drainage of any public or private property.
   F.   To obstruct or encroach upon public highways, private ways, streets,
alleys or commons.
   G.   To establish, maintain or carry on any offensive or unwholesome
business within the limits of the Village, or within one mile of the limits
thereof.
   H.   To throw or deposit any straw, dirt, filth, chips, ashes or other
rubbish in any alley or other public place.
   I.   To permit or suffer any offal, filth, refuse, animal or vegetable
matter, which is liable to become putrid or offensive or injurious to health,
to remain on any premises used or occupied by him for a longer period than four
(4) hours at any one time.
   J.   To keep or suffer to keep, in a foul, offensive, nauseous or filthy
condition any railroad car, building, yard, cellar, barn, sewer, pig sty or
privy.
   K.   To own, keep or use any railroad car, yard, pen, place or premises in
or upon which cattle or swine may be confined or kept, as to be offensive to
persons residing in the vicinity of the same.
   L.   To erect, continue or use any building or other place for the exercise
of any trade, employment or manufacture which, by occasioning noxious
exhalations, offensive smells or otherwise is offensive or dangerous to the
health of individuals or the public.
   M.   To locate and use, without first having obtained permission of the
Village President and Board of Trustees, to do so, any packing house, rendery,
tallow chandlery, bone factory, tannery, brewery, distillery, livery stable,
blacksmith shop or foundry.
   N.   To erect or use habitually any house or lot for the purpose of
butchering or slaughtering cattle, calves, sheep or swine without the
permission of the President and Board of Trustees.
   O.   To boil or render tainted lard or other animal substance so as to taint
the air, render it unwholesome or offensive.
   P.   To use in the erection of, or repairing of any building a scaffold or
scaffolds not wide enough to ensure the safety of the persons passing under or
near the same.
   Q.   To suffer any bitch or slut, owned by him to run at large while in
heat.
   R.   To suffer any horse, ox, cow, calf, hog, dog, cat or other animal owned
by him or in his charge which may come to its death in any manner, to lie for
more than twenty four (24) hours after its death, in or upon any street, alley
or other ground, public or private.
   S.   To erect or continue any public sign indicating that any premises or
building owned, occupied or in charge of such person is used in whole or in
part as a saloon or dramshop, unless such person shall have a license to keep a
dramshop, issued by the village president and the board of trustees. (1904 Code
§ 17.1; amd. 1997 Code)
   T.   To leave any vehicles parked on a village street during street cleaning
or snow removal operations. (Ord. 1978-5, 1978)
   U.   To demolish any structure by fire. (Ord. 1987-5, 2-25-1987)
   V.   In an eviction by a landlord of a tenant, it shall be a nuisance: (Ord.
1988-15, 10-10-1988)
      1.   For a landlord to cause tenant's goods and chattels to be removed
from the landlord's premises and deposited upon any street, alley, avenue or
other public ground within the village, unless such goods and chattels shall be
enclosed within a good and sufficient container as provided in section
7-2-4 of this title. Twenty four (24) hours shall be considered a reasonable
time to remove or abate such nuisance.
      2.   For the owner of goods and chattels which a landlord has caused to
be removed from the landlord's premises and deposited upon any street, alley,
avenue or other public ground within the village, to allow such goods and
chattels to remain upon the public grounds. If such goods and chattels are not
enclosed in a container as provided in section
7-2-4 of this title, then twenty four (24) hours shall be considered a
reasonable time to remove or abate such nuisance. If such goods and chattels
are enclosed within a container as provided in section
7-2-4 of this title, then seven (7) days shall be considered a reasonable time
to remove or abate such nuisance. (Ord. 1988-15, 10-10-1988; amd. Ord. 2014-32,
12-16-2014)
   W.   To pull up or break down or otherwise injure any of the trees, grass,
shrubbery, fences, seats, stands or other fixtures or things in or about, or
appertaining to any public square or park in the village; or to erect any booth
or other structure on any such public square or park without the written
permission of the president of the village first being obtained by such person.
(1904 Code § 26.11)
7-1-2: PENALTY, NOTICE TO ABATE:
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
Provided, that the offender shall, in every case under this chapter, be
notified by some officer of the village to remove or abate such nuisance, and
be allowed a reasonable time, to be fixed by such officer in such notice
according to the nature of the nuisance, to so remove and abate the same, and
upon so doing within the time fixed by such officer, the offender shall not be
subject to the penalty aforesaid, unless the commission of such nuisance was
wilful or resulted in the actual damage to the person or property affected.
(1904 Code § 17.2; amd. 1977 Code)
7-1-3: ABATEMENT BY VILLAGE:
If any person guilty of creating, suffering or continuing any nuisance defined
in this chapter shall, upon being notified as aforesaid, neglect or refuse to
remove, abate or discontinue such nuisance within the time specified in such
notice, it shall be the duty of the village police to cause such nuisance to be
abated or removed, and he shall keep an accurate account of the necessary
expense incurred thereby, which expense shall be collected from the offender by
an action of debt in the name of the village, before the proper village
officer, and the removal or abatement of such nuisance by the village police
and the collection of the expenses thereby incurred, as herein provided, shall
be no bar to the prosecution for the recovery of the penalty provided in
section
7-1-2 of this chapter. (1904 Code § 17.3)
7-1-4: BURNING OF WASTE MATERIALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to burn waste materials within the
village limits, except as regulated herein. Any person violating this section
shall be punishable as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   All burning of waste materials is subject to the following regulations:
      1.   Burning Prohibited: Except as hereinafter provided it shall be
unlawful to burn any material, including, but not limited to, "landscape waste"
and "municipal waste" as hereinafter defined.
      2.   Definitions:
   LANDSCAPE WASTE: All accumulations of grass or shrubbery, leaves and all
other materials accumulated in the care of lawns, shrubbery and vines.
   MUNICIPAL WASTE: Garbage, general household and commercial waste, industrial
lunchroom or office waste, landscape waste and construction or demolition
debris.
      3.   Exceptions: The following open burning activities are permitted
within the village:
         a.   The setting of fires by the forest preserve district of any
county on property owned or controlled by it, to perform prescribed burning for
natural community and habitat management;
         b.   The setting of fires to combat or limit existing fires, when
reasonable and necessary in the judgment of the responsible government
official;
         c.   The burning of fuels for legitimate campfire, recreational, and
cooking purposes, or in domestic fireplaces, in areas which such burning is
consistent with other laws, provided that no garbage shall be burned in such
cases;
         d.   Small open flames for heating tar or for welding, acetylene
torches, highway safety flares, and the like.
   C.   Fires shall be located not less than fifty feet (50') from any
structure, with adequate provisions made to prevent the spread of fire, or the
fire shall be contained in a fireproof container located not less than fifteen
feet (15') from any structure.
   D.   All fires shall be constantly attended until such fire is extinguished.
The person attending the fire shall be equipped with a hose connected to a
water supply, or other fire extinguishing equipment, suitable to extinguish the
fire.
   E.   Prior to starting the fire, the appropriate fire protection district
shall be notified of the location of the fire, the nature of the materials to
be burned, the date and time of the fire, and the name of the person to be
attending the fire.
   F.   No waste materials may be burned on any village or public street or
alley.
   G.   It shall be unlawful to burn styrofoam, polystyrene, any other kind of
plastic material, shingles, or insulation. It shall be unlawful to burn any
materials in which the above materials may be incorporated.
   H.   The owner of the property where the fire is to be located, the person
owning the materials to be burned, the person responsible for causing the
materials to be burned, and the person attending the fire are each jointly
responsible to see that the regulations set forth in this section are not
violated. (Ord. 2003-02, 1-28-2003)
CHAPTER 2
GARBAGE AND REFUSE
SECTION:
7-2-1 System Of Collection
7-2-2 Contract For Collection; Letting Of Bids
7-2-3 Collection Of Garbage, Requirements
7-2-4 Deposits Of Garbage
7-2-5 Collection Of Garbage, Charges
7-2-6 Penalty
7-2-7 Voluntary Recycling Program
7-2-1: SYSTEM OF COLLECTION:
The village shall provide a system of collection and disposal of garbage for
the benefit of inhabitants of the village. (Ord. 1933-3, 5-1-1933; amd. 1977
Code)
7-2-2: CONTRACT FOR COLLECTION; LETTING OF BIDS:
   A.   The board of trustees of the village shall let a contract for the
collection and disposal of garbage.
   B.   The finance committee of the village board may, prior to termination of
the current contract term, procure written quotations from various contractors
for the contract of collecting and disposing of garbage, and submit their
recommendations to the board of trustees prior to the termination of the
current contract term. The village may also advertise for bidders for the
contract for the collection and disposal of garbage. (Ord. 2014-32, 12-16-2014)
7-2-3: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, REQUIREMENTS:
The successful bidder for the contract of collecting and disposing of garbage
as aforesaid, shall collect all garbage on all premises within the village
limits at least once each week and shall transport the same through the streets
and alleys of the village in such a manner that no leakage shall occur from the
vehicle in which said garbage is transported. Said garbage, after being placed
in said vehicle, shall remain covered while the same is being transported on
any street or alley within the village limits.
The successful bidder for the contract herein provided for shall remove said
garbage to a place outside the village limits. (Ord., 1985)
7-2-4: DEPOSITS OF GARBAGE:
   A.   No garbage of any description shall be deposited upon any street,
alley, vacant lot, public grounds or private premises within the village
limits, except by direction or written permission of the board of health of the
village. It shall be the duty of the occupant of every home, hotel, tavern,
eating house and other premises to, at all times, have the garbage upon his
premises collected and deposited in suitable containers. Such containers shall
be located so as to be convenient of access to the garbage collector.
   B.   All persons are hereby prohibited from placing any substance other than
garbage within the containers herein provided for, and shall be further
required to keep ashes separate from cans and other refuse.
   C.   Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be punishable
as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2014-32, 12-16-2014)
7-2-5: COLLECTION OF GARBAGE, CHARGES:
   A.   There are hereby established charges for the collection of garbage and
refuse from each family residential unit in the village.
   B.   The charge shall be:
 Effective Date - July 1   Cost
                           
                          Effective Date - July 1   Cost
                                                    
64 or 96 gallon container 2025                     28.07
                         2026                     29.47
                         2027                     30.94
                         2028                     32.49
                         2029                     34.12
                         2030                     35.82
                         2031                     37.61
 
   C.   The charges shall be billed bimonthly along with the water and sewer
service billings.
   D.   Provided that sufficient proof is given to the Village annually to
establish that at least one head of household of a residential unit in the
Village is age sixty five (65) or older, the charge for collection of garbage
and refuse shall be reduced by two dollars ($2.00) per month for the
residential unit. (Ord. 2014-32, 12-16-2014; amd. Ord. 2017-29, 11-21-2017;
Ord. 2020-21, 7-28-2020; Ord. 2025-19, 7-29-2025)
7-2-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 1981-17, 11-23-1981)
7-2-7: VOLUNTARY RECYCLING PROGRAM:
   A.   Recyclables are materials having an economic value in the secondary
materials market. The following materials have such economic value: aluminum
cans and articles, bimetal cans, glass containers, corrugated paper (cardboard
and paper boxes), magazines, computer printout paper, computer tax cards,
office paper, steel cans, newspaper, paper products not chemically coated.
   B.   There is hereby established a Recycling Program for the voluntary
separating of recyclables from garbage and rubbish in the Village of Minooka.
   C.   Recyclables shall be prepared and separated from other refuse as
required and shall be collected by the Village, or by its designated agent.
Recyclables shall be placed either at the curbside to be collected at times
designated by the Village or shall be taken to a recycling facility.
   D.   Recyclable items shall become the property of the Village from time of
placement of the recyclables at the curb or in the recycling shelters. It shall
be a violation of this section for any person not authorized by the Village to
collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked up any such items. Any
and each such collection in violation hereof from one or more locations shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
   It shall be unlawful for a person not authorized by the Village to collect,
remove or dispose of solid waste which contains recyclables combined with other
forms of solid waste.
   E.   Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine as set out in section
1-4-1 of this Code.
   F.   Any person may donate or sell recyclables to any other person whether
operating for profit or not for profit. (Ord. 1990-10, 6-12-1990; amd. 1997
Code)
CHAPTER 3
NOXIOUS WEEDS
SECTION:
7-3-1: Nuisance Declared
7-3-2: Height Limit
7-3-3: Notice To Abate
7-3-4: Charges To Abate
7-3-5: Charges, Lien
7-3-6: Penalty
7-3-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
Any weeds such as jimson, burdock, ragweed, thistle, cocklebur, poison ivy,
poison oak, poison sumac or other weeds of a like kind, found growing in any
lot or tract of land in the village except in residentially zoned, unsubdivided
land are hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful to permit
any such weeds to grow or remain in such places. (1997 Code)
7-3-2: HEIGHT LIMIT:
It shall be unlawful for anyone to permit any weeds, grass or plants, other
than trees, bushes, flowers or other ornamental plants to grow to a height
exceeding one foot (1') anywhere in the village, and such plants or weeds
exceeding such heights are hereby declared to be a nuisance. (1977 Code; amd.
1997 Code)
7-3-3: NOTICE TO ABATE:
It shall be the duty of the village clerk to serve or cause to be served a
notice upon the owner or occupant of any such premises on which weeds or plants
are permitted to grow in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and to
demand the abatement of the nuisance within ten (10) days from when the notice
is mailed, hand delivered, or posted on the property. (Ord. 2011-09, 3-22-2011)
7-3-4: CHARGES TO ABATE:
If the person so notified does not abate the nuisance within ten (10) days
after such notice, the village clerk shall proceed to abate such nuisance by
having the weeds cut. The charge for cutting weeds shall be the total costs
incurred by the village in cutting and removing the weeds. A bill for the weed
cutting charges shall be served, or caused to be served, by the village clerk
upon, and shall be paid by, the owner or occupant upon receipt. (Ord. 2016-23,
7-26-2016)
7-3-5: CHARGES, LIEN:
Charges for weed cutting shall be a lien upon the premises as provided by
statute. Whenever a bill for weed cutting remains unpaid for thirty (30) days
after it has been rendered, the village clerk may file with the county recorder
of deeds, of the county having jurisdiction, a notice consisting of a sworn
statement setting out: (Ord. 1989-15, 10-24-1989; amd. 1997 Code)
   A.   A description of the real estate sufficient for identification thereof,
   B.   The amount of money representing the cost and expense incurred or
payable for the service, and
   C.   The date or dates when such cost and expense were incurred by the city.
(1977 Code)
7-3-6: PENALTY:
The penalty prescribed for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be as set out under section
1-4-1 of this code. (1977 Code)
CHAPTER 4
REMOVAL AND TRIMMING OF NUISANCE TREES
SECTION:
7-4-1: Dangerous, Unsafe, Diseased, And Infested Trees On Public Property Or
Right Of Way
7-4-2: Trees On Private Property Causing Dangerous Or Unsafe Condition Other
Than A Sight Restriction
7-4-1: DANGEROUS, UNSAFE, DISEASED, AND INFESTED TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY OR
RIGHT OF WAY:
   A.   Where a tree is located on property owned by the village or in the
dedicated public right of way, and causes a dangerous or unsafe condition to
exist, the removal and trimming of said tree shall be in accordance with (i)
all applicable guidelines contained in the village's Urban Forest Management
Plan, as amended from time to time, (ii) with any and all applicable Illinois
laws and regulations, and (iii) with any local franchise or other agreements
with the village.
   B.   Where a tree is located on property owned by the village or in the
dedicated public right of way and said tree is determined by a certified
village arborist to be diseased or infested, care for and/or removal of such
tree(s) shall be in accordance with all applicable guidelines contained in the
village's Urban Forest Management Plan. (Ord. 2013-11, 4-23-2013; Ord. 2019-19,
8-27-2019)
7-4-2: TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY CAUSING DANGEROUS OR UNSAFE CONDITION OTHER
THAN A SIGHT RESTRICTION:
   A.   Where any tree located on private property causes a dangerous or unsafe
condition to exist on village-owned property, in the public right of way, or in
a dedicated village easement, the owner of the private property on which the
tree is located shall be responsible for removing or trimming said tree so as
to abate said condition. Notice and abatement shall be in accordance with the
following:
      1.   Notice: The department of public works shall give to the owner of
the premises on which the tree is located a written notice of the existence of
the condition caused by said tree. Service of the notice required by this
section shall be by personal service or by registered mail, to the person who
is listed as the taxpayer of record for said property. Said notice shall
include the following:
         a.   The common address for the property in question;
         b.   The permanent tax index number for the property in question;
         c.   A brief description of the condition;
         d.   An identification of the specific tree or trees causing the
condition; and
         e.   A statement indicating that if the identified condition is not
remedied within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the village may
provide for abatement of the condition and bill the property owner and/or lien
the property for the    reasonable cost of said abatement.
      2.   Abatement: Upon receiving notice pursuant to this section, the
property owner must abate the dangerous or unsafe condition in a manner
consistent with all applicable guidelines in the village's Urban Forest
Management Plan. If the property owner refuses or neglects to remedy the
condition within the time frame set out in the notice, the village may provide
for abatement of the condition by removing and/or trimming said tree(s). The
reasonable cost for said removal and/or trimming shall be billed to the
property owner.
      3.   Lien: If said property owner refuses or neglects to pay said bill
within ninety (90) days, a lien in the amount of said costs shall be recorded/
registered with the county recorder of deeds/registrar of titles. Said lien
shall be recorded/registered within one (1) year after such costs are incurred
by the village, and shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth the
following:
         a.   The legal description of the property;
         b.   The permanent tax index number of the property;
         c.   The common address of the property;
         d.   The cost incurred in removing and/or trimming the tree(s); and
         e.   The date(s) on which the tree removal and/or trimming work was
performed.
      4.   Notice Of Lien: Upon the recording/registering of said lien, a copy
thereof shall be forwarded by first class U.S. mail to the taxpayer of record
for said property.
      5.   Emergency Removal And/Or Trimming: In cases where it reasonably
appears that the condition of the tree poses an imminent hazard, and there is
immediate danger to the life or safety of any property or person unless the
tree in question is immediately trimmed and/or removed, the Superintendent of
public works, or his/her duly authorized designee, shall provide for the
immediate trimming and/or removal of such dangerous tree. The costs of such
emergency trimming and/or removal shall be collected in the same manner as
provided in this section.
      6.   Lien Satisfaction: Upon receipt of payment consisting of the amount
of the lien and the village's actual cost for recording the lien, the village
shall issue a release of lien to the person making said payment.
   B.   Where any tree located on private property is determined by a certified
village arborist to be diseased or infested and the village arborist further
determines that there is a risk that said disease or infestation could spread
to other trees within the village, the owner of the private property on which
the tree is located shall be responsible for removing or trimming said tree so
as to abate said condition. Notice and abatement shall be in accordance with
the following:
      1.   Notice: The department of public works shall give to the owner of
the premises on which the tree is located a written notice of the existence of
the diseased or infested tree. Service of the notice required by this section
shall be by personal service or by registered mail, to the person who is listed
as the taxpayer of record for said property. Said notice shall include the
following:
         a.   The common address for the property in question;
         b.   The permanent tax index number for the property in question;
         c.   A brief description of the disease/infestation affecting the tree
(s) in question;
         d.   An identification of the specific tree or trees that are
diseased/infested; and
         e.   A statement indicating that if the identified condition is not
remedied within ten (10) days of the date of the notice, the village may
provide for abatement of the condition and bill the property owner and/or lien
the property for the reasonable cost of said abatement.
      2.   Abatement: Upon receiving notice pursuant to this section, the
property owner must treat or remove the diseased or infested tree(s) in a
manner consistent with all applicable guidelines in the village's Urban Forest
Management Plan. If the property owner refuses or neglects to remedy the
condition within the time frame set out in the notice, the village may provide
for abatement of the condition by treating or removing said tree(s). The
reasonable cost for said treatment and/or removal shall be billed to the
property owner.
      3.   Lien: If said property owner refuses or neglects to pay said bill
within ninety (90) days, a lien in the amount of said costs shall be recorded/
registered with the county recorder of deeds/registrar of titles. Said lien
shall be recorded/registered within one (1) year after such costs are incurred
by the village, and shall consist of a sworn statement setting forth the
following:
         a.   The legal description of the property;
         b.   The permanent tax index number of the property;
         c.   The common address of the property;
         d.   The cost incurred in removing and/or trimming the tree(s); and
         e.   The date(s) on which the tree removal and/or trimming work was
performed.
      4.   Notice Of Lien: Upon the recording/registering of said lien, a copy
thereof shall be forwarded by first class U.S. mail to the taxpayer of record
for said property.
      5.   Emergency Removal And/Or Trimming: In cases where it reasonably
appears that the condition of the diseased/infested tree poses an imminent
hazard, and there is immediate danger to the life or safety of any property or
person unless the tree in question is immediately treated and/or removed, the
Superintendent of public works, or his/her duly authorized designee, shall
provide for the immediate treatment and/or removal of such diseased or infested
tree. The costs of such emergency treatment and/or removal shall be collected
in the same manner as provided in this section.
      6.   Lien Satisfaction: Upon receipt of payment consisting of the amount
of the lien and the village's actual cost for recording the lien, the village
shall issue a release of lien to the person making said payment.
   C.   Definition Of Private Property: For purposes of this section, "private
property" shall be defined to include all property within the village which is
neither owned by the village nor is dedicated right of way. (Ord. 2013-11, 4-
23-2013; Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019)
CHAPTER 5
TREE PRESERVATION
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose
7-5-2: Statement Of Value
7-5-3: Definitions
7-5-4 Urban Forest Inventory; Urban Forest Management Plan
7-5-5: Tree Planting
7-5-6: Tree Removal
7-5-7: Damage To Trees
7-5-8: Tree Transplantation
7-5-9: Tree Replacement
7-5-10: Legacy Trees
7-5-11: Site Development On Private Property
7-5-12: Conservation Areas/Easements
7-5-13: Tree Preservation and Management During Construction
7-5-14: Tree Permits
7-5-15: Civil Enforcement
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
To maintain the ecological and economic benefits that trees provide. To
recognize the services and function that trees provide as a collective asset to
the entire community and to state the goals of the Village of Minooka with
respect to the protection, preservation, care and planting of trees. This
ordinance applies to public property and, in specific cases such as site
development, private property. (Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-2: STATEMENT OF VALUE:
The Village of Minooka values trees as infrastructure and recognizes the
benefits that trees provide in the community. Healthy trees improve air quality
by reducing air and noise pollution, regulate climate by providing shade,
regulate stormwater runoff, furnish a habitat for wildlife, provide energy-
savings shade and cooling, and enhance aesthetics and property values. (Ord.
2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-3:    DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter:
                                   Any person who is licensed or certified in
ARBORIST:                          forestry by the International Society of
                                   Arboriculture or any other substantially
                                   similar organization.
COMMISSION:                        The Forestry Commission of the village.
                                   An area on the ground extending out from the
CRITICAL ROOT ZONE:                trunk of the tree in all directions a
                                   distance of at least one foot (1') for every
                                   inch (1") DBH.
                                   The diameter of the trunk of the tree
DIAMETER AT BREAST HEIGHT (“DBH�measured in inches at a point 4.5 feet above
                                   ground line.
SUPERINTENDENT:                    The Superintendent of Public Works for the
                                   village.
                                   Any tree located on public property within
                                   the corporate boundaries of the village (i)
LEGACY TREE:                       having a DBH of eighteen inches (18") or
                                   more or (ii) as otherwise designated by
                                   ordinance.
                                   Any proposed change in the use or character
                                   of land, including but not limited to the
SITE DEVELOPMENT:                  construction or replacement of any structure
                                   or improvement thereon, as well as any
                                   activity that requires excavation or
                                   grading.
VILLAGE:                           The Village of Minooka, Will, Kendal, and
                                   Grundy Counties, Illinois.
                                   Any arborist that is employed by the
VILLAGE ARBORIST:                  village. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord.
                                   2025-24, 8-26-2025)
 
7-5-4: URBAN FOREST INVENTORY; URBAN FOREST MANAGEMENT PLAN:
   A.   On or before January 1, 2020, the Superintendent shall conduct an Urban
Forest Inventory for the Village of Minooka, which inventory must be approved
and adopted by the corporate authorities of the village. Once the Urban Forest
Inventory has been completed and adopted by the corporate authorities of the
village, it shall be kept and maintained by the Superintendent. Thereafter, the
Superintendent shall update the Urban Forest Inventory of the village at least
annually, and shall submit the updated inventory to the corporate authorities
of the village for approval and adoption. The Urban Forest Inventory must
include an appraised value for each tree.
   B.   On or before January 1, 2021, the Commission shall recommend an Urban
Forest Management Plan for the Village of Minooka, which plan must be approved
and adopted by the corporate authorities of the village. Once the Urban Forest
Management Plan has been adopted by the village, the Commission shall review it
at least annually and make any recommendations and proposals for amendments of,
additions to, or deletions from said plan as it may determine to be necessary
from time to time.
   C.   The Urban Forest Management Plan:
      1.   Shall cover a period of at least five (5) years;
      2.   Shall be based upon guidelines published by the American National
Standards Institute from time to time; and
      3.   Must include, at a minimum, the following:
         a.   Tree selection guidelines (including a preferred species list, a
non-preferred species list, and a prohibited species (nuisance and invasive)
list); and
         b.   Tree diversity guidelines; and
         c.   Tree planting guidelines; and
         d.   Tree removal guidelines; and
         e.   Tree transplantation/translocation guidelines; and
         f.   Tree care and management guidelines; and
         g.   Budgetary and staffing guidelines; and
         h.   Template tree permit application materials. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-
2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-5: TREE PLANTING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not employed by the village
to plant any tree on any public property within the corporate boundaries of the
village without having first secured a tree permit authorizing such planting.
   B.   Every tree planted within the village must be planted in a manner that
is fully compliant with all applicable guidelines contained in the village’s
Urban Forest Management Plan, as amended from time to time.
   C.   No tree permit shall be issued for any planting unless the applicant
submits and the village approves a three (3) year tree maintenance plan that
fully complies with all applicable guidelines of the village’s Urban Forest
Management Plan, as amended from time to time.
   D.   Any person that plants a tree without a permit in violation of this
section shall be guilty of a business offense and fined an amount equal to:
      1.   Fifty dollars ($50.00); and
      2.   The actual costs incurred by the village in connection with the tree
so planted (whether for the purposes of removal, replanting, or remediation).
      Every tree so planted shall constitute a separate offense.
   E.   Tree care, pruning and maintenance must be performed in a manner that
is fully compliant with all applicable guidelines contained in the village’s
Urban Forest Management Plan, as amended from time to time.
   F.   Species restrictions and planting restrictions guidelines are contained
in the village’s Urban Forest Management Plan, as amended from time to time.
(Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-6:    TREE REMOVAL:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not employed by the village
to remove any tree on any public property within the corporate boundaries of
the village without having first secured a tree permit authorizing such
removal.
   B.   Any tree removed pursuant to a tree permit issued by the village must
be removed in a manner that is fully compliant with all applicable guidelines
contained in the village’s Urban Forest Management Plan, as amended from time
to time.
   C.   Any person that intentionally removes a tree without a tree permit in
violation of this section shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be
fined in an amount equal to:
      1.   The appraised value of the tree, as set out in the village’s Urban
Forest Inventory, as amended from time to time; and
      2.   The actual costs incurred by the village to replace the tree in
compliance with Section
7-5-7 of this chapter.
      Every tree so removed shall constitute a separate offense.
   D.   Emergency Tree Removal: An exemption may be authorized when a tree, due
to natural circumstances, is dead or irreversibly declining, is deemed to be a
nuisance tree or species, is in danger of falling, creates a line-of-sight
obstruction, or is a health hazard. Such a tree may be removed only after
approval has been granted by the Superintendent.
   E.   All tree removal, trimming, and pruning conducted by tree care
contractors must comply with the guidelines set forth in the village’s Urban
Forest Management Plan, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019;
amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-7: DAMAGE TO TREES:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to damage any tree located on any
public property within the corporate boundaries of the village. For the
purposes of this section, the word “damage” means any action that has the
direct and natural consequence of causing any permanent loss of function in a
tree, including without limitation: root compaction, root removal, girdling,
soil contamination, topping, canopy removal, bark removal, poisoning, improper
mulching, and any other action that results in the death or irreversible
decline of the tree.
   B.   Any person that damages any tree in violation of this section shall be
guilty of a business offense and shall be fined in an amount equal to:
      1.   The appraised value of the tree, as set out in the village’s Urban
Forest Inventory, as amended from time to time; and
      2.   The actual costs incurred by the village to replace the tree in
compliance with Section
7-5-7 of this chapter or else to remediate the damage done.
      Every tree so damaged shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2019-19,
8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-8: TREE TRANSPLANTATION:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not employed by the village
to transplant any tree on any public property within the corporate boundaries
of the village without having first secured a tree permit authorizing such
transplantation.
   B.   Any tree transplanted pursuant to a tree permit issued by the village
must be removed and replanted in a manner that is fully compliant with all
applicable guidelines contained in the village’s Urban Forest Management Plan,
as amended from time to time.
   C.   No tree permit shall be issued for any transplantation unless the
applicant submits and the village approves a three (3) year tree maintenance
plan that fully complies with all applicable guidelines of the village’s Urban
Forest Management Plan, as amended from time to time.
   D.    Any person that intentionally transplants a tree without a tree permit
in violation of this section shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be
fined in amount equal to:
      1.   The appraised value of the tree, as set out in the village’s Urban
Forest Inventory, as amended from time to time; and
      2.   The actual costs incurred by the village to replace the tree in
compliance with Section
7-5-7 of this chapter.
      Every tree so transplanted shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord.
2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-9:    TREE REPLACEMENT:
   A.   Every tree selected to replace an existing tree located on any public
property within the corporate boundaries of the village shall be selected from
the village’s preferred species list, as amended from time to time.
   B.   Every replacement tree required to be planted pursuant to this chapter
shall be planted in full compliance with Section
7-5-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-10: LEGACY TREES:
   A.   The Superintendent shall keep a list, to be known as the “Legacy Tree
List,” of every legacy tree in the Village of Minooka.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person other than an employee of the
village to remove, transplant, or damage any legacy tree without a tree permit
approved by a majority vote of corporate authorities of the village.
   C.    No tree permit shall be issued for any planting or transplanting of
any legacy tree unless the applicant submits and the village approves a three
(3) year tree maintenance plan that fully complies with all applicable
guidelines of the village’s Urban Forest Management Plan, as amended from time
to time.
   D.   Any person that removes, transplants, or damages any legacy tree in
violation of this section shall be guilty of a business offense and shall be
fined in an amount equal to:
      1.   Five hundred dollars ($500.00); and
      2.   The appraised value of the tree, as set out in the village’s Urban
Forest Inventory, as amended from time to time; and
      3.   The actual costs incurred by the village to replace the tree in
compliance with Section
7-5-7 of this chapter or else to remediate the damage done.
      Every legacy tree removed, transplanted, or damaged in violation of this
section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd.
Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-11: SITE DEVELOPMENT ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   Any person that wishes to engage in site development on any parcel of
private property in the village must request a site review by a village
arborist if:
      1.   Any work related to the proposed site development will encroach into
the critical root zone of any legacy tree; or
      2.   Any work related to the proposed site development will encroach into
the critical root zone of at least three (3) trees located on public property;
or
      3.   The person is so directed by the Superintendent.
   B.   Within five (5) business days after any person requests a site review,
a village arborist must conduct an inspection of the site in question and make
a determination whether the proposed site development is likely to have any
negative impact on any tree located on public property.
      1.   If a village arborist conducts a site inspection as required by this
section and determines that the proposed site development is unlikely to have
any negative impact on any tree located on the abutting public property, the
village arborist shall render his or her determination in writing to that
effect and deliver a copy of said determination to the person that requested
the site inspection. Thereafter, the site development may thereafter proceed
without any further approvals or actions under this chapter (though nothing in
this section is intended or shall be deemed to release any person from their
obligation to comply with any and all other applicable provisions of this Code
and the person shall still be held liable for any damage caused to any tree on
public property).
      2.   If a village arborist conducts such a site inspection as required by
this section and determines that the proposed site development is likely to
have a negative impact on any tree located on the abutting public property, the
village arborist shall render his or her determination in writing to that
effect and deliver a copy of said determination to the person that requested
the site inspection. Thereafter, the site development may not proceed unless
and until (i) the owner of the property in question submits a tree preservation
plan to the village and (ii) the village approves said tree preservation plan
and issues a tree permit authorizing the site development.
   C.   Every tree preservation plan required by this section shall be
submitted to the Public Works Department of the village, along with an
application for a tree permit, and shall be accompanied at a minimum by the
following:
      1.   A detailed description of the proposed site development, including a
list of any and all heavy machinery that is expected to be employed and copies
of any and all engineering plans or documents; and
      2.   A copy of the village arborist’s written determination; and
      3.   A list of all protective measures that will be employed to prevent
or mitigate as much as possible any negative impact upon the tree(s) identified
in the village arborist’s written determination.
      Every tree preservation plan so submitted must be developed in
consultation with a licensed or certified arborist and shall bear such
arborist’s signature and certification. The village reserves the right to
require that additional protective measures be added to a tree preservation
plan as a condition of approval.
   D.   Any person that engages in site development on any parcel of private
property without securing a written determination from a village arborist in
violation of this section is guilty of a business offense and shall be fined in
an amount equal to fifty dollars ($50.00). In addition, to the extent that the
site development undertaken by any person liable under this Subsection C causes
any damage to any tree located on any parcel of public property, that person
shall also be liable for such damage as set forth in Section
7-5-5 of this chapter.
   E.   Any person that engages in site development on any parcel of private
property without receiving approval of a tree preservation plan and a tree
permit shall, if such approvals were required by this section, be guilty of a
business offense and shall be fined in an amount equal to one hundred and fifty
dollars ($150.00). In addition, to the extent that the site development
undertaken by any person liable under this Subsection D causes any damage to
any tree located on any parcel of public property, that person shall also be
liable for such damage as set forth in Section
7-5-5 of this chapter.
   F.   In the event that any person requests and receives approval of a tree
preservation plan and tree permit under this section, undertakes the approved
site development, and as a result causes any damage to any tree located on any
parcel of public property, that person shall not be guilty of any offense or
otherwise held liable for such damage unless the village proves that the person
failed to comply with any of the protective measures set out in the approved
tree preservation plan. If the village proves that the person failed to comply
with any of the protective measures set out in the tree preservation plan, the
person shall be liable for any and all damage caused, as set forth in Section
7-5-5 of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-12: CONSERVATION AREAS/EASEMENTS:
   A.   For the purposes of this chapter, any area or parcel of property that
is or may be dedicated to the village for the purposes of conservation and/or
preservation shall be considered “public property” for the purposes of applying
this chapter to any trees located within any such area or parcel.
   B.    To the extent that any plat, agreement, or other legally-operative
document used to affect the dedication of a conservation area or easement to
the village (i.e. the dedication document) has restrictions or provisions that
conflict with or are more restrictive than the provisions of this chapter, the
terms and provisions of the dedication document shall control. (Ord. 2019-19,
8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-13: TREE PRESERVATION AND MANAGEMENT DURING CONSTRUCTION:
Tree protection of public property trees for construction taking place on or
near public properties shall be handled in a manner that is fully compliant
with all applicable guidelines contained in the village’s Urban Forest
Management Plan, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-14: TREE PERMITS:
   A.   Every applicant for a tree permit shall submit their request to the
Village Clerk on a form to be provided by the village.
   B.   Upon receipt of any application for a tree permit, the Village Clerk
shall, as soon thereafter as practicable, forward said application to the
Superintendent.
   C.    The Superintendent shall, with the assistance of the village
arborists, review the application and shall, within thirty (30) days after
receipt, make a final written determination either issuing or denying the tree
permit. However, if the Superintendent, in his or her sole discretion,
determines that additional information is needed in order to fully process the
application, he or she shall have the authority to request such additional
information from the applicant and the time for the Superintendent’s final
written determination shall be extended until thirty (30) days after all
information so requested is received from the applicant.
   D.   In the event that the Superintendent refuses to issue any requested
tree permit, the applicant shall have the right to appeal said decision to the
Village Board. Any such appeal must be filed, if at all, in writing with the
Village Clerk within thirty (30) days of the Superintendent’s final
determination. The decision of the Village Board on all appeals is and shall be
the final administrative decision of the village.
   E.   Every tree permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be good for a
period of one (1) year from the date of issuance and shall expire if the work
authorized by the tree permit is not commenced within such one (1) year period.
   F.    Every tree permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to
any and all reasonable conditions and restrictions that the Superintendent (or
the Village Board, in the case of appeal) determines are necessary to ensure
compliance with all applicable guidelines contained in the village’s Urban
Forest Management Plan. (Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
7-5-15: CIVIL ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   The Superintendent is, with the assistance of the Village Attorney,
authorized to take any action permitted under the constitution and laws of the
State of Illinois that he deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this
chapter, including but not limited to sending cease and desist letters, issuing
stop-work orders, and filing lawsuits.
      Every violation of this chapter may be enforced, in the Superintendent’s
discretion, by administrative proceedings before the village’s code hearing
department or else in any manner available to the village in equity or at law.
(Ord. 2019-19, 8-27-2019; amd. Ord. 2025-24, 8-26-2025)
TITLE 8
POLICE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION:
8-1-1: Members, Duties
8-1-2: Special Police Officers
8-1-3: Call For Assistance
8-1-1: MEMBERS, DUTIES:
   A.   The village president and members of the board of trustees, police
chief and any police officer or special police officer appointed at any time by
authority of the village president shall constitute the police department of
the village. It shall be the duty of each member of the police force to enforce
all village ordinances relating to the preservation of the peace, health, good
order and quiet of the village and to prosecute all violations of all village
ordinances. (1904 Code § 20.1; amd. 1977 Code)
   B.   There is hereby established the position of one deputy chief in the
village of Minooka. The deputy chief position shall be an exempt rank
immediately below that of chief. The deputy chief may be appointed from any
rank of sworn, full time officers of the village's police department, but must
have at least five (5) years of full time service as a police officer in said
department. A deputy chief shall serve at the discretion of the chief and, if
removed from the position, shall revert to the rank held immediately prior to
appointment to the deputy chief position. (Ord. 2002-04, 2-26-2002)
   C.   There is hereby established the position of police department
administrator in the village of Minooka. The police department administrator
position shall be an exempt rank immediately below that of chief. The police
department administrator shall be an appointment by the chief of police, and
may be removed from office in accordance with the personnel policy manual. The
compensation of the police department administrator shall be determined from
time to time by the board of trustees. The police department administrator
shall assist the chief of police in the administration and operation of the
police department, and shall perform such other law and nonlaw enforcement
duties as may be directed from time to time by the chief of police. (Ord. 2006-
35, 9-26-2006)
   D.   All part time police officers shall serve for such term and on such
conditions as may be designated by the terms of such appointment, but the
number of hours a part time officer may work within a calendar year is
restricted. Appointments may be revoked at any time, and part time police
officers shall meet the following requirements:
      1.   Successfully completed any training mandated by the Illinois law
enforcement training and standards board.
      2.   At least twenty one (21) years of age.
      3.   A high school graduate or equivalent.
      4.   Have a current and valid motor vehicle operator's license.
      5.   Not convicted of a felony or any other crime involving moral
turpitude.
      6.   Submit fingerprints to the chief of police for a formal background
check by the Illinois state police and federal bureau of investigation, and
pass said background check. (Ord. 2012-13, 6-26-2012)
8-1-2: SPECIAL POLICE OFFICERS:
The board of trustees may, from time to time, appoint as many police officers
and special police officers as they may deem necessary, who shall hold their
offices during the pleasure of the village board, but not to exceed the
municipal year in which they are appointed. (1904 Code § 6.12; amd. 1977 Code)
8-1-3: CALL FOR ASSISTANCE:
Any police officer of the village may call to his assistance any person over
the age of twenty one (21) years to assist him in the execution of any legal
process, or in making an arrest of any offender against the ordinances of the
village or the laws of the state of Illinois, or to assist in the preservation
of the public peace, and if such person so summoned neglects or refuses to aid
and assist in taking, arresting or securing any person against whom there may
have been issued any civil or criminal process, or neglects or refuses to aid
and assist in retaking or securing who, after having been arrested or confined,
may have escaped from any such arrest or imprisonment, or neglects or refuses
to aid and assist in preventing any breach of the peace or the commission of
any criminal offense, being thereto lawfully required by any police officer of
the village concerned in the administration of justice, shall be deemed guilty
of a misdemeanor. (1904 Code § 6.12; amd. 1977 Code)
CHAPTER 2
GENERAL OFFENSES
SECTION:
8-2-1: Disorderly Conduct
8-2-2: Damaging Property
8-2-3: Weapons, Discharging
8-2-4: Playing Ball In Streets
8-2-5: Posting Handbills, Injuring Property
8-2-6: Public Indecency
8-2-7: Fireworks
8-2-8: Trespass
8-2-9: Cannabis, Synthetic Cannabis, And Drug Paraphernalia
8-2-1: DISORDERLY CONDUCT:
   A.   Enumerated: A person commits disorderly conduct when he knowingly:
      1.   Does any act in such unreasonable manner as to alarm or disturb
another and to provoke a breach of the peace; or
      2.   While acting as a collection agency as defined in the "collection
agency act" or as an employee of such collection agency, and while attempting
to collect an alleged debt, makes a telephone call to the alleged debtor which
is designed to harass, annoy or intimidate the alleged debtor; or
      3.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report to the
department of public health under the nursing home care act; or
      4.   Transmits or causes to be transmitted a false report under article
II of "an act in relation to victims of violence and abuse", approved September
16, 1984, as amended; or
      5.   Knowingly does or makes any unreasonable or offensive act,
utterance, gesture, or display that under the circumstances creates a clear and
present danger of a breach of peace or imminent threat of violence; or
      6.   Knowingly fails to obey a lawful order of dispersal by a person
known to be a peace officer under circumstances under which three (3) or more
persons are committing acts of disorderly conduct in the immediate vicinity
that are likely to cause substantial harm or serious inconvenience, annoyance,
or alarm; or
      7.   Knowingly assembles with three (3) or more persons for the purpose
of using force or violence to disturb the public peace; or
      8.   Wilfully makes or assists in the making of any noise or diversion
that disturbs or tends to disturb the peace or good order of a school session
or class while on public or private grounds adjacent to any building in which a
school or any class is in session; or
      9.   Engages in fighting, threatening or tumultuous behavior upon any
school property, public or private; or
      10. Wilfully makes or assists in the making of any loud, unnecessary or
unusual noise or noises, caused by any horn, bell, radio, loudspeaker, vehicle,
motorcycle, dirt bike, or other such instrument, which are of such character,
intensity and duration as to annoy, disturb, injure or endanger the comfort,
repose, health, peace or safety of others within the village. (Ord. 2007-38, 7-
24-2007)
   B.   Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this
section shall be sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
8-2-2: DAMAGING PROPERTY:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully, maliciously or
negligently break, deface, injure or destroy any property within the village,
whether such property is owned by the state, county, village or any other
governmental body, or owned by any private person. Any person violating this
provision shall be punished as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (1977
Code)
   B.   Any person who shall wantonly break the glass in any streetlamp or
injure the burner thereof, or any part, wire or support thereof, or who shall,
without proper authority from the village president and board of trustees,
either light or extinguish the burner of any lamp in the village, shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (1904 Code § 14.1)
8-2-3: WEAPONS, DISCHARGING:
No person shall fire or discharge any gun, cannon, musket, rifle, fowling
piece, pistol, air gun or firearm of any description, or release or fire any
projecting type instrument such as an arrow within the limits of the village,
except in cases of necessity or in the performance of a public act or lawful
duty, without first having obtained permission from the village president for
that purpose. (Ord. 1985-19, 10-28-1985)
8-2-4: PLAYING BALL IN STREETS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to play ball, raise or fly any kite or ride
any bike, skateboard and roller skates in any part of the village devoted to
business purposes, or in any street, alley or other public place in any portion
of the village, to the disturbance or annoyance of any citizen or person
passing along any such street, alley or other public place. (1904 Code § 22.13;
amd. 1997 Code)
8-2-5: POSTING HANDBILLS, INJURING PROPERTY:
It shall be unlawful for any person to post, paint, cut, write or otherwise
place any handbill, notice or any written or printed matter upon any bridge,
approach to a bridge, fence, wall, stone, post, tree, building or other public
place without the consent of the owner of said property, or to break any window
or in any manner to injure any building, fence, sidewalk or tree. (1904 Code §
6.9)
8-2-6: PUBLIC INDECENCY:
   A.   Public Indecency: A person commits the offense of public indecency if
they knowingly or intentionally, in a public place: 1) engage in sexual
intercourse; 2) engage in deviate sexual conduct; 3) appear in a state of
nudity; or 4) fondles the genitals of himself/herself or another person.
   B.   Definitions:
   NUDITY: The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, female
breast with less than a full opaque covering of any part of the nipple, the
covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or that portion of the
buttocks which would be covered by a properly worn "thong" type bikini bottom.
   PUBLIC PLACE: Any location frequented by the public, or where the public is
present or likely to be present, or where a person may reasonably be expected
to be observed by members of the public. Public places include, but are not
limited to, streets, sidewalks, parks, beaches, business and commercial
establishments (whether for profit or not for profit and whether open to the
public at large or where entrance is limited by a cover charge or membership
requirement), hotels, motels, restaurants, nightclubs, country clubs, cabarets,
and meeting facilities utilized by religious, social, fraternal or similar
organizations. Premises used solely as a private residence, whether permanent
or temporary in nature, shall not be deemed a public place. Public place shall
not include enclosed single sex public restrooms, enclosed single sex
functional showers, locker and/or dressing room facilities, enclosed motel
rooms and hotel rooms designed and intended for sleeping accommodations,
doctors' offices, churches, synagogues or similar places when used for
circumcisions, baptisms or similar ceremonies, portions of hospitals and
similar places in which nudity or exposure is necessarily and customarily
expected outside of the home; nor shall it include a person appearing in a
state of nudity as a model in a class operated by: 1) a proprietary school
licensed by the state; a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation; or 2) a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable
to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation or an accredited private college. (Ord. 1999-03, 3-9-1999)
   C.   Violation; Penalty:
      1.   In addition to all other remedies, a person who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of this section shall
be sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense and may be enjoined from continuing the
conduct determined to be public indecency.
      2.   A person who knowingly or intentionally encourages or facilitates
another person's commission of the offense of public indecency shall be deemed
to have committed the offense itself.
      3.   A club, restaurant, theater or other place where violations of this
section occur shall be deemed a public nuisance which shall be subject to
abatement. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
   D.   Interpretation:
      1.   This section is patterned after Indiana public indecency statute
upheld by the United States supreme court in Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501
U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456 (1991). It is the intent of the village that this
section be interpreted in the same manner as said statute.
      2.   It is the intent of the village that the definition of "public
place" set forth above shall be interpreted to be no more broad than the
definition of public place set forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
9 as upheld by the Illinois supreme court in People v. Garrison, 82 Ill.2d 444,
412 N.E.2d 483 (1980). (Ord. 1999-03, 3-9-1999)
8-2-7: FIREWORKS:
   A.   Nuisance: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for any person, firm,
copartnership or corporation to knowingly possess, offer for sale, sell at
retail, or use or explode any fireworks; provided, however, that the president
and village board may issue a permit for pyrotechnical and consumer displays.
   B.   Definitions:
   FIREWORKS: Any explosive composition or any substance or combination of
substances, or article prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or
audible effect of a temporary exhibitional nature by explosion, combustion,
deflagration or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy cannons in
which explosives are used, the type of balloons which require fire underneath
to propel the same, firecrackers, torpedoes, skyrockets, roman candles, bombs
or other fireworks of like construction and any fireworks containing any
explosive compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive
substance, or containing combustible substances producing visual effects, or
any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance, or containing
combustible substances producing visual effects, and shall include the terms
"consumer fireworks", "display fireworks", and "flame effects" as defined in
the fireworks use act, 425 Illinois Compiled Statutes 35/1.
      The term "fireworks" shall not include snake or glowworm pellets; smoke
devices; sparklers; trick noisemakers known as "party poppers", "booby traps",
"snappers", "trick matches", "cigarette loads" and "auto burglar alarms"; toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic caps
containing twenty five hundredths (0.25) grain or less of explosive compound
are used, provided they are so constructed that the hand cannot come in contact
with the cap when in place for the explosion; and toy pistol paper or plastic
caps which contain less than twenty hundredths (0.20) grain of explosive
mixture; the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   C.   Permits:
      1.   Pyrotechnic Displays:
         a.   Each pyrotechnic display shall be conducted by a licensed lead
pyrotechnic operator. Applications for a pyrotechnic display permit shall be
made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of the
pyrotechnic display. No pyrotechnic display permit shall be transferable.
         b.   Permits shall be signed by the chief of the fire department
providing fire protection to the area of display, or his or her designee, and
must identify the lead pyrotechnic operator.
         c.   The applicant seeking the pyrotechnic display permit must provide
proof of liability insurance in a sum not less than one million dollars
($1,000,000.00), naming the village of Minooka as an additional insured, to
satisfy claims for damages to property or personal injuries arising out of any
act or omission on the part of such person, firm, or corporation or any agent
or employee thereof.
         d.   A permit shall be issued only after the chief of the fire
department providing fire protection coverage to the area of display, or his or
her designee, has inspected the site and determined that the display can be
performed in full compliance with the rules adopted by the state fire marshal
and that the display shall not be hazardous to property or endanger any person
or persons. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the village from adopting
more stringent rules.
      2.   Consumer Displays:
         a.   Each consumer display shall be handled by a competent individual
who has received training from a consumer fireworks training class approved by
the office of the state fire marshal. Applications for consumer display permits
shall be made in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date of
the display. No consumer displays permit shall be transferable.
         b.   Permits may be granted hereunder to any adult individual applying
for a permit who provides proof that he or she has received the requisite
training. The village is authorized to conduct a criminal background check of
the applicant as a condition of issuing a permit at the applicant's expense.
         c.   A permit shall be issued only after inspection of the display
site by the fire chief providing fire protection coverage to the area of
display, or his or her designee, to determine that the display is in full
compliance with the rules adopted by the state fire marshal. Nothing in this
section shall prohibit the village from adopting more stringent rules.
   D.   Exceptions: Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit any
of the following:
      1.   The sale at wholesale of any fireworks for supervised displays by
any approved resident manufacturer, wholesaler, dealer, or jobber in accordance
with regulations of the U.S. bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms (see title
27, code of federal regulations, subchapter C) and the U.S. department of
transportation;
      2.   The manufacture, transportation or storage of fireworks at a
manufacturing facility, and the testing of fireworks under the direction of its
manufacturer provided permission for such testing has been obtained from the
village;
      3.   The sale, transportation, handling or use of industrial pyrotechnic
devices or fireworks such as railroad torpedoes, fuses, automotive,
aeronautical and marine flares and smoke signals;
      4.   The manufacture, storage or use of signals or fuses necessary for
the safe operation of railroads, trucks, aircraft, or other instrumentalities
of transportation;
      5.   The sale and use of blank cartridges for use in a show or theater,
for signal or ceremonial purposes, in athletics or sports, or legal power
tools;
      6.   The transportation, handling, or use of pyrotechnic devices by the
armed forces of the United States;
      7.   The use of pyrotechnics in training by the fire service, law
enforcement or similar government agencies; and
      8.   Fireworks devices distributed to farmers, ranchers, or growers
through a wildlife management program administered by the U.S. department of
the interior (or by equivalent state or local government agencies); and such
distribution is in response to a written application describing the wildlife
management problem that requires use of such devices, is of a quantity no
greater than required to control the problem described, and is where other
means of control is unavailable or inadequate.
   E.   Owner Of Real Property: If the owner of real property on which any of
the prohibited activities as set forth in this section is present while the
prohibited activity or activities occurs, said owner shall also be deemed to
have committed an offense. (Ord. 2007-29, 6-26-2007)
   F.   Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, any person, firm,
copartnership or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses
to comply with any of the provisions of this section shall be sentenced as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-
2011)
8-2-8: TRESPASS:
   A.   Violation: A person commits the offense of trespass when knowingly or
intentionally:
      1.   Enters upon the land of another, including public property, when the
person, prior to such entry, receives notice that such entry is forbidden; or
      2.   Remains upon the land of another, including public property, after
receiving notice to depart; or
      3.   Enters upon the land of another, including public property, and
remains thereon with a malicious and mischievous intent after receiving notice
to depart.
   B.   Notice: A person has received notice within the meaning of subsection A
of this section if the person has been notified personally, either orally by an
official in the performance of his or her official duties or by an owner or
occupant, or in writing, including a valid court order, or if a printed or
written notice forbidding such entry has been conspicuously posted or exhibited
at the main entrance to such property or the forbidden part thereof.
   C.   Exception: This section does not prohibit a person from entering upon
the land of another, including public property, for emergency purposes or to a
peace officer or other official of a unit of government in the performance of
his or her official duties.
   D.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
   EMERGENCY: A condition or circumstance in which an individual is or is
reasonably believed by the person to be in imminent danger of serious bodily
harm or in which property is or is reasonably believed to be in imminent danger
of damage or destruction.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY: Property owned by the Village or the government or one of
its agencies, divisions, or entities, including, but not limited to, parks,
playgrounds, streets, sidewalks, schools, libraries, trails, ponds, lakes,
parkways or parking areas and other property regularly used by the general
public, as opposed to land held by an individual, a corporation or private
entity trust for the benefit of the owners (private property). (Ord. 2011-06,
2-22-2011)
   E.   Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this section shall be
sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord.
2011-29, 12-20-2011)
8-2-9: CANNABIS, SYNTHETIC CANNABIS, AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply:
   CANNABIS: Shall have the same meaning ascribed to it in the Illinois
Cannabis Control Act (720 ILCS 550/3), as amended from time to time.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE:
         1.   A drug, substance, or immediate precursor in the schedules of
article II of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/201 et seq., or
         2.   A drug or other substance, or immediate precursor, designated as
a controlled substance by the department through administrative rule, and
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
         2,5-dimethoxy-4-(n)-propylthio-phenethylamine
         3-fluoromethcathinone
         4-fluoromethcathinone
         4-methoxymethcathinone
         5-Methoxy-N,N-diisopropyltryptamine
         AM-694 (1-[(5-fluoropentyl)-1H-indol-3-yl]-(2- iodophenyl)methanone)
         CP 47,497 (2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2- methyloctan-2-
yl)phenol), where side chain n=5; and homologues where side chain n=4, 6, or 7)
         CP 47,497 and its C6, C8 and C9 homologs (2- [1R,3S)-3-
hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
         HU-210, Dexanabinol ((6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)- 6a,7,10,10atetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol, its isomers,
salts, and salts of isomers)
         HU-210 ((6aR,10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl- 3-(2-methyloctan-2-
yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1- ol)
         HU-211, Dexanabinol (6aS,10aS)-9-(hydroxymethyl)- 6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a- tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol)
         JWH-015 ((2-methyl-1-propyl-1H-indol-3-yl)-1- naphthalenyl-methanone)
         JWH-018 (1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-073 (1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-081 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone)
         JWH-122 (1-Pentyl-3-(4-methyl-1-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-251 (2-(2-methylphenyl)-1-(1-pentyl-1H-indol- 3-yl)-ethanone)
         MDPV (3,4-Methyenedioxypyrovalerone)
         Mephedrone (4-Methylmethcathinone)
         Methylone (3,4-Methylenedioxymethcathinone)
         RCS-8, BTW-8 and SR-18 (1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-3- (2-
methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
         Any compound structurally derived from 3-(1- naphthoyl)indole or 1H-
indol-3-yl-(1-naphthyl)methane by substitution at the nitrogen atom of the
indole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or
2-(4- morpholinyl)ethyl whether or not further substituted in the indole ring
to any extent, whether or not substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent
         Any compound structurally derived from 3-(1- naphthoyl)pyrrole by
substitution at the nitrogen atom of the pyrrole ring by alkyl, haloalkyl,
alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl, whether
or not further substituted in the pyrrole ring to any extent, whether or not
substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent
         Any compound structurally derived from 1-(1- naphthylmethyl)indene by
substitution at the 3-position of the indene ring by alkyl, haloalkyl, alkenyl,
cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2- (4-morpholinyl)ethyl whether or not
further substituted in the indene ring to any extent, whether or not
substituted in the naphthyl ring to any extent
         Any compound structurally derived from 3- phenylacetylindole by
substitution at the nitrogen atom of the indole ring with alkyl, haloalkyl,
alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2- (4-morpholinyl)ethyl, whether
or not further substituted in the indole ring to any extent, whether or not
substituted in the phenyl ring to any extent
         Any compound structurally derived from 2-(3- hydroxycyclohexyl)phenol
by substitution at the 5-position of the phenolic ring by alkyl, haloalkyl,
alkenyl, cycloalkylmethyl, cycloalkylethyl or 2-(4-morpholinyl)ethyl, whether
or not substituted in the cyclohexyl ring to any extent
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG: A substance:
      1.   The chemical structure of which is substantially similar to the
chemical structure of a controlled substance in schedule I or II;
      2.   Which has a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than the
stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system
of a controlled substance in schedule I or II; or
      3.   With respect to a particular person, which such person represents or
intends to have a stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the
central nervous system that is substantially similar to or greater than the
stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system
of a controlled substance in schedule I or II.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA: All equipment, products and materials of any kind, other
than methamphetamine manufacturing materials as defined in 720 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 646/10, the methamphetamine control and community protection
act, which are intended to be used unlawfully in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling or otherwise
introducing into the human body cannabis or a controlled substance in violation
of 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 550/1 et seq., the cannabis control act; 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 570/100 et seq., the Illinois controlled substances
act; or 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 646/1 et seq., the methamphetamine
control and community protection act. It includes, but is not limited to:
      1.   Kits intended to be used unlawfully in manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing or preparing cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      2.   Isomerization devices intended to be used unlawfully in increasing
the potency of any species of plant which is cannabis or a controlled
substance;
      3.   Testing equipment intended to be used unlawfully in a private home
for identifying or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
cannabis or controlled substances;
      4.   Diluents and adulterants intended to be used unlawfully for cutting
cannabis or a controlled substance by private persons;
      5.   Objects intended to be used unlawfully in ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing cannabis, synthetic cannabis, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil into the human body including, where applicable, the following
items:
         a.   Water pipes;
         b.   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         c.   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         d.   Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials;
         e.   Carburetor pipes;
         f.   Electric pipes;
         g.   Air driven pipes;
         h.   Chillums;
         i.   Bongs;
         j.   Ice pipes or chillers; or
      6.   Any item whose purpose, as announced or described by the seller, is
for use in violation of this section.
   SYNTHETIC CANNABIS: An herbal and chemical product, whether described as
tobacco, herbs, incense, spice, or any blend thereof, regardless of whether the
substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked, which mimics the effects
of the active ingredient in cannabis and tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), and
contains a cannabinoids receptor agonist as follows:
         CP 55,940 (2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3- hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5-
(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol)
         HU-308 ([(1R,2R,5R)-2-[2,6-dimethoxy-4-(2- methyloctan-2-yl)phenyl]-
7,7-dimethyl-4-bicyclo[3.1.1]hept-3- enyl]methanol)
         HU-331 ((3-hydroxy-2-[(1R,6R)-3-methyl-6-(1- methylethenyl)-2-
cyclohexen-1-yl]-5-pentyl-2,5-cyclohexadiene- 1,4-dione)
         JWH-007 (1-pentyl-2-methyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole)
         JWH-019 (1-hexyl-3-(naphthalen-1-oyl)indole)
         JWH-073 (naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3- yl)methanone)
         JWH-098 (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentyl-2- methylindol-3-
yl)methanone)
         JWH-164 (7-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol- 3-yl)methanone)
         JWH-200 (1-(2-morpholin-4-ylethyl)indol-3-yl)- naphthalen-1-
ylmethanone)
         JWH-203 (2-(2-chlorophenyl)-1-(1-pentylindol-3- yl)ethanone)
         JWH-210 (4-ethylnaphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3- yl)methanone)
         JWH-250 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole)
         JWH-251 (1-pentyl-3-(2-methylphenylacetyl)indole)
         JWH-398 (1-pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole)
         RCS-4 ((4-methoxyphenyl)(1-pentyl-1H-indol-3- yl)methanone)
         RCS-8 (1-(1-(2-cyclohexylethyl)-1H-indol-3-yl)-2- (2-
methoxyphenyl)ethanone)
         WIN 55,212-2 ((R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4- morpholinylmethyl)
pyrrolo[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1- nepthalenylmethanone)
         Street names for synthetic cannabis may include, but are not limited
to, the following:
         Black mamba strawberry
         Black mamba tangerine
         Black mamba vanilla
         Cloud nine incense
         Flying buddha aqua
         Flying buddha golden
         Flying buddha nirvana
         Flying buddha rose
         Flying buddha royal
         Flying buddha rubia
         Flying buddha zen
         Formula 420
         K2 blonde
         K2 citron
         K2 huckleberry
         K2 pineapple
         K2 pink
         K2 sky
         K2 solid sex
         K2 standard
         K2 summit
         K2 thai dream
         K2 ultra
         K2 ultra incense
         Kronic skunk blend
         Pottpouri
         Purple haze max
         Quick fix plus
         Smoke buddy
         Spice
         Triad blue label 1
         Wickedspice
   B.   Exceptions: This section shall not apply to any person who may, under
federal or state law, possess, manufacture, distribute, dispense, or ingest the
substances regulated by this section. Furthermore, if a violation is a felony,
it shall be prosecuted under appropriate federal and/or state law and not this
section.
   C.   Synthetic Cannabis And Controlled Substance:
      1.   Beginning on January 1, 2012, it shall be unlawful for any person to
sell, offer to sell, deliver, barter, give away, gift, or publicly display for
sale or otherwise transfer any product substance containing synthetic cannabis,
controlled substance, or controlled substance analog.
      2.   Beginning on January 1, 2012, it shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly possess or ingest any substance containing synthetic cannabis,
controlled substance, or controlled substance analog. (Ord. 2011-24, 11-22-
2011)
   D.   Possession Of Cannabis:
      1.   Except as provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1, et seq.), as amended; the Industrial Hemp Act (505 ILCS 89/1, et
seq.), as amended; or any other state or federal law, as amended, permitting
the cultivation, production, manufacture, sale, purchase, delivery, possession,
consumption, and/or use of cannabis, it shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly possess not more than ten grams (10 g) of cannabis.
      2.   Except as provided in the Cannabis Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS
705/1-1, et seq.), as amended,; the Industrial Hemp Act (505 ILCS 89/1, et
seq.), as amended; or any other state or federal law, as amended, permitting
the cultivation, production, manufacture, sale, purchase, delivery, possession,
consumption, and/or use of cannabis, it shall be unlawful for any person to
knowingly possess more than ten grams (10 g) but not more than thirty grams (30
g) of cannabis.
   E.   Possession Of Drug Paraphernalia: Except as provided in the Cannabis
Regulation and Tax Act (410 ILCS 705/1-1, et seq.), as amended; the Industrial
Hemp Act (505 ILCS 89/1, et seq.), as amended; or any other state or federal
law, as amended, permitting the cultivation, production, manufacture, sale,
purchase, delivery, possession, consumption, and/or use of cannabis, it shall
be unlawful for any person to knowingly possess an item of drug paraphernalia
with the intent to use it in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing
cannabis, synthetic cannabis, or a controlled substance into the human body, or
in preparing cannabis, synthetic cannabis, or a controlled substance for that
use.
   F.   Penalty:
      1.   A person convicted of violating subsection C1 of this section shall
be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than as
provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
      2.   A person convicted of violating subsection C2 of this section shall
be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than as
provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
      3.   A person convicted of violating subsection D1 of this section shall
be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
      4.   A person convicted of violating subsection D2 of this section shall
be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and not more than as
provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense.
      5.   A person convicted of violating subsection E of this section shall
be fined as follows:
         a.   When the drug paraphernalia is seized alone or during a violation
of subsection (a) of section 4 of the cannabis control act (as amended by
Public Act 099-0697), the fine for possession of such drug paraphernalia shall
be two hundred dollars ($200.00).
         b.   Except as provided in subsection F5a of this section, the fine
shall be not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than as
provided by section 1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-24, 11-22-
2011; amd Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016; Ord. 2020-14, 4-28-2020)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS
SECTION:
8-3-1: Curfew
8-3-2: Smoking Materials (Rep. by Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-3-3: Truancy Prohibited
8-3-1: CURFEW:
   A.   Loitering Of Minors: It is unlawful for a person less than seventeen
(17) years of age who has not been emancipated by court order (hereinafter
referred to as "minor") to be present at or upon any public assembly, building,
place, store or highway at the following times:
      Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. Saturday;
      Between one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M. and six o'clock (6:
00) A.M. Sunday; and
      Between eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Sunday to Thursday, inclusive and
six o'clock (6:00) A.M. on the following day.
   B.   Defenses: It is a defense to a violation under subsection A of this
section that the minor engaged in the unlawful conduct while:
      1.   Accompanied by and supervised by the minor's parent, legal guardian
or other responsible companion at least eighteen (18) years of age approved by
a parent or legal guardian;
      2.   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence;
      3.   In a motor vehicle, train, or bus involved in interstate travel; or
      4.   Participating in, going to, or returning from, without any detour or
stop:
         a.   Employment which the laws of this state authorize a person less
than seventeen (17) years of age to perform;
         b.   A school recreational activity;
         c.   A religious event;
         d.   An emergency involving the protection of a person or property
from an imminent threat of serious bodily injury, loss of life, or substantial
damage, the resulting state calling for immediate action, and includes, but is
not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident;
         e.   An activity involving the exercise of the minor's rights
protected under the first amendment to the United States constitution or
article 1, sections 3, 4 and 5 of the constitution of the state of Illinois, or
both; or
         f.   An activity conducted by a nonprofit or governmental entity that
provides recreation, education, training, or other care under the supervision
of one or more adults.
   C.   Parents: It is unlawful for a parent, legal guardian, custodian, or
other person to knowingly permit a person in his custody or control to violate
subsection A of this section; provided however that the defenses enumerated in
subsection B of this section do not apply.
   D.   Owners Of Amusement Places: It is unlawful for any person operating
places of amusement and entertainment, including, but not limited to, pool
halls, arcades and similar businesses, to permit any minors to enter or remain
in such places of amusement and entertainment during the hours prohibited under
this section; provided however that the defenses enumerated in subsection B of
this section do not apply.
   E.   Officer Investigation: A citation for violation of subsection A of this
section may be issued by a police officer if he reasonably believes that a
violation has occurred only after investigation and, based on any response and
other circumstances, none of the defenses enumerated in subsection B of this
section apply. (Ord. 2004-15, 4-27-2004)
8-3-2: SMOKING MATERIALS 1:
(Rep. by Ord. 2004-08, 2-10-2004, eff. 5-1-2004)
8-3-3: TRUANCY PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) who
is enrolled in grades one through twelve (12) who: 1) is required by law to
attend school and/or 2) is subject to the compulsory attendance requirements of
the Illinois school code and/or 3) is enrolled in a public, private or
parochial school within the corporate limits of the village, to absent himself
or herself from attendance at school without parental or school permission or
valid cause. Parental permission shall refer to and include permission obtained
from a parent, legal guardian, or other adult person standing in loco parentis
and having custody and control over such person under the age of eighteen (18)
years. Any person who shall so absent himself or herself shall be guilty of the
offenses of truancy and be subject to the penalties hereinafter set forth in
this section.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person who induces or attempts to induce
any child to be absent from school unlawfully, or who knowingly employs or
harbors, while school is in session, any child absent from school in violation
of this section.
   C.   A valid cause for absence from school shall include illness, observance
of a religious holiday, death in the immediate family, family emergency, and
shall include other situations beyond the control of the person so absenting
himself or herself from school as determined by the school district; provided
that parental permission for absence due to such cause is obtained, in writing,
from the parent and is submitted to the proper school authorities, according to
their regulations, within twenty four (24) hours after such absence, not
including weekends. (Ord. 2004-04, 1-27-2004)
   D.   In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys,
omits, neglects or refuses to comply with any provision of subsection A or B of
this section shall be sentenced as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code, or
in lieu of a fine, complete a corresponding amount of public service work. If
it is the first offense, a violator may be assigned to work six (6) hours of
school assigned tasks in lieu of such fine. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 4
ANIMAL CONTROL
SECTION:
8-4-1: Definitions
8-4-2: Inoculation Against Rabies
8-4-3: Registration Of Dogs And Cats
8-4-4: Kennels
8-4-5: Running At Large
8-4-6: Apprehension Of Animals Running At Large
8-4-7: Possession Of Running At Large Animals
8-4-8: Surrender Of Running At Large Animals
8-4-9: Confinement Of Female Dogs
8-4-10: Nuisance Animals
8-4-11: Animal Bites
8-4-12: Vicious Dog
8-4-13: Dangerous Dog
8-4-14: Inhumane Treatment
8-4-15: Impoundment Of Animals
8-4-16: Notice Of Impoundment
8-4-17: Cost Of Impoundment
8-4-18: Redemption Of Animals
8-4-19: Disposal Of Animals
8-4-20: Abandonment
8-4-21: Unclaimed Owned Animals
8-4-22: Disposal Of Animal Defecation
8-4-23: Defense Of Livestock
8-4-24: Maintenance Of Records
8-4-25: Entry Upon Private Property
8-4-26: Penalty
8-4-27: Effective Date
8-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this chapter:
ANIMAL: Every living creature, other than man, which may be affected by rabies.
ANIMAL CONTROL DEPARTMENT: The Will County, Grundy County or Kendall County
animal control department.
ANIMAL CONTROL FACILITY: Any facility approved by the police chief or his
designee or animal control department for the purpose of enforcing this
chapter, and used as a shelter for seized, stray, homeless, abandoned, or
unwanted cats, dogs or other animals; also used interchangeably with "pound".
BUSINESS DAY: Any day including holidays that the animal control facility is
open to the public for animal reclaims.
CAT: All members of the family felidae.
CONFINED: Restriction of an animal at all times by the owner or his/her agent,
to an escape proof building, house, or other enclosure away from other animals
and the public.
DANGEROUS DOG: Any individual dog when unmuzzled, unleashed, or unattended by
its owner or custodian that behaves in a manner that a reasonable person would
believe poses a serious and unjustified imminent threat of serious physical
injury or death to a person or a companion animal in a public place.
DOG: All members of the family canidae, male or female, four (4) months of age
or older. Excluding animals classified as wild (e.g., wolves, coyotes) or
crossbred (e.g., coydogs).
ENCLOSURE: A fence or structure of at least six feet (6') in height forming or
causing an enclosure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and
suitable to confine a vicious dog in conjunction with other measures that may
be taken by the owner or keeper, such as tethering of a vicious dog within the
enclosure. The enclosure shall be securely enclosed and locked and designed
with secure sides, top and bottom and shall be designed to prevent the animal
from escaping from the enclosure. If the enclosure is a room within a
residence, the door must be locked. A vicious dog may be allowed to move about
freely within the entire residence if it is muzzled at all times.
FERAL CAT: A cat that: a) is born in the wild or is the offspring of an owned
or feral cat and is not socialized, or b) is a formerly owned cat that has been
abandoned and is no longer socialized or lives on a farm.
HAS BEEN BITTEN: Has been seized with the teeth or jaws so that the person or
other animal seized has been nipped, gripped, wounded, or pierced, and further
includes contact of saliva with any break or abrasion of the skin.
HOUSING REQUIREMENTS: The provision of:
   A.   A fenced area of adequate size such that the animal may move freely and
relieve himself away from the food and water supply,
   B.   Fresh clean water,
   C.   A crate or kennel large enough to permit the animal to stand, turn
around easily and to lie down comfortably, and
   D.   If chained, the animal should be in a harness and must have the ability
to move about without becoming tangled or injured, must be ten feet (10') off
the property line at the full extent of the chain, and must not pose a nuisance
by prolonged barking or by lunging at passersby.
IMPOUNDED: Taken into custody and located at the animal control facility.
INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES: The injection of an antirabies vaccine approved by
the department of agriculture of the state of Illinois.
LEASH: A cord, rope, strap, or chain which shall be securely fastened to the
collar or harness of an animal and shall be of sufficient strength to keep such
animal under control.
LICENSED VETERINARIAN: A person trained by an accredited medical school who is
licensed to practice veterinary medicine by the state in which they establish a
practice of veterinary medicine.
OWNER: Any person having a right of property in an animal, or who keeps or
harbors an animal, or who has an animal in his/her care, or acts as the
custodian of an animal.
PHYSICAL INJURY: The impairment of physical condition.
POLICE ANIMAL: An animal owned or used by a law enforcement department or
agency in the course of the department or agency's work.
POLICE CHIEF OR HIS DESIGNEE: The village of Minooka police chief or his
designee.
RUNNING AT LARGE: Any animal found which is not secured by a leash, or not
confined within the real property limits of its owner.
SERIOUS PHYSICAL INJURY: A physical injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious or protracted disfigurement, protracted
impairment of health, impairment of the function of any bodily organ, or
plastic surgery.
VICIOUS DOG: A dog that, without justification, attacks a person and causes
serious physical injury or death or any individual dog that has been found to
be a dangerous dog upon three (3) separate occasions. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-
2006)
8-4-2: INOCULATION AGAINST RABIES:
   A.   Dogs: Every owner of a dog four (4) months or more of age shall have
each dog inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. Every dog shall
have a second rabies vaccination within one year of the first. Terms of
subsequent vaccine administration and duration of immunity must be in
compliance with the department of agriculture of the state of Illinois.
Evidence of such rabies inoculation shall be entered on a certificate which
shall be signed by the licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine.
Veterinarians who inoculate a dog shall procure serially numbered tags, one to
be issued with each inoculation certificate. Only one dog shall be included on
each certificate. The tag must be attached to a collar or harness and worn at
all times by the dog for which the certificate and tag have been issued.
   B.   Cats: Every owner of a cat in a residential district shall cause their
cat, four (4) months or more of age, to be inoculated against rabies by a
licensed veterinarian at such intervals as may be established by regulations
pursuant to the Illinois animal control act. Evidence of such rabies
inoculation shall be entered on a certificate and which shall be signed by the
licensed veterinarian administering the vaccine. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-3: REGISTRATION OF DOGS AND CATS:
There shall be no requirement of a village license for a dog or cat. However,
it shall be unlawful to permit any dog to be on any public street, sidewalk,
alley or other public place unless such dog has a collar firmly attached around
its neck with a county license tag for the current year attached to such
collar. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-4: KENNELS:
   A.   Annual Inspection: Kennels shall be subject to, at a minimum, an annual
inspection by the police chief or his designee in cooperation with the animal
control department to ensure compliance with this chapter and other local and
state regulations.
   B.   Regulations: Kennels shall be sanitary, with proper ventilation,
adequate nutrition, housing, humane care and treatment, including required
rabies vaccinations and registrations, for all animals.
   C.   Removal: The court upon finding evidence of a violation of this chapter
may order removal by the police chief or his designee or animal control
department or the appropriate state authority of all animals until the
violation is corrected. The owner of the animals shall be ordered to pay the
cost of housing the animals until the violation is corrected. (Ord. 2006-36,
10-10-2006)
8-4-5: RUNNING AT LARGE:
It is hereby declared unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person
to allow or cause an animal to "run at large". An animal will be considered to
be "running at large" when it is off or outside the premises of its owner,
unless it is controlled as follows:
   A.   By a line or leash not more than eight feet (8') in length, provided
that the line or leash is held by a competent person who has the capacity to
control the animal.
   B.   The animal is confined within a vehicle being driven, parked or
stopped. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-6: APPREHENSION OF ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
Any animal found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter
may be apprehended and impounded. For this purpose, the police chief or his
designee or animal control department shall utilize any existing or available
animal control facility. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-7: POSSESSION OF RUNNING AT LARGE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, without the knowledge and consent of the
owner, to retain possession of any "running at large" animal for more than
forty eight (48) hours without first reporting such possession to the police
chief or his designee and providing their name, address, a description of the
animal, and a statement of the circumstances under which possession of the
animal was obtained. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-8: SURRENDER OF RUNNING AT LARGE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person who obtains possession of a "running at
large animal" to refuse to surrender such animal to the police chief or his
designee or animal control department when requested to do so. (Ord. 2006-36,
10-10-2006)
8-4-9: CONFINEMENT OF FEMALE DOGS:
All female dogs shall be confined to an enclosure at all times during the
estrus period. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-10: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly keep a dog, cat or other
animal which by unusual or prolonged barking, howling or other noise disturbs
the peace and quiet of any person. For the purpose of this section, unusual or
prolonged noise shall include, but not be limited to, animal noise which
continues in a substantially uninterrupted manner for ten (10) minutes or more
or which occurs more than five (5) times in one hour. The mailing of a notice
to a keeper of an animal that such animal has engaged in unusual or prolonged
barking, howling or other noise shall give rise to a rebuttable presumption
that the keeper is knowingly keeping such an animal in the case of any charges
brought against such keeper under this section after the mailing of such a
notice. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-11: ANIMAL BITES:
The police chief or his designee shall investigate all bites by dogs or other
animals. In the event a noninoculated animal bites a person, said animal shall
be quarantined at any approved location, for a period of ten (10) days, and it
shall be the duty at the owner's expense to have the animal examined by a
physician or licensed veterinarian at the commencement and termination of the
ten (10) day period. If such animal, during this period, shall die or shall
show definite signs of illness, it shall be the duty of the owner or person
having custody of the animal to turn the dog over to the police chief or his
designee or animal control department so that it can be determined whether or
not the dog has rabies. Inoculated animals may be quarantined in the home of
the owner if the bite is below the shoulders, and, after inspection by the
police chief or his designee or animal control department, the location is
deemed satisfactory for confinement. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-12: VICIOUS DOG:
   A.   Vicious Dog Determination: In order to have a dog deemed vicious, the
police chief or his designee or animal control department must give notice of
the infraction that is the basis of the investigation to the owner, conduct a
thorough investigation, interview any witnesses, including the owner, gather
any existing medical records, veterinary medical records or behavioral
evidence, and make a detailed report recommending a finding that the dog is a
vicious dog and give the report to the state's attorney's office and the owner.
The police chief or his designee, animal control department, state's attorney,
or any citizen of the county in which the dog exists may file a complaint in
the circuit court to deem a dog to be a vicious dog. Testimony of a certified
applied behaviorist, a board certified veterinary behaviorist, or another
recognized expert may be relevant to the court's determination of whether the
dog's behavior was justified. The petitioner must prove the dog is a vicious
dog by clear and convincing evidence. The police chief or his designee or
animal control department shall determine where the animal shall be confined
during the pendency of the case. If a dog is found to be a vicious dog, the dog
shall be spayed or neutered within ten (10) days of the finding at the expense
of its owner and microchipped, if not already, and is subject to enclosure. A
dog found to be a vicious dog shall not be released to the owner until the
police chief or his designee or animal control department approves the
enclosure. No owner or keeper of a vicious dog shall sell or give away the dog
without court approval. Whenever an owner of a vicious dog relocates, he or she
shall notify the police chief or his designee and animal control department and
the administrator of the county animal control where he or she has relocated.
   B.   Justified Conduct: A dog shall not be declared vicious if the court
determines the conduct of the dog was justified because:
      1.   The threat, injury, or death was sustained by a person who at the
time was committing a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog,
or upon the property of the owner or custodian of the dog;
      2.   The injured, threatened, or killed person was tormenting, abusing,
assaulting, or physically threatening the dog or its offspring, or has in the
past tormented, abused, assaulted, or physically threatened the dog or its
offspring; or
      3.   The dog was responding to pain or injury, or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, or member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
   C.   Exceptions: No dog shall be deemed vicious if it is a professionally
trained dog for law enforcement or guard duties. Vicious dogs shall not be
classified in a manner that is specific as to breed. Guide dogs for the blind
or hearing impaired, support dogs for the physically handicapped, and sentry,
guard, or police owned dogs are exempt from this section; provided, an attack
or injury to a person occurs while the dog is performing duties as expected. To
qualify for exemption under this section, each such dog shall be currently
inoculated against rabies in accordance with this chapter. It shall be the duty
of the owner or keeper of such exempted dog to notify the police chief or his
designee and animal control department of changes of address. In the case of a
sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the police chief or his designee and
animal control department advised of the location where such dog will be
stationed. The police chief or his designee and animal control department shall
provide police and fire departments with a categorized list of such exempted
dogs, and shall promptly notify such departments of any address changes
reported to him or her.
   D.   Enclosure: It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain any
dog which has been found to be a vicious dog unless the dog is kept in an
enclosure. The only times that a vicious dog may be allowed out of the
enclosure are:
      1.   If it is necessary for the owner or keeper to obtain veterinary care
for the dog;
      2.   In the case of an emergency or natural disaster where the dog's life
is threatened; or
      3.   To comply with the order of a court of competent jurisdiction,
provided that the dog is securely muzzled and restrained with a leash not
exceeding six feet (6') in length, and shall be under the direct control and
supervision of the owner or keeper of the dog or muzzled in its residence.
   E.   Impoundment: Any dog which has been found to be a vicious dog and which
is not confined to an enclosure shall be impounded by the police chief or his
designee or animal control department. If the owner of the dog has not appealed
the impoundment order to the county in which the owner resides within fifteen
(15) working days, the dog may be euthanized. Upon filing a notice of appeal,
the order of euthanasia shall be automatically stayed pending the outcome of
the appeal. The owner shall bear the burden of timely notification to the
police chief or his designee and animal control department in writing of an
appeal. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-13: DANGEROUS DOG:
   A.   Dangerous Dog Determination: The police chief or his designee, after a
thorough investigation, including sending, within three (3) days of becoming
aware of an alleged infraction, notification to the owner of the alleged
infraction, the initiation of an investigation, and affording the owner an
opportunity to meet with the police chief or his designee, gathering of any
medical or veterinary evidence, interviewing witnesses, and making a detailed
written report, may deem a dangerous dog. No dog shall be deemed a dangerous
dog without clear and convincing evidence. The owner shall be sent immediate
notification of the determination by registered or certified mail that includes
a complete description of the appeal process. If deemed dangerous, the police
chief or his designee shall order the dog to be spayed or neutered within
fourteen (14) days at the owner's expense and microchipped, if not already, and
one or more of the following as deemed appropriate under the circumstances and
necessary for the protection of the public:
      1.   Evaluation of the dog by a certified applied behaviorist, a board
certified veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert in the field and
completion of training or other treatment as deemed appropriate by the expert.
The owner of the dog shall be responsible for all costs associated with
evaluations and training ordered under this subsection; or
      2.   Direct supervision by an adult eighteen (18) years of age or older
whenever the animal is on public premises.
      3.   Order the dangerous dog to be muzzled whenever it is on public
premises in a manner that will prevent it from biting any person or animal, but
that shall not injure the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration.
   B.   Justified Conduct: A dog shall not be declared dangerous if the police
chief or his designee after investigation determines the conduct of the dog was
justified because:
      1.   The threat was sustained by a person who at the time was committing
a crime or offense upon the owner or custodian of the dog;
      2.   The threatened person was tormenting, abusing, assaulting, or
physically threatening the dog or its offspring;
      3.   The injured, threatened, or killed companion animal was attacking or
threatening to attack dog or its offspring; or
      4.   The dog was responding to pain or injury or was protecting itself,
its owner, custodian, or a member of its household, kennel, or offspring.
      Testimony of a certified applied behaviorist, a board certified
veterinary behaviorist, or another recognized expert may be relevant to the
determination of whether the dog's behavior was justified pursuant to the
provisions of this section.
   C.   Exceptions: Guide dogs for the blind or hearing impaired, support dogs
for the physically handicapped, and sentry, guard, or police owned dogs are
exempt from this section; provided, an attack or injury to a person occurs
while the dog is performing duties as expected. To qualify for exemption under
this section, each such dog shall be currently inoculated against rabies and
performing duties as expected. It shall be the duty of the owner of the
exempted dog to notify the police department of changes of address. In the case
of a sentry or guard dog, the owner shall keep the police chief or his designee
advised of the location where such dog will be stationed. The police chief or
his designee and animal control department shall provide police and fire
departments with a categorized list of such exempted dogs, and shall promptly
notify such departments of any address changes reported to him or her.
   D.   Control: It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or recklessly
permit any dangerous dog to leave the premises of its owner when not under
control by leash or other recognized control method.
   E.   Appeal: The owner of a dog found to be a dangerous dog pursuant to this
section may file an appeal in the circuit court within thirty five (35) days of
receipt of notification of the determination, for a de novo hearing on the
determination. The proceeding shall be conducted as a civil hearing pursuant to
the Illinois rules of evidence and the code of civil procedure, including the
discovery provisions. After a hearing, the court may make a determination of
dangerous dog upon proof by clear and convincing evidence. The determination of
the circuit court may be appealed pursuant to the civil appeals provisions of
the Illinois supreme court rules. Until the order has been reviewed and at all
times during the appeal process, the owner shall comply with the requirements
set forth by the police chief or his designee, animal control department or the
court. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-14: INHUMANE TREATMENT:
It shall be unlawful for any person to be guilty of cruelty to animals by:
   A.   Overloading, overdriving, overworking, cruelly beating, torturing,
tormenting, mutilating or cruelly killing any animal, or causing or knowingly
allowing the same to be done.
   B.   Cruelly working any old, maimed, infirm, sick or disabled animal, or
causing or knowingly allowing the same to be done, or by abandoning such
animal.
   C.   Unnecessarily failing to provide any animal in his charge or custody,
as owner or otherwise, with proper food, drink, shelter, or housing
requirements.
   D.   Carrying or driving, or causing to be carried or driven or kept, any
animal in an unnecessarily cruel manner.
   E.   By allowing any animal to stand or be on any street or alley or other
public place an unreasonable length of time without food or drink.
   F.   The use of an animal to fight another animal for sport or pleasure.
(Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-15: IMPOUNDMENT OF ANIMALS:
It shall be the duty of the police chief or his designee or animal control
department to impound in an approved animal control facility any animal over
which possession is obtained under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-
36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-16: NOTICE OF IMPOUNDMENT:
When any animal has been impounded in an animal control facility, the police
chief or his designee or animal control department shall give written notice to
the owner, if known, at such owner's last known address. Testimony of the
police chief or his designee or animal control department who mails such notice
shall be evidence of the receipt of such notice by the owner of the animal.
(Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-17: COST OF IMPOUNDMENT:
The owner is liable for the cost of impoundment when the animal is impounded
for any of the following reasons:
   A.   Failure to provide sufficient quantity of good quality, wholesome food
and water.
   B.   Failure to provide shelter sufficient for the animal to maintain its
body heat and functions without drawing upon the necessary constituents of its
own body.
   C.   Failure to provide veterinary care when needed to prevent suffering.
   D.   Failure to provide humane care and treatment.
   E.   Failure to redeem any impounded animal whose ownership can be proven by
the animal control department.
   F.   The animal is left unattended inside vehicles when the outdoor
temperatures are dangerous to the animal's health.
   G.   The animal is captured outside of the owner's property running at
large. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-18: REDEMPTION OF ANIMALS:
The owner of any impounded animal may redeem such animal upon compliance with
the following conditions:
   A.   Presenting proof of current registration and inoculation of the dog or
cat; or
   B.   Obtaining and paying for the registration and inoculation of the dog or
cat, if required; and
   C.   Payment for all expenses incurred during the impoundment, apprehension,
or confinement.
   D.   Compliance with the Minooka zoning ordinance.
   E.   No animal shall be released to an individual representing a rescue
group unless the group has been licensed by the department of agriculture of
the state of Illinois or incorporated as a not for profit organization. (Ord.
2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-19: DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS:
   A.   Any animal that has bitten a human being and cannot be confined by its
owner, if known, or by the animal control facility, may be destroyed by the
village of Minooka police department, its authorized designee, or the animal
control department.
   B.   Any animal surrendered to the animal control facility by its owner, or
any animal impounded under the provisions of this chapter, which has not bitten
a person shall, unless sooner redeemed, be held at the animal control facility
for a period of at least three (3) days, including Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays, if the owner of said dog is unknown. If the owner of said animal is
known or can be reasonably determined, the animal will be held for a period of
at least seven (7) days including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays.
   C.   The police chief or his designee or animal control department may
dispose of an impounded animal not redeemed, by either:
      1.   Placing the animal in an adoptive home; or
      2.   Selling the animal; or
      3.   Destroying the animal in a humane manner. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-20: ABANDONMENT:
No person shall knowingly abandon any animal whether healthy, old, maimed,
infirm, sick or disabled on their own property without daily care or by
abandonment off the owner's premises where it may suffer injury, hunger,
exposure or become a public charge. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-21: UNCLAIMED OWNED ANIMALS:
The owner of an impounded animal who fails to claim such animal within the time
limits specified in this chapter is responsible for all expenses incurred, when
proof of ownership is established. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-22: DISPOSAL OF ANIMAL DEFECATION:
No defecation or manure shall be dumped or left on any street, alley, sidewalk,
nor on any open area or lot in any portion of the village; provided however
that this provision shall not be construed to prohibit the use of manure as
fertilizer for lawns and gardens in keeping with ordinary and customary
practices, in a manner that does not create a nuisance. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-
2006)
8-4-23: DEFENSE OF LIVESTOCK:
Any owner seeing his or her livestock, poultry, or equidae being injured,
wounded, or killed by a dog not accompanied by or not under the supervision of
its owner, may kill such dog. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-24: MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS:
The police chief or his designee shall maintain records of all animals
apprehended and/or impounded. Such records shall be maintained for at least one
year following disposal of each animal and shall contain at least the following
information:
   A.   A complete description, including photograph if available, of the
animal. At a minimum the description must include color, size, sex and a
description of any tags.
   B.   The manner and date of acquisition of the animal.
   C.   The manner and date of disposal of the animal.
   D.   The name and address of the person adopting, or purchasing, the animal.
   E.   A record of all fees and/or fines received in relation to the animal.
   F.   The reason for disposal of the animal and the manner used. (Ord. 2006-
36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-25: ENTRY UPON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
For the purpose of making inspections hereunder, the police chief or his
designee or animal control department, or any law enforcement officer may enter
upon private premises, provided that the entry shall not be made into any
building that is a person's residence, to apprehend a straying dog or other
animal, a dangerous or vicious dog or other animal, or an animal thought to be
infected with rabies. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-26: PENALTY:
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
punishable as provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed so as to prevent the village, or any of its duly
authorized agents, from instituting any other form of action at law or in
equity to enforce the provisions, or to prevent or abate violations of this
chapter. (Ord. 2006-36, 10-10-2006)
8-4-27: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This chapter shall be effective on and after October 10, 2006. (Ord. 2006-36,
10-10-2006)
CHAPTER 5
ABANDONED, WRECKED VEHICLES
SECTION:
8-5-1: Definitions
8-5-2: Time Limit For Leaving Vehicles On Property Within The Village
8-5-3: Authority To Inspect Vehicles
8-5-4: Authority To Impound Vehicles
8-5-5: Contents Of Notice
8-5-6: Record Searches
8-5-7: Disposal Of Unclaimed Vehicles; Reclaimed Vehicles
8-5-8: Penalty
8-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
ABANDONED VEHICLE: Any vehicle, or any part thereof, in a state of disrepair
rendering the vehicle incapable of being driven safely or unlicensed (except
vehicles for sale by new and used motor vehicle dealers and repair shops), or
left for such a time and under such circumstances as to reasonably appear to
have been abandoned or deserted. A vehicle is unlicensed when it does not have
a current set of valid license plates from the state in which the vehicle is
registered displayed on the vehicle.
CHIEF OF POLICE: The chief of police or authorized representative.
HIGHWAY OR STREET: The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or located on public school property 1.
INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle from which, for a period of at
least seven (7) days, the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or
on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or
otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. Inoperable motor vehicle shall not include a motor vehicle
which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own
motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations 2.
OWNER: A person who holds legal title of a vehicle, or in the event a vehicle
is the subject of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease thereof with
the right of purchase upon performance of the conditions stated in the
agreement and with an immediate right of possession vested in the conditional
vendee or lessee, or in the event a mortgagor of such vehicle is entitled to
possession, then such conditional vendee or lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed
the owner for the purpose of this chapter 3.
URBAN DISTRICT: The territory contiguous to and including any street or highway
which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry or dwelling
houses situated at intervals of less than one hundred feet (100') for a
distance of a quarter of a mile or more1. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-2: TIME LIMIT FOR LEAVING VEHICLES ON PROPERTY WITHIN THE VILLAGE:
   A.   A vehicle, or any part thereof, which is on a highway and is abandoned,
burned, inoperable, partially dismantled, unattended, or wrecked and creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway, or on a
highway and impeding traffic by its physical appearance, is declared a nuisance
and unlawful 2.
   B.   A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned on a highway in an urban
district that remains ten (10) hours or more, is declared a nuisance and
unlawful 3.
   C.   A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned or left unattended on a
highway, outside of an urban district, that remains twenty four (24) hours or
more, is declared a nuisance and unlawful 4.
   D.   A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned on public or private
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, except on
property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle, that remains seven
(7) days or more, is declared a nuisance and unlawful 5.
   E.   A vehicle, or any part thereof, abandoned, discarded, inoperable,
junked, partially dismantled, or wrecked, on private property, and in view of
the general public, by any person in charge or control of said vehicle and
property, that remains thirty (30) days or more, is declared a nuisance and
unlawful. This shall not apply to a vehicle in an enclosed building, a vehicle
on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
when necessary to the lawful operation of such business enterprise, or to an
operable historic vehicle over twenty five (25) years of age6. (Ord. 2010-07,
1-26-2010)
8-5-3: AUTHORITY TO INSPECT VEHICLES:
The chief of police is authorized to enter upon public or private property at
all reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting vehicles reasonably believed
to be in violation of this chapter, and affix to such vehicle, in a conspicuous
location, in the form of an adhesive sticker, notice informing the owner of the
violation. It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent the chief of police
from entering public or private property for purposes of carrying out duties
under this chapter or to interfere in the lawful performance of duties under
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-4: AUTHORITY TO IMPOUND VEHICLES:
   A.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is on a highway and abandoned,
burned, inoperable, partially dismantled, unattended, or wrecked and creating a
traffic hazard because of its position in relation to the highway, or on a
highway and causing the impeding of traffic by its physical appearance, the
chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle in
accordance with all applicable laws 1.
   B.   When a vehicle or any part thereof, is abandoned on a highway in an
urban district that remains ten (10) hours or more, the chief of police is
hereby authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle from the highway in
accordance with all applicable laws 2.
   C.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned or left unattended on
a highway, outside of an urban district, that remains twenty four (24) hours or
more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have removed said
vehicle from the highway in accordance with all applicable laws 3.
   D.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned on private or public
property, other than a highway, in view of the general public, except on
property of the owner or bailee of such abandoned vehicle, that remains seven
(7) days or more, the chief of police is hereby authorized to remove or have
removed said vehicle, in accordance with all applicable laws; provided however
that no vehicle shall be removed and impounded until five (5) days after the
chief of police gives written notice of the intention to impound the vehicle,
if the vehicle has not been brought into compliance with the provisions of this
chapter at the end of such time. Such notice shall be given by:
      1.   Affixing a "police tow" notice on the vehicle; and
      2.   By personally serving a copy of the notice on the owner of the
vehicle; or
      3.   Sending notice by regular and certified mail to the owner of such
vehicle at their last known address if the owner is reasonably ascertainable;
or
      4.   Sending notice by regular and certified mail to the owner of such
property, if the owner is reasonably ascertainable 4.
   E.   When a vehicle, or any part thereof, is abandoned, discarded,
inoperable, junked, partially dismantled, or wrecked, on public or private
property, and in view of the general public, by any person in charge or control
of said vehicle and property, that remains thirty (30) days or more, the chief
of police is authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle or any part
thereof, in accordance with all applicable laws; provided however that no
vehicle or any part thereof shall be removed and impounded until after the
chief of police serves a notice of intention to impound the vehicle and after
the accused had the opportunity for a hearing in the circuit court with
competent jurisdiction. Such notice shall be given in the following manner:
      1.   Affixing a "police tow" notice on the vehicle; and
      2.   Personal service of the notice on the owner or any person in charge
or control of said property; or
      3.   Sending notice by regular and certified mail to the owner or any
person in charge or control of said property.
   Upon obtaining an appropriate court order, the chief of police is hereby
authorized to remove or have removed said vehicle. The enforcement of this
subsection is stayed when a hearing and/or decision is pending.
   F.   Such vehicle shall be impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of
in accordance with 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/4-203 et seq., and the
provisions of this chapter.
   G.   The chief of police may tow or cause to be towed any vehicle
inoperable, abandoned, parked, or otherwise kept in violation of the provisions
of this chapter to a suitable storage area.
   H.   The owner of the vehicle shall be responsible for the fees and expenses
of towing, storage, impounding and enforcement. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-5: CONTENTS OF NOTICE:
The notice under this chapter may contain the following information:
   A.   The name of the owner of the vehicle, if available;
   B.   A description of the vehicle (if applicable);
   C.   Location of the vehicle (if applicable);
   D.   The nature of the violation; and
   E.   The right to a pretow hearing (if applicable). (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-
2010)
8-5-6: RECORD SEARCHES:
When the identity of the owner of a vehicle is not known, the police department
will cause:
   A.   The vehicle registration records of the state to be searched by the
secretary of state for the purpose of obtaining the required ownership
information; and/or
   B.   The stolen motor vehicles files of the state police and the national
crime information center (NCIC) files to be searched by a directed
communication to the state police for stolen or wanted information on the
vehicle. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-2010)
8-5-7: DISPOSAL OF UNCLAIMED VEHICLES; RECLAIMED VEHICLES:
   A.   Disposal of unclaimed vehicles shall be as set forth in the motor
vehicle code of Illinois, as amended.
   B.   Any time before a vehicle is sold or disposed of as provided in this
chapter, the owner of the vehicle may reclaim the vehicle by presenting to the
police department and the commercial towing service having custody of the
vehicle, proof of ownership or proof of right to possession of the vehicle. No
vehicle shall be released until all fees and expenses of towing, storage,
impounding and enforcement have been paid, and shall be in addition to any
fines assessed in violation of this chapter, unless prohibited by law which
requires the release of the vehicle without paying such charges. The village,
in an action at law, may collect said fees and expenses. (Ord. 2010-07, 1-26-
2010)
8-5-8: PENALTY:
In addition to all other remedies, any person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
CHAPTER 6
FALSE ALARMS
SECTION:
8-6-1: Purpose
8-6-2: Definitions
8-6-3: Public Nuisance
8-6-4: Response To Alarms
8-6-5: Automatic Dialing Systems
8-6-6: Outside Audible Alarms
8-6-7: False Alarm Penalty
8-6-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this Chapter is to define and abate false alarms as public
nuisances. False alarms are hereby declared to be a detriment to the safety and
public welfare of the people of this Village. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
this Chapter:
ALARM: Any audible, visual, electronic or other signal indicating the
occurrence of an emergency.
ALARM SYSTEM: Any device designed to detect the occurrence of an emergency and
to transmit an alarm, or any device designed to transmit an alarm upon being
activated by a person. Alarm systems include, but are not limited to, burglar
alarms, hold-up alarms, fire alarms, automatic dialing systems and systems
utilizing an operator or central location to which signals are transferred.
ALARM USER: The property owner or person in control of any building, structure
or facility or portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEM: Any alarm system which upon being activated
automatically transmits by telephone line a recorded message or code signal
indicating the occurrence of an emergency, or the need for a response to an
emergency.
EMERGENCY: The occurrence of fire, smoke or combustion; unlawful forced entry
or burglary; robbery or other violent crime; flood, tornado, earthquake or
other natural disaster.
FALSE ALARM: The transmission by an alarm system of an alarm when an emergency
does not exist. False alarms shall not include alarms activated by:
   A.   Criminal activity or unauthorized entry;
   B.   Earthquake, hurricane or tornado winds causing structure damage to the
protected premises;
   C.   Flooding of the protected premises;
   D.   Lightning;
   E.   Fire causing damage to the protected premises;
   F.   Occasional telephone line malfunction, not repeated unrepaired line
trouble.
   If a false alarm has been identified to the Minooka Police Department to be
a false alarm, or authorized system test, or resulting from any other
nonemergency cause, prior to the time that a Minooka police officer is
dispatched to investigate the alarm, then the alarm shall not be considered a
false alarm for the purposes of this Chapter.
   There shall be a rebuttal presumption that an alarm is a false alarm if the
Police Department officers responding to the alarm check the premises upon
which the alarm system is installed, according to standard Minooka Police
Department procedures, and do not discover any evidence of an unauthorized
entry, criminal activity or other emergency.
   A false alarm transmitted by a newly installed or modified alarm system
shall not be considered a false alarm for the purposes of this Chapter, if the
false alarm is transmitted within fourteen (14) days of the installation or
modification to the alarm system.
KEY HOLDER: A person authorized by the alarm user to have access to the
protected premises and alarm system by use of a key or combination.
PERSON: Any individual, corporation, partnership, organization, firm,
association or other entity. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-3: PUBLIC NUISANCE:
A false alarm as defined in this Chapter is hereby declared to be a public
nuisance. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-4: RESPONSE TO ALARMS:
   A.   Whenever an alarm system is activated, thereby calling an emergency
response to the location by a member of the Police Department or Fire
Department, the police officer responding to the alarm shall inspect the area
protected by the system and determine whether or not the alarm was a false
alarm.
   B.   If the police officer in charge of the scene of the activated alarm
system determines the alarm to be false, the officer shall make a report of the
false alarm, a notification of which shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm
user advising of the false alarm. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-5: AUTOMATIC DIALING SYSTEMS:
   A.   Information on File: Alarm users of automatic dialing systems are
required to fill out and file an information card with the Minooka Police
Department and with the agency which is being called by the automatic dialer.
The information card shall contain the names of all key holders with regard to
the premises and alarm system; and the names of two (2) contact persons,
together with their work and home addresses, and their work, home, pager and
other telephone numbers at which they may be reached. The purpose of this
requirement is to have information as to the location and whereabouts of a
contact person, plus other information, readily available to the Police
Department in the event of an emergency or other situation.
   B.   Length of Message: Messages transmitted by automatic dialing systems
shall be no longer than forty five (45) seconds in length with an automatic
cutoff at the end of the message. The message must contain the location of the
building, not the mailing address. Messages longer than that allowable under
this Chapter are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Violations of the
provisions of this Section shall be considered a petty offense. (Ord. 1993-10,
8-10-1993)
8-6-6: OUTSIDE AUDIBLE ALARMS:
All outside audible alarms on burglar alarm systems are required to be of the
"resetting type" and capable of being deactivated by a key holder. All outside
audible alarms on burglar alarm systems that continue to signal for more than
thirty (30) minutes are considered a nuisance, and an alarm user maintaining
such an alarm system shall be guilty of a petty offense. Outside audible alarms
on fire alarm systems are not required to be of the "resetting type". All alarm
users of fire alarm systems on business or manufacturing establishments, as
defined in this Code, shall provide the Minooka Police Department with a list
of the key holders for their premises. (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
8-6-7: FALSE ALARM PENALTY:
   A.   General Penalty: Except as specifically limited hereafter, any person
convicted of a violation of any section or provision of this Chapter shall be
fined a sum not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any one offense.
   B.   Fire Alarm Systems: No alarm user of fire alarm systems shall permit,
allow or suffer their fire alarm system to transmit a false alarm. There shall
be no penalty under this Chapter for the first two (2) false alarms within any
twelve (12) month period, although warnings may be issued. In the event of
three (3) false alarms from premises on which the alarm user maintains a fire
alarm system, within any twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be not less
than seventy five dollars ($75.00). In the event of four (4) false alarms from
premises on which the alarm user maintains a fire alarm system, within any
twelve (12) month period, the fine shall not be less than one hundred fifty
dollars ($150.00). In the event of five (5) or more false alarms from premises
on which the alarm user maintains a fire alarm system, within any twelve (12)
month period, the fine shall not be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
   C.   Burglar Or Hold-Up Alarm Systems: No alarm user of burglar or hold-up
alarm systems shall permit, allow or suffer the burglar or hold-up alarm system
to transmit a false alarm. There shall be no penalty under this Chapter for the
first three (3) false alarms within any twelve (12) month period, although
warnings may be issued. In the event of four (4) false alarms from premises on
which the alarm user maintains a burglar or hold-up alarm system, within any
twelve (12) month period, the fine shall be not less than seventy five dollars
($75.00). In the event of five (5) false alarms from premises on which the
alarm user maintains a burglar or hold-up alarm system, within any twelve (12)
month period, the fine shall not be less than one hundred fifty dollars
($150.00). In the event of six (6) or more false alarms from premises on which
the alarm user maintains a burglar or hold-up alarm system, within any twelve
(12) month period, the fine shall not be less than two hundred dollars
($200.00). (Ord. 1993-10, 8-10-1993)
CHAPTER 7
VEHICLE SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT
SECTION:
8-7-1: Nuisance Declared
8-7-2: Seizure And Impoundment
8-7-3: Administrative Fee
8-7-4: Vehicle Possession
8-7-5: Probable Cause Hearing
8-7-6: Administrative Hearing
8-7-7: Failure To Pay
8-7-1: NUISANCE DECLARED:
   A.   Any motor vehicle used in connection with the following shall be
declared a public nuisance and subject to seizure and impoundment under this
chapter:
 
1. A violation of:
                   Operating a motor vehicle with an expired license, permit,
 625 ILCS 5/6-101  or a restricted driving permit if the period of expiration
                   is greater than 1 year, or operating a motor vehicle without
                   ever having been issued a driver's license or permit.
                   Driving while driver's license, permit or privilege to
                   operate a motor vehicle is suspended or revoked, except a
 625 ILCS 5/6-303  person whose driver's license, permit or privilege to
                   operate a motor vehicle is suspended only for an unpaid
                   citation (parking or moving) or a violation of 625 ILCS 5/13
                   et seq., the emissions inspection law.
2. A violation of:
                   Driving under the influence of alcohol, other drug or drugs,
 625 ILCS 5/11-501 intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination
                   thereof.
 
      3.   A person who is found to be in control of a motor vehicle against
whom a warrant has been issued by a circuit court for failing to appear to
answer charges that the person was: a) operating a motor vehicle with an
expired driver's license (625 ILCS 5/6-101); b) operating a motor vehicle while
that person's license was suspended or revoked (625 ILCS 5/6-303); or c)
operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, other drug or
drugs, intoxicating compound or compounds or any combination thereof (625 ILCS
5/11-501). (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
4. A violation of:
 720 ILCS 5/11-6                     Indecent solicitation of a child.
 720 ILCS 5/11-26                    Traveling to meet a minor.
 720 ILCS 5/12-2                     Aggravated assault.
 720 ILCS 5/12-3.05                  Aggravated battery.
 720 ILCS 5/12-7.3                   Stalking.
 720 ILCS 5/16-25                    Retail theft, when the full retail value
                                     of the merchandise exceeds $150.00.
 720 ILCS 5/18-1                     Robbery.
 720 ILCS 5/18-2                     Armed robbery.
 720 ILCS 5/19-1                     Burglary.
 720 ILCS 5/19-3                     Residential burglary.
 720 ILCS 5/20-1                     Arson.
 720 ILCS 5/20-1.1                   Aggravated arson.
 720 ILCS 5/20-2                     Possession of explosives or explosive or
                                     incendiary devices.
 720 ILCS 5/21-1                     Criminal damage to property.
 720 ILCS 5/25-1(a)(1) or 5/25-1(d)  Mob action.
(Ord. 2012-15, 6-26-2012)
5. A violation of:
 720 ILCS 550/4                      Possession of more than 30 grams of any
                                     substance containing cannabis.
                                     Manufacture, delivery, or possession
 720 ILCS 550/5                      with intent to deliver or manufacture
                                     prohibited.
 720 ILCS 550/5.1                    Cannabis trafficking.
 720 ILCS 550/5.2                    Delivery of cannabis on school grounds.
 720 ILCS 550/8                      Unauthorized production or possession of
                                     Cannabis sativa plant.
(Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016)
6. A violation of:
                                     Manufacture of controlled or counterfeit
 720 ILCS 570/401                    substance or controlled substance analog
                                     prohibited.
 720 ILCS 570/401.1                  Controlled substance trafficking.
 720 ILCS 570/402(a), 570/402(b), or Possession of controlled or counterfeit
 570/402(c)                          substance.
(Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
7. A violation of:
                                     Possession of drug paraphernalia, except
                                     where the drug paraphernalia is seized
 720 ILCS 600/3.5                    alone or during a violation of
                                     subsection (a) of section 4 of the
                                     Cannabis Control Act.
 
   (Ord. 2016-31, 9-21-2016)
   B.   Any motor vehicle which is used in connection with the following shall
be declared a public nuisance and subject to seizure and impoundment under this
chapter:
 
A violation of:
 720 ILCS 5/24-1   Unlawful use of weapon.
 720 ILCS 5/24-1.5 Reckless discharge of a firearm.
 720 ILCS 5/24-3.1 Unlawful possession of firearms and firearm ammunition.
 720 ILCS 5/24-3.3 Unlawful sale or delivery of firearms on the premises of any
                   school.
 
   This subsection shall not apply when the exemptions are satisfied as set
forth in 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-2.
   C.   Any motor vehicle which is used or operated in the commission of, or in
the attempt to commit, an offense for which a motor vehicle may be seized and
forfeited pursuant to 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 of the Criminal
Code, shall be declared a nuisance and subject to seizure and impoundment under
this chapter. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-2: SEIZURE AND IMPOUNDMENT:
Whenever a police officer has probable cause to believe that a motor vehicle is
subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the police officer
shall provide for the towing of the motor vehicle according to Police
Department procedures. When the motor vehicle is towed, the police officer
shall notify or make a reasonable attempt to notify the owner, lessee, or
person identifying himself or herself as the owner or lessee of the vehicle, or
the person who is found to be in control of the motor vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation, if there is such a person, of the fact of the seizure
and of the motor vehicle owner's right to request a hearing. Said motor vehicle
shall be impounded pending the completion of the hearings provided for in this
chapter, unless the owner of the motor vehicle posts with the Village a cash
bond as set forth in section
8-7-3 of this chapter. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-3: ADMINISTRATIVE FEE:
In addition to all other remedies, the owner of record of such motor vehicle
subject to seizure and impoundment shall be liable to the Village for an
administrative fee as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. This chapter is in addition to and shall not replace or
otherwise abrogate any existing State or Federal laws or any ordinance that
relates to the seizure and/or impoundment of motor vehicles, and any fee in
this chapter shall be in addition to any and all penalties that may be assessed
or imposed by a court for any criminal charges. This chapter shall not apply:
(Ord. 2019-08, 2-26-2019)
   A.   If the motor vehicle used in the violation was stolen at that time and
the theft was reported to the appropriate police authorities within twenty four
(24) hours after the theft was discovered;
   B.   If the motor vehicle is operating as a common carrier and the violation
occurs without the knowledge of the person in control of the motor vehicle; or
   C.   If the motor vehicle is subject to successful forfeiture proceedings
under 725 Illinois Compiled Statutes 150/1 et seq., the Drug Asset Forfeiture
Procedure Act; 720 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/36-1 et seq., the seizure and
forfeiture of vessels, vehicles and aircraft act; or state or federal
forfeiture laws.
For purposes of this chapter, the "owner of record" or "owner" of a motor
vehicle is the record titleholder as registered with the secretary of state,
state of Illinois, or similar entity in a different state or a lessee who has
possession, use, control and responsibility of the vehicle. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-
20-2011)
8-7-4: VEHICLE POSSESSION:
   A.   Except as provided otherwise in this chapter, a motor vehicle shall
continue to be impounded until:
      1.   The administrative fee, plus any applicable towing and storage
charges, are paid, in which case possession of the motor vehicle shall be given
to the person who is legally entitled to possess the motor vehicle;
      2.   A finding that a violation of this chapter did not occur after a
probable cause hearing or an administrative hearing; or
      3.   The motor vehicle is sold or otherwise disposed of to satisfy a
judgment to enforce a lien as provided by law.
   B.   Except as otherwise specifically provided by law, no owner, lienholder
or other person shall be legally entitled to take possession of a motor vehicle
impounded under this chapter until the civil fees applicable under this chapter
have been paid. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-5: PROBABLE CAUSE HEARING:
If the owner of a motor vehicle seized pursuant to this chapter requests a
probable cause hearing, said owner must make a request for said probable cause
hearing within forty eight (48) hours of the seizure and impoundment. Said
request shall be made in person and in writing at the police department
administrative offices, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. using the probable cause tow hearing
request form. If the request for a probable cause hearing is timely filed, the
chief of police or his designee shall conduct such probable cause hearing
within twenty four (24) hours after the request, or by a date mutually
agreeable to the parties, Monday through Friday, excluding holidays, nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. All interested persons shall be
given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the probable cause hearing. The
formal rules of evidence will not apply and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible. If, after the probable cause hearing, the chief of police or his
designee determines there is probable cause to believe that the motor vehicle
is subject to seizure and impoundment pursuant to this chapter, the chief of
police or his designee shall order the continued impoundment of the motor
vehicle, as provided in this chapter, unless the owner of the motor vehicle
posts with the village a cash bond as set forth in section
8-7-3 of this chapter. However, if the chief of police or his designee finds
that no such violation occurred, the chief of police or his designee shall
order the return of the motor vehicle or cash bond, but the owner shall be
responsible for any towing and storage charges. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-6: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING:
Within ten (10) days after a motor vehicle is seized and impounded pursuant to
this chapter, or within ten (10) days after the conclusion of forfeiture
proceedings, the village shall notify by certified mail, return receipt
requested, or by personal service, the owner of record of the date, time and
location of an administrative hearing, unless the owner affirmatively waives
the right to a hearing. The notice shall state the fees that may be imposed,
and that a motor vehicle not released by cash bond and remaining in the village
may be sold or disposed of by the village in accordance with applicable law.
The hearing shall be conducted and held, unless the motor vehicle was subject
to successful forfeiture proceedings pursuant to applicable state or federal
forfeiture laws, no later than forty six (46) days after the motor vehicle was
seized, unless continued by the owner or by order of the hearing officer; or
unless the motor vehicle was subject to unsuccessful forfeiture proceedings, in
which case the hearing shall be conducted and held, unless continued by the
owner or by order of the hearing officer, no later than forty six (46) days
after the conclusion of the forfeiture proceedings. The hearing officer shall
be an attorney licensed to practice law in the state of Illinois for a minimum
of three (3) years. All interested persons shall be given a reasonable
opportunity to be heard at the hearing. At any time prior to the hearing date,
the hearing officer may, at the request of either party, direct witnesses to
appear and give testimony at the hearing. The formal rules of evidence will not
apply at the hearing and hearsay evidence shall be admissible. If, after the
hearing, the hearing officer determines by a preponderance of evidence that the
motor vehicle, operated with the permission, express or implied, of the owner,
was used in the commission of any of the violations set forth in this chapter,
and that none of the exceptions apply, the hearing officer shall enter an order
finding the owner of record of the motor vehicle civilly liable to the village
for an administrative fee in the amount as set forth in section
8-7-3 of this chapter, which shall constitute a debt due and owing to the
village. If the owner of record fails to appear at the hearing, the hearing
officer shall enter a default order finding the owner of record of the motor
vehicle civilly liable to the village for an administrative fee in the amount
as set forth in section
8-7-3 of this chapter, which shall constitute a debt due and owing to the
village, and a copy of which default order shall be sent to the registered
owner via certified mail, return receipt requested. If a cash bond has been
posted, the bond shall be applied. If a motor vehicle has been impounded when
such administrative fee is imposed, the village may seek to obtain a judgment
on the debt and enforce such judgment against the motor vehicle as provided by
law. However, if the hearing officer finds that no such violation occurred, the
hearing officer shall order the return of the motor vehicle or cash bond, but
the owner shall be responsible for any towing and storage charges. All final
decisions of the hearing officer shall be subject to review under the
provisions of 735 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-101 et seq., the
administrative review law. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
8-7-7: FAILURE TO PAY:
If the administrative fee and towing and storage charges are not paid:
   A.   After the time for an administrative hearing has expired, or
   B.   Within thirty five (35) days after entry of an administrative fee
against an owner of record after an administrative hearing and the owner did
not file a petition for administrative review, or
   C.   Within thirty five (35) days after an action seeking administrative
review has been resolved in favor of the village,
the village shall be authorized to dispose of said vehicle (including contents
and license plates) in the manner provided by law for the disposition of
unclaimed motor vehicles. (Ord. 2011-30, 12-20-2011)
TITLE 9
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
CHAPTER 1
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
9-1-1 Traffic Code Adopted
9-1-2 Obedience To Traffic Control Devices, Police Officers
9-1-3 Interference With Official Traffic Control Devices
9-1-4 Driving On Right Side Of Roadway, Exceptions
9-1-5 Passing Vehicles Proceeding In Opposite Directions
9-1-6 Overtaking Vehicle On The Left
9-1-7 Following Too Closely
9-1-8 Starting Parked Vehicles
9-1-9 When Signal Required
9-1-10 Entering Through Highway
9-1-11 Yield Right Of Way Intersections, Streets
9-1-12 Stop Streets
9-1-13 Entering Highway From Alley, Private Road Or Driveway
9-1-14 Pedestrians' Right Of Way At Crosswalks
9-1-15 Following Emergency Vehicles Prohibited
9-1-16 Parking In Prohibited Parking Spaces
9-1-17 Speed Restrictions
9-1-18 Bicycles, Electric Bicycles, And Gas Bicycles
9-1-19 Distracted Driving
9-1-20 Prohibited Parking; Vehicles Obstructing Vision
9-1-21 Vehicle Weight Limitations; Exceptions; Permit
9-1-22 Exhibition Driving
9-1-23 Prohibited Parking; Trailers, Mobile Homes, Boats And Recreational
Vehicles
9-1-24 Prohibited Parking During Snow Removal Operations
9-1-25 Engine Braking Prohibited
9-1-26 Adoption Of State Law (Rep. by Ord. 2010-22, 8-24-2010)
9-1-27 Violations, Penalties
9-1-28 Suspension Of Driving Privileges
9-1-29: Electric Scooters
9-1-30: Golf Carts
9-1-1: TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED:
   A.   In order to control and regulate traffic within the village there is
hereby adopted the Illinois vehicle code, being particularly 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein.
   B.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-40-1 and 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208(a)(7), the village hereby adopts Illinois Compiled
Statutes chapter 625, act 5, chapter 15, including, but not limited to, its
numbering system, size, weight, load regulations, permits, and violations/
penalties, by reference and it is incorporated as a part of this code as if set
out at length herein.
   C.   Pursuant to 65 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-80-2 and 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-208(a)(2) and 5/11-208(a)(15), the village hereby adopts
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/3-401(d) and 5/3-815, including its numbering
system, schedules and violations/penalties, by reference and it is incorporated
as a part of this code as if set out at length herein. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-
2010)
9-1-2: OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, POLICE OFFICERS:
   A.   No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the instructions of any official
traffic control device placed in accordance with the ordinances of the village,
unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer.
   B.   No person shall wilfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
or direction of any police officer invested by law with authority to direct,
control or regulate traffic. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-3: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES:
No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact alter, deface,
injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device or any
railroad sign or signal or any inscription, shield or insignia thereon, or any
other part thereof. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-4: DRIVING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY, EXCEPTIONS:
Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the right
half of the roadway, except as follows:
   A.   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement.
   B.   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair.
   C.   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a private
road or driveway. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-5: PASSING VEHICLES PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS:
Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other to
the right; and upon roadways having width for not more than one line of traffic
in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-half (1/2)
of the main traveled portion of the roadway as nearly as possible. (Ord. 1960-
2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-6: OVERTAKING VEHICLE ON THE LEFT:
The following rules shall govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles
proceeding in the same direction, subject to those limitations, exceptions and
special rules hereinafter stated:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall pass to the left thereof at a safe distance and shall not
again drive to the right side of the roadway until safely clear of the
overtaken vehicle.
   B.   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
driver of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his
vehicle until completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
   C.   No person shall pass another vehicle within one hundred feet (100') of
an intersection or within one hundred feet (100') of a railroad crossing.
   D.   No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction unless such left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming
traffic for a sufficient distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing
to be completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any
vehicle approaching from the opposite direction or any vehicle overtaken. In
every event the overtaking vehicle must return to the right side of the roadway
before coming within one hundred feet (100') of any vehicle approaching from
the opposite direction, or within one hundred feet (100') of an intersection or
railroad crossing. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-7: FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY:
The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such vehicle
and the traffic upon and the condition of the roadway. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-8: STARTING PARKED VEHICLES:
No person shall start or place in motion a vehicle which is stopped, standing
or parked unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety.
(Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-9: WHEN SIGNAL REQUIRED:
   A.   No person shall turn a vehicle from a direct course upon a roadway
unless and until such movement can be made with reasonable safety, and then
only after giving a clearly audible signal by sounding the horn, if any
pedestrian may be affected by such movement or after giving an appropriate
signal in the manner provided by law, in the event any other vehicle may be
affected by such movement.
   B.   A signal of intention to turn right or left shall be given during the
last one hundred feet (100') traveled by the vehicle before turning.
   C.   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear when there is opportunity to give
such signal. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-10: ENTERING THROUGH HIGHWAY:
The driver of a vehicle shall stop at the entrance to a through street and
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersection from said through street or which are approaching so closely on
said through street as to constitute an immediate hazard; but said driver
having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval occurs. (Ord.
1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-11: YIELD RIGHT OF WAY INTERSECTIONS, STREETS:
   A.   The driver of a vehicle in obedience to a yield right of way sign shall
reduce the speed of his vehicle to not more than twenty (20) miles per hour and
shall yield the right of way to other vehicles which have entered the
intersecting highway either from the right or left or which are approaching so
closely on said intersecting highway as to constitute an immediate hazard; but
said driver having so yielded may proceed at such time as a safe interval
occurs. (Ord. 60-2, 3-1-1960)
   B.   "Yield right of way" means the act of granting the privilege of the
immediate use of the intersecting roadway to traffic within the intersection
and to vehicles approaching from the right or left; provided, that when the
roadway is clear, the vehicle may proceed into the intersection.
   C.   The streets and parts of streets of the village designated by this
section as right of way streets are hereby declared to be right of way streets.
The driver of a vehicle approaching the entrance to a right of way street shall
yield the right of way to other vehicles on a right of way street which have
entered the intersection or which are approaching from the right or the left so
close as to constitute a hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with.
   D.   Adequate official yield right of way signs designating the right of way
streets shall be erected. (Ord. 1958-4, 4-1-1958; amd. 1997 Code)
9-1-12: STOP STREETS:
The streets and parts of streets of the village designated as stop streets are
hereby declared to be stop streets. The driver of a vehicle shall stop at an
intersection with a stop street, and shall cautiously proceed, yielding to the
vehicles not so obliged to stop, which are with the intersection or approaching
so close as to constitute a hazard, unless traffic at such intersection is
controlled by a police officer on duty, in which event the directions of the
police officer shall be complied with. (Ord. 1958-4, 4-1-1958; amd. 1997 Code)
9-1-13: ENTERING HIGHWAY FROM ALLEY, PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY:
The driver of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from an alley or a
private road or driveway shall yield the right of way to all vehicles
approaching on said highway. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-14: PEDESTRIANS' RIGHT OF WAY AT CROSSWALKS:
   A.   Where traffic control signals are not in place or in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right of way, slowing down or stopping if
need be to so yield, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within any marked
crosswalk or within any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, except as
otherwise provided in this chapter.
   B.   Whenever any vehicle is stopped, at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection, to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle. (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-15: FOLLOWING EMERGENCY VEHICLES PROHIBITED:
The driver of any motor vehicle other than one on official business shall not
follow any emergency apparatus traveling in response to a call closer than five
hundred feet (500'). (Ord. 1960-2, 3-1-1960)
9-1-16: PARKING IN PROHIBITED PARKING SPACES:
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any of the following places:
   A.   In an alley or alleyway so as to interfere with traffic or emergency
vehicles traveling through the alley.
   B.   Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant or so as to block the use
of a fire hydrant.
   C.   On a roadway so as to impair the vision of traffic at an intersection.
   D.   On the left of any roadway.
   E.   In zones marked "No Parking". (Ord. 2012-14, 6-26-2012)
   F.   In parking spaces designated for "Handicapped Parking" in violation of
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 or in violation of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5. (Ord. 2013-04, 1-22-2013)
   G.   In areas designated and posted "No Overnight Parking". This shall apply
to any municipal parking areas or any private areas falling within the
guidelines of the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
209.
   H.   In areas designated and posted by sign, during the hours, dates and/or
time period specified on said sign.
   I.   Vehicles shall park in designated parking stalls. It is prohibited to
park vehicles on grass on all public property, unless permitted by the village.
   J.   On the driveway of Aux Sable Springs Park.
   K.   Upon any portion of a sidewalk so as to encroach or otherwise obstruct
the sidewalk, unless the sidewalk has been designated and posted as a permitted
parking area.
   L.   On a crosswalk.
   M.   In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
   N.   In a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2)
right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly
established curb line, except upon those streets that have been marked for
angle parking where the vehicle is parked at the angle to the curb indicated by
the marking. (Ord. 2012-14, 6-26-2012; amd. Ord. 2015-23, 9-22-2015; Ord. 2023-
26, 6-27-2023)
9-1-17: SPEED RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   No person shall drive any vehicle upon any public highway of the
village at a speed which: 1) is greater than is reasonable and proper with
regard to traffic conditions and the use of the highway, or endangers the
safety of any person or property; or 2) is greater than the applicable maximum
speed limit established by this section. The fact that the speed of a vehicle
does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the driver
from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and crossing an intersection,
when approaching and going around a curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when
traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway, or when special hazard exists
with respect to pedestrians or other traffic or by reason of weather or highway
conditions; and speed shall be decreased as may be necessary to avoid colliding
with any person or vehicle on or entering the highway in compliance with legal
requirements and the duty of all persons to use due care.
   B.   Unless otherwise posted by a uniform traffic sign, the maximum speed
limits on all streets which are within the corporate limits of the village and
which are not under the jurisdiction of the state of Illinois department of
transportation and for which any county or highway commissioner does not have
the maintenance responsibilities, shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour in a
residential district and fifteen (15) miles per hour in an alley. Signs may be
installed at the entrances to subdivisions indicating a speed limit of twenty
five (25) miles per hour unless otherwise posted.
   C.   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to impede
or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when reduced
speed is necessary for safe operation of his vehicle or in compliance with law.
(Ord. 2014-21, 6-24-2014)
9-1-18: BICYCLES, ELECTRIC BICYCLES, AND GAS BICYCLES:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
 
BICYCLE: Every device propelled by human power upon which any person may
         ride, having two tandem wheels except scooters and similar devices.
ELECTRIC A bicycle equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor
BICYCLE: of less than 750 watts.
        A “low-speed electric bicycle” is not a moped or a motor driven
         cycle.
GAS      A 2-wheeled or 3-wheeled device with fully operable pedals and a
BICYCLE: gasoline motor of less than one horsepower.
         A moped is a motor-driven cycle, with or without optional power
MOPED:   derived from manually operated pedals, with a motor that produces 2
         brake horsepower or less.
 
   B.   Operating a Bicycle, Electric Bicycle, or Gas Bicycle Prohibited:
Bicycles are prohibited from being ridden on the sidewalk on the north side of
Mondamin Street between Wabena Avenue and the alley located west of Massasoit
Street.
      Electric Bicycles and Gas Bicycles are prohibited from being ridden on
the street or sidewalk on Mondamin Street between Wabena Avenue and the alley
located west of Massasoit Street.
   C.   Penalties: Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to the following fines:
      1.   First offense within a twelve (12) month period: Sixty dollars
($60.00).
      2.   Second offense within the same twelve (12) month period: One hundred
twenty dollars ($120.00).
      3.   Third or subsequent offense within the same twelve (12) month
period: Two hundred forty dollars ($240.00).
To the extent that any violation of this section also constitutes a violation
of a criminal statute of the State of Illinois, then the violator shall also be
subject to criminal prosecution. (1977 Code; amd. Ord. 1990-13, 10-11-1990;
Ord. 2025-30, 9-23-2025)
9-1-19: DISTRACTED DRIVING:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
   ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION DEVICE: An electronic device, including, but not
limited to, a handheld wireless telephone, handheld personal digital assistant,
or a portable or mobile computer, but does not include a global positioning
system or navigation system or a device that is physically or electronically
integrated into the motor vehicle.
   NEGLIGENTLY OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE: Operating a motor vehicle on a
roadway while using an electronic communication device.
   B.   Distracted Driving Prohibited: It shall be unlawful and a nuisance for
any person to negligently operate a motor vehicle upon any roadway in the
Village.
   C.   Exceptions: This section does not apply to:
      1.   A law enforcement officer or operator of an emergency vehicle while
performing his or her official duties;
      2.   A driver using an electronic communication device for the sole
purpose of reporting an emergency situation and continued communication with
emergency personnel during the emergency situation;
      3.   A driver using an electronic communication device in handsfree or
voice operated mode, which may include the use of a headset;
      4.   A driver of a commercial motor vehicle reading a message displayed
on a permanently installed communication device designed for a commercial motor
vehicle with a screen that does not exceed ten inches tall by ten inches wide
(10" x 10") in size;
      5.   A driver using an electronic communication device while parked on
the shoulder of a roadway;
      6.   A driver using an electronic communication device when the vehicle
is stopped due to normal traffic being obstructed and the driver has the motor
vehicle transmission in neutral or park;
      7.   A driver using two-way or citizens band radio services;
      8.   A driver using two-way mobile radio transmitters or receivers for
licensees of the Federal Communications Commission in the amateur radio
service;
      9.   A driver using an electronic communication device by pressing a
single button to initiate or terminate a voice communication; or
      10.   A driver using an electronic communication device capable of
performing multiple functions, other than a handheld wireless telephone or
handheld personal digital assistant (for example, a fleet management system,
dispatching device, citizens band radio, or music player) for a purpose that is
not otherwise prohibited by this section.
   D.   Violation; Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, every person who
violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this section
shall be sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2014-24, 7-22-2014)
9-1-20: PROHIBITED PARKING; VEHICLES OBSTRUCTING VISION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a truck, van, camper or any vehicle
that tends to restrict or obstruct the vision toward oncoming traffic of
drivers of parked vehicles at the following locations in Minooka, Illinois:
   In adjacent parking space on the north side of Mondamin Street, from Osceola
Street to Wabena Avenue, and on Mondamin Street west of Massasoit Street to the
north-south alley between Mondamin Street to St. Mary's Street.
   In an adjacent parking space on the north side of Mondamin Street, from
Wabena Street east to the north-south alley between Mondamin Street and St.
Mary's Street.
In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects or refuses to comply with this section shall be sentenced as provided
in section
1-4-1 of this Code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
9-1-21: VEHICLE WEIGHT LIMITATIONS; EXCEPTIONS; PERMIT:
   A.   Maximum Weight On Nondesignated Roads: All Municipal roads shall be
classified as nondesignated unless State or County designated, signposted, as
provided by ordinance, or as set forth in this chapter. The maximum weight
permitted on all nondesignated Municipal roads shall be five (5) tons, except
for the following:
      40 ton:
         East Minooka Road (Ridge Road to North Tabler Road)
         Grainger Way
         Mid Point Road
         North Internationale Parkway
         North McLindon Road (the CSX railroad crossing to Minooka Road)
         Ottawa Drive
         Ridge Road
         Serena Court
         South Internationale Parkway
         Twin Rail Drive
         West Mondamin Street (Ridge Road to Minooka Road)
      25 ton:
         South McLindon Road (the CSX railroad crossing to Twin Rail Drive)
      8 ton:
         Bell Road
         Brannick Road
         County Line Road
         East Mondamin Street
         Hare Road
         Holt Road
         Industrial Avenue
         North Tabler Road
         South McLindon Road (Twin Rail Drive to U.S. Route 6)
         Wabena Road (Holt Road to McEvilly Road)
         Wildy Road (Ridge Road west to the Village limits)
   B.   Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits On A
Nondesignated Municipal Road: It shall be unlawful to operate on any
nondesignated Municipal road any motor vehicle with a gross weight, including
load, in excess of maximum weight limits, or in excess of special weight limits
provided for by ordinance and signposted without having first obtained an
overweight permit from the Police Chief or his designee.
      This subsection shall not apply to the following:
      1.   Any road which has been designated by the Village as a construction
entrance;
      2.   Garbage trucks, tow trucks, school buses, ambulances, firefighting
vehicles, snowplows, street maintenance vehicles, local delivery box trucks
(trucks with a boxlike cargo area that may or may not be separated from the cab
of the truck and used primarily for local deliveries of baked goods, beverages,
food, ice, milk, parcels or packages), emergency vehicles; and
      3.   Vehicles traveling from an origin point within the Village to a
destination outside the Village, or vehicles traveling to a destination within
the Village, and the origin point or destination is on a road on which the
vehicle would be otherwise prohibited, so long as the vehicle deviates from the
road(s) on which the vehicle is permitted by the shortest permissible route.
      Except that any of the aforesaid vehicles in excess of eighty thousand
(80,000) pounds must first obtain an overweight permit from the Police Chief or
his designee.
   C.   Vehicles With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Eighty Thousand Pounds On A
Designated Municipal Road: It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle with a
gross weight, including load in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds on a
designated Municipal road, without first having obtained an overweight permit
from the Police Chief or his designee.
   D.   Application For Overweight Permit: Application for all overweight
permits shall be submitted through the Village’s designated third-party vendor
and shall include at a minimum:
      1.   The type of vehicle(s);
      2.   The weight to be transported;
      3.   The content to be transported;
      4.   The number of trips required;
      5.   The route to be taken by the vehicles;
      6.   The destination of the vehicles within the Village; and
      7.   The name of the carrier, if different than the applicant.
   E.   Issuance Of Overweight Permit: Upon submission of the overweight permit
application and required payment through the Village’s designated third party
vendor, the Police Chief or his or her designee may authorize issuance of the
overweight permit, subject to the following conditions:
      1.   In consideration of seasonal or other time limitations, the Police
Chief or his designee shall restrict the number or time of daily trips
authorized by each overweight permit, as is consistent with the public safety.
      2.   In establishing the routes to be traveled, the Police Chief or his
designee may establish the most direct and shortest route consistent with the
public safety, taking into consideration existing traffic, the character of the
road or roads, and the configuration of the terrain.
      3.   All overweight permits shall be nontransferable and shall be valid
only for the applicant or his agent or employee and the specific vehicle listed
on the application.
      4.   Every overweight permit shall be carried in the vehicle to which it
refers and shall be open to inspection by any police officer or agent of the
Village.
      5.   No refunds of the overweight permit fee shall be made to the
applicant following the issuance of an overweight permit.
      6.   The applicant shall comply with all Village, State, County, and
township ordinances, regulations and requirements.
      7.   Altering or falsifying a permit will revoke overweight permit
privileges for twelve (12) months.
   F.   Fee Schedule For Overweight Permit, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In
Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits On A Nondesignated Municipal Road: Overweight
permits for a motor vehicle with a gross weight, including load, in excess of
maximum weight limits but a gross weight equal to or less than eighty thousand
(80,000) pounds, or in excess of special weight limits provided for by
ordinance and signposted, may be applied for and may be granted in accordance
with the following schedule:
      1.   Single trip permit: Thirty dollars ($30.00).
      2.   Round trip permit: Fifty dollars ($50.00).
      3.   Thirty (30) day permit: Seventy five dollars ($75.00).
      4.   Applicable transaction fees charged by the Village’s authorized
third-party vendor may be added to amounts paid pursuant to the fee schedule.
   G.   Fee Schedule For Overweight Permit, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In
Excess Of Eighty Thousand Pounds: Overweight permits for a motor vehicle with a
gross weight, including load in excess of eighty thousand (80,000) pounds for
single trips and round trips may be applied for and may be granted according to
the fee schedule as set forth in section 9-1-1 of this chapter, to which may be
added applicable transaction fees charged by the Village’s authorized third-
party vendor below:
Gross weight Permit Fee*
Gross weight      Permit Fee*
80,000 - 100,000  $48.71
100,001-140,000   $146.14
140,001 - 160,000 $194.85
160,001-180,000   $243.57
180,001-200,000   $292.28
> 200,001*        TBD
*   Use formula for weights exceeding 200,000 lbs
**   Double for round-trip
*One-way Permit Fee = ((((Gross weight/80,000)*100) -100)*0.018*0.03*0.01)
*Estimated Roadway Repair Cost
 
   In addition to the permit fees listed in this Section, applicants are
responsible for payment of all applicable transaction fees and service fees
charged by the Village’s authorized third-party vendor. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-
2010; amd. Ord. 2010-22, 8-24-2010; Ord. 2018-05, 1-23-2018; Ord. 2018-23, 8-
28-2018; Ord. 2020-22, 8-25-2020; Ord. 2024-14, 3-26-2024; Ord. 2024-19, 4-23-
2024)
9-1-22: EXHIBITION DRIVING:
   A.   Any person who shall engage in any "exhibition driving" as herein
defined, upon any highway or street or any other place open to the general
public, including any area designated for the parking of motor vehicles, shall
upon conviction, be fined as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code for any one offense. (Ord., 4-14-1980; amd. 1997 Code)
   B.   "Exhibition driving" is defined as the driving of a motor vehicle in
such a manner or out of the usual flow of traffic, whether or not other traffic
is present, so as to likely attract the attention of the public, whether or not
there is anyone present and shall consist of one or more of the following acts:
      1.   Rapid acceleration.
      2.   Squealing, peeling or burning of the tires.
      3.   The swaying of a motor vehicle from side to side, commonly referred
to as "fishtailing".
      4.   Racing or running the engine of a motor vehicle at such high
revolutions per minute, combined with the engaging of the gears, causing
excessive or unusual noise.
      5.   Unnecessary and excessive changing of lanes.
      6.   The emission of any unreasonably loud or raucous or disturbing noise
from the engine or exhaust system of any motor vehicle. (Ord., 4-14-1980)
9-1-23: PROHIBITED PARKING; TRAILERS, MOBILE HOMES, BOATS AND RECREATIONAL
VEHICLES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park or store any of the following on
any public street, alley, roadway, highway or other public way, or on any
village property, within the village: any trailer, camping trailer, travel
trailer or mobile home; any recreational vehicle or boat; or any utility
trailer or trailer used for hauling, including, but not limited to, trailers
designed to haul equipment, snowmobiles, motorcycles or boats. (Ord. 1994-5, 4-
12-1994)
9-1-24: PROHIBITED PARKING DURING SNOW REMOVAL OPERATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any highway,
street, or alley within the village when snow shall have accumulated to a depth
of two inches (2") or more on such highway, street, or alley. It shall be
unlawful to so park from the time of such accumulation until the snow has been
removed. In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this section shall be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. Each occurrence shall constitute a
separate offense. Members of the police department are hereby authorized to
cause any vehicle parked in violation of this section to be removed from the
highway, street, or alley, at the expense of the owner of the vehicle, pursuant
to applicable statutes. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
9-1-25: ENGINE BRAKING PROHIBITED:
   A.   Prohibition: No person shall operate or cause to be operated at or upon
any municipal road any compression/release engine brake (engine braking) on any
vehicle. For purposes of this section, a compression/release engine brake
(engine braking) is a mechanical exhaust device designed to aid in the braking
or deceleration of any vehicle by converting engine power to compressed air
which results in additional, excessive, loud or explosive noise from such
vehicle. (Ord. 2005-06, 2-8-2005)
   B.   Penalty: In addition to all other remedies, every person who violates,
disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with this section shall be
sentenced as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code for each offense. (Ord. 2011-29, 12-20-2011)
9-1-26: ADOPTION OF STATE LAW:
(Rep. by Ord. 2010-22, 8-24-2010)
9-1-27: VIOLATIONS, PENALTIES:
   A.   Violations, Penalties Generally: Unless otherwise stated, any person
who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-2010)
   B.   Penalty, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Maximum Weight Limits
On A Nondesignated Municipal Road: Any person who violates this section
operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of maximum weight limits on a
nondesignated municipal road, in addition to any other fines and penalties as
provided by law/ordinance, shall be fined a minimum of five hundred dollars
($500.00) and a maximum as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; except that a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of
eighty thousand (80,000) pounds may be subject to the fines and penalties as
set forth in subsection C of this section. Prior to release of a vehicle with a
gross weight in excess of the maximum weight limits as set forth in section
9-1-21 of this chapter on a nondesignated road, a sufficient bond must be
posted. Each occurrence shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-22, 8-
24-2010)
   C.   Penalty, Vehicle With A Gross Weight In Excess Of Prescribed Weight
Limits: Any person who violates this section operating a vehicle with a gross
weight in excess of prescribed weight limits, in addition to any other fines
and penalties as provided by law/ordinance, shall be subject to the fines and
penalties as follows:
      1.   Weight: Whenever any vehicle is operated in violation of the
provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, the owner or driver of
such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation and either the owner or
the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person
charged with a violation of any of these provisions who pleads not guilty shall
be present in court for the trial on the charge. Any person, firm or
corporation convicted of any violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-
111, as enforced by the village, including, but not limited to, a maximum axle
or gross limit specified on a regulatory sign posted in accordance with
paragraphs (g) or (h) of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111, in addition
to any surcharge, court costs, and fees, shall be fined according to the
following schedule:
Pounds Overweight          Fine
Up to and including 2,000  $100.00
From 2,001 - 2,500         270.00
From 2,501 - 3,000         330.00
From 3,001 - 3,500         520.00
From 3,501 - 4,000         600.00
From 4,001 - 4,500         850.00
From 4,501 - 5,000         950.00
                           The fine shall be computed by assessing $1,500.00
From 5,001 or more         for the first 5,000 pounds overweight and $150.00
                           for each additional increment of 500 pounds
                           overweight or fraction thereof.
 
   In addition, any person, firm or corporation convicted of four (4) or more
violations of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-111 within any twelve (12)
month period shall be fined an additional amount of five thousand dollars
($5,000.00) for the fourth and each subsequent conviction within the twelve
(12) month period. Provided, however, that with regard to a firm or
corporation, a fourth or subsequent conviction shall mean a fourth or
subsequent conviction attributable to any one employee-driver1. 625 ILCS 5/15-
113(a).1.
      2.   Width, Height, Length Of Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is operated
in violation of the provisions of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-102, 5/
15-103 or 5/15-107, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty
of such violation and either may be prosecuted for such violation. Any person,
firm or corporation convicted of any violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-102, 5/15-103 or 5/15-107, shall be fined for the first or second
conviction an amount equal to not less than fifty dollars ($50.00), nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and for the third and subsequent
convictions by the same person, firm or corporation within a period of one year
after the date of the first offense, not less than five hundred dollars
($500.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00)2. 625 ILCS 5/15-113
(b).2.
      3.   Sentence Of Permit Moves: Whenever any vehicle is operated in
violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions of 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as enforced by the
village, by operating under a fraudulent permit or under a permit not
specifically covering the move, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be
deemed guilty of a business offense and either the owner or the driver of such
vehicle may be prosecuted for such violation. When any person, firm or
corporation is convicted of such violation, the permit shall be null and void
and such person, firm or corporation shall be fined in an amount not less than
ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound the gross weight of the vehicle
exceeds the gross weight of such vehicles allowable under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-111. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in
addition to any penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-301(j) as enforced by the village1. 625 ILCS 5/15-113.1.1.
4. Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Axle Weights: Whenever any vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions
of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as enforced by the
village, by operating with axle weights in excess of those authorized in such
permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a
business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be
prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of
such violation shall be fined in an amount not less than two cents ($0.02) nor
more than five cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight on such
axle or tandem axle in excess of the weight authorized in the permit when the
excess is one thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than five cents ($0.05)
nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for each pound of excess weight when
the excess exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000)
pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10) nor more than fifteen cents
($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two
thousand (2,000) pounds and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; and not
less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than twenty cents ($0.20) per pound
for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000)
pounds. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in addition to any
penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301(j)
as enforced by the village2. 625 ILCS 5/15-113.2.2.
5. Sentence Of Permit Moves Exceeding Gross Weight: Whenever any vehicle is
operated in violation of the provisions of a permit issued under the provisions
of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/15-301 through 5/15-319, as enforced by the
village, by operating with the gross weight in excess of that authorized in
such permit, the owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of a
business offense and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be
prosecuted for such violation. Any person, firm or corporation convicted of
such violation shall be fined in an amount not less than two cents ($0.02) nor
more than five cents ($0.05) per pound for each pound of excess weight in
excess of the gross weight authorized in the permit when the excess is one
thousand (1,000) pounds or less; not less than four cents ($0.04) nor more than
seven cents ($0.07) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds one thousand (1,000) pounds and is two thousand (2,000) pounds or less;
not less than seven cents ($0.07) nor more than ten cents ($0.10) per pound for
each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds two thousand (2,000) pounds
and is three thousand (3,000) pounds or less; not less than ten cents ($0.10)
nor more than fifteen cents ($0.15) per pound for each pound of excess weight
when the excess exceeds three thousand (3,000) pounds and is four thousand
(4,000) pounds or less; not less than fifteen cents ($0.15) nor more than
twenty cents ($0.20) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess
exceeds four thousand (4,000) pounds and is five thousand (5,000) pounds or
less; and not less than seventeen cents ($0.17) nor more than twenty five cents
($0.25) per pound for each pound of excess weight when the excess exceeds five
thousand (5,000) pounds. Penalties for violations of this section shall be in
addition to any penalties imposed for violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/15-301(j) as enforced by the village1. 625 ILCS 5/15-113.3.1.
6. Registration, Second Division Vehicles: Whenever any vehicle is operated in
violation of the provisions of subsection (d) of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes
5/3-401, in that a vehicle and load are operated in this state and the
appropriate fees and taxes have not been paid, or the vehicle and load exceed
the registered gross weight for which the required fees and taxes have been
paid by two thousand one (2,001) pounds or more, the operator or owner shall be
fined according to the schedule as provided in subsection C1 of this section;
provided, that for any unregistered vehicle or vehicle displaying expired
registration, no fine shall exceed the actual cost of what the appropriate
registration for that vehicle and load should have been as set forth below,
regardless of the route traveled:
         SCHEDULE OF FLAT WEIGHT TAX REQUIRED BY LAW
Gross Weight In                Total Fees Each
Pounds Including Vehicle Class Fiscal Year
And Maximum Load
Gross Weight In                Total Fees Each
Pounds Including Vehicle Class Fiscal Year
And Maximum Load
8,000 and less           B     $ 98.00
8,001 to 12,000          D     138.00
12,001 to 16,000         F     242.00
16,001 to 26,000         H     490.00
26,001 to 28,000         J     630.00
28,001 to 32,000         K     842.00
32,001 to 36,000         L     982.00
36,001 to 40,000         N     1,202.00
40,001 to 45,000         P     1,390.00
45,001 to 50,000         Q     1,538.00
50,001 to 54,999         R     1,698.00
55,000 to 59,500         S     1,830.00
59,501 to 64,000         T     1,970.00
64,001 to 73,280         V     2,294.00
73,281 to 77,000         X     2,622.00
77,001 to 80,000         Z     2,790.00
 
   The owner or driver of such vehicle shall be deemed guilty of such violation
and either the owner or the driver of such vehicle may be prosecuted for such
violation. Any person charged with a violation of any of these provisions who
pleads not guilty shall be present in court for the trial on the charge2. 625
ILCS 5/3-401(d), 5/3-815, 5/15-113.2. (Ord. 2010-10, 2-23-2010)
   D.   Penalty, Violation Of Unauthorized Use Of Persons With Disabilities'
Parking Places:
      1.   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a) shall be fined two hundred fifty dollars
($250.00) in addition to any costs or charges connected with the removal or
storage of any motor vehicle authorized under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/
11-1301.3. It shall not be a defense to a charge under 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.3 that either the sign posted pursuant to 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3 or the intended accessible parking place does not
comply with the technical requirements of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-
301, department regulations, or local ordinance if a reasonable person would be
made aware by the sign or notice on or near the parking place that the place is
reserved for a person with disabilities.
      2.   Any person found guilty of violating the provisions of 625 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-1) a first time shall be fined six hundred
dollars ($600.00). Any person found guilty of violating 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-1) a second or subsequent time shall be fined one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Any person who violates 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.3(a-2) is guilty of a class A misdemeanor and shall be fined
two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00).
      3.   Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from any
person who commits a violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.3.
Any police officer may seize the disability license plate upon authorization
from the secretary of state.
   E.   Penalty, Violation Of Use Of Fictitious Or Unlawfully Altered
Disability License Plate Or Decal:
      1.   Any person convicted of a violation of paragraph (1), (2), (3), (4),
or (5), or (7) of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5(b) shall be guilty
of a class A misdemeanor and fined not less than one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for a first offense and shall be guilty of a class 4 felony and
fined not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a second or subsequent
offense.
      2.   Any person convicted of a violation of 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes 5/11-1301.5(b)(6) is guilty of a class A misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for a first offense and
not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) for a second or subsequent
offense.
      3.   Any police officer may seize the parking decal or device from any
person who commits a violation of 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-1301.5.
Any police officer may seize the disability license plate upon authorization
from the secretary of state. (Ord. 2013-04, 1-22-2013)
9-1-28: SUSPENSION OF DRIVING PRIVILEGES:
   A.   Authorization: The village is hereby authorized to prepare and send to
the secretary of state certified reports as authorized by section 6-306.5(c) of
the vehicle code1. 625 ILCS 5/6-306.5.1 seeking suspension of driving
privileges for owners of a registered vehicle who have failed to pay any fine
or penalty due and owing as a result of ten (10) or more violations of the
village's vehicular standing, parking or compliance regulations or for owners
who are more than fourteen (14) days in default of a payment plan pursuant to
which a suspension had been terminated under subsection (c) of section 6-306.5,
625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5(c).
   B.   Notice Of Impending Driver's License Suspension Pursuant To 625
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/11-208.3(b)(6): Notice shall be sent to the person
liable for failure to complete a required traffic education program or to pay
any fine or penalty that remains due and owing, or both, on ten (10) or more
parking violations (or combination of 5 or more automated traffic law
violations). The notice shall state that failure to complete a required traffic
education program or to pay the fine or penalty owing, or both, within forty
five (45) days of the notice's date will result in the village notifying the
secretary of state that the person is eligible for initiation of suspension
proceedings under 625 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/6-306.5 of the vehicle code.
The notice shall also state that the person may obtain a photostatic copy of an
original ticket imposing a fine or penalty by sending a self-addressed, stamped
envelope to the village along with a request for the photostatic copy. The
notice of impending driver's license suspension shall be sent by first class
United States mail, postage prepaid, to the address recorded with the secretary
of state or, if any notice to that address is returned as undeliverable, to the
last known address recorded in a United States post office approved database.
   C.   Procedures For Challenge To Certified Report: Any owner may challenge a
certified report on grounds which are limited to the following: that either: 1)
the person had not been the owner or lessee of the vehicle receiving ten (10)
or more standing, parking or compliance violation notices on the date or dates
such notices were issued, or 2) the person has already paid the fine or penalty
for the ten (10) or more standing, parking, or compliance violations indicated
on the certified report. The procedures for a challenge shall be as follows:
Said owner may make a request for a hearing on a challenge within five (5)
business days from the date of the notice of the certified report from the
secretary of state. Said request shall be made in person and in writing at the
police department administrative offices, Monday through Friday, excluding
holidays, from nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. to five o'clock (5:00) P.M. ("business
hours"). If the request for a hearing is timely filed, the chief of police or
his designee shall conduct a hearing on the challenge of the accuracy of the
certified report within twenty four (24) hours after the request, or by a date
mutually agreeable to the parties and during business hours. All interested
persons will be given a reasonable opportunity to be heard at the hearing. The
formal rules of evidence shall not apply and hearsay evidence shall be
admissible. If, after the hearing, the chief of police or his designee
determines that there is sufficient evidence in favor of the challenge, the
secretary of state shall be notified accordingly. If after the hearing, the
chief of police determines that there is not sufficient evidence in favor of
the challenge, the challenge shall be denied and no further notice shall be
required to the secretary of state.
   D.   Notice To The Secretary Of State: The village shall notify the
secretary of state if after making a certified report the person named in the
report has paid the previously reported fine or penalty or has entered into a
payment plan pursuant to which the village has agreed to terminate the
suspension, or whenever the village determines that the original report was in
error. A certified copy of such notification shall also be given upon request
and at no additional charge to the person named therein. (Ord. 2015-32, 12-15-
2015)
9-1-29: ELECTRIC SCOOTERS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section:
 
ELECTRIC A device weighing less than 100 pounds, with 2 or 3 wheels, handlebars, and a
SCOOTER  floorboard that can be stood upon while riding, that is solely powered by an
or LOW-  electric motor and human power. “Electric Scooter” and “Low-Speed Electric
SPEED    Scooter” do not include a moped or motor-driven cycle as defined in Section 5/1-
ELECTRIC 148.2 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/1-148.2).
SCOOTER:
 
   B.   Operation of an Electric Scooter: Electric Scooters are permitted to be
ridden on Village roads in accordance with the general regulations set forth in
Section 5/11-1518 of the Illinois Vehicle Code (625 ILCS 5/11-1518),
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Code of Ordinances.
      1.   A person may not operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter on a highway
with a posted speed limit in excess of 35 mph.
      2.   A person may not operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter on any Village
highway unless he or she is 18 years of age or older.
      3.   A Low-Speed Electric Scooter may be parked in the same manner and at
the same locations as a bicycle may be parked.
      4.   Every Low-Speed Electric Scooter when in use at nighttime shall be
equipped with a lamp on the front that emits a white light visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front and with a red reflector on the rear
that is visible from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when
directly in front of lawful lower beams of headlamps on a motor vehicle, except
that a lamp emitting a steady or flashing red light visible from a distance of
500 feet to the rear may be used in addition to or instead of the red
reflector.
      5.   A Low-Speed Electric Scooter shall not be equipped with nor shall
any person use upon a Low-Speed Electric Scooter any siren. This subsection
does not apply to a Low-Speed Electric Scooter that is a police vehicle or fire
department vehicle.
      6.   Every Low-Speed Electric Scooter shall be equipped with a brake that
will adequately control movement of and stop and hold the Low-Speed Electric
Scooter.
      7.   A person may not operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter on any Village
highway while carrying any package, bundle, or article that prevents the
operator from keeping at least one hand upon the handlebars.
      8.   A person may not use a Low-Speed Electric Scooter to carry more than
one person at a time. A person operating a Low-Speed Electric Scooter may not
attach himself or herself or the scooter to any other vehicle being operated on
the public right-of-way.
      9.   A person may not operate a Low-Speed Electric Scooter upon any
public highway in the State while under the influence of alcohol or any drug.
      10.   Every Low-Speed Electric Scooter shall be well-maintained and in
good operating condition.
      11.   Electric Scooters are prohibited from being ridden on the street or
sidewalk on Mondamin Street between Wabena Avenue and the alley located west of
Massasoit Street.
      12.   Electric Scooters are prohibited from being ridden on any other
Village roadway or highway where prohibited by signage.
      13.   No person shall operate an Electric Scooter in a manner that
endangers the safety of any person or property.
   C.   Penalties: Any person who violates the provisions of this ordinance
shall be subject to the following fines:
      1.   First offense within a twelve (12) month period: Sixty dollars
($60.00).
      2.   Second offense within the same twelve (12) month period: One hundred
twenty dollars ($120.00).
      3.   Third or subsequent offense within the same twelve (12) month
period: Two hundred forty dollars ($240.00).
      To the extent that any violation of this Ordinance also constitutes a
violation of a criminal statute of the State of Illinois, then the violator
shall also be subject to criminal prosecution.
   D.   Parental Liability: It is unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of
any minor to permit or negligently fail to prevent the minor’s operation or use
of an Electric Scooter or other recreational vehicle in violation of this
Section. Any parent or legal guardian who violates this Subsection D. is in
violation of this Section and shall be liable for all damages and injuries to
persons or property resulting therefrom. (Ord. 2025-30, 9-23-2025)
9-1-30: GOLF CARTS:
   A.   Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
 
ALL-TERRAIN  Any motorized off-highway device designed to travel primarily off-highway, 50
VEHICLE      inches or less in width, having a manufacturers dry weight of 1,500 pounds or
(ATV):       less, traveling on 3 or more non-highway tires, designed with a seat or straddle
             for operator use, and handlebars or steering wheel for steering control.
             A vehicle specifically designed and intended for the purpose of transporting one
             or more persons and their golf clubs or maintenance equipment while engaged in
GOLF CART:   the playing of golf, supervising the playing of golf or maintaining the
             condition of the grounds on a public or private golf course and having a maximum
             speed of 20 miles per hour.
OFF-HIGHWAY  Any motorized device designed to travel primarily off-highway on 2 wheels,
MOTORCYCLE:  having a seat or saddle for the use of the operator, upon or by which any
             person, persons or property may be transported or drawn.
             A motorized vehicle designed to travel primarily off-highway; 64 inches or less
RECREATIONAL in width; having a manufacturer’s dry weight of 2,000 pounds or less; for gas-
OFF-HIGHWAY  powered engines 3,000 pounds or less for electric-powered engines, traveling on
VEHICLE:     four or more non-highway tires; designed with non-straddle seats for two to six
             passengers inclusive of driver, and a steering wheel for steering control and
             maneuvering.
RESIDENTIAL  Any Village Street abutting on both sides by land zoned for and used for
STREETS:     residential purposes and that has a speed limit of 35 MPH or less.
VILLAGE      Any of the streets within the boundaries of the Village of Minooka except for
STREETS:     state and county roads.
 
   B.   Operating Requirements: Permitted golf carts may be operated on
Residential Streets subject to the following:
      1.   The driver is subject to the mandatory vehicle liability insurance
requirements of Illinois under 625 ILCS 5/7-601 through 7-610 of the Illinois
Vehicle Code, and must carry proof of such insurance, specifically listing the
golf cart.
      2.   Permit sticker/placard issued by the Village shall be affixed and
remain constantly visible on the rear of the golf cart while operating on
Village streets.
      3.   The driver must be 16 years of age or older and must possess a valid
driver’s license.
      4.   Prior to operating any golf cart within the Village of Minooka, each
operator will have on file a signed waiver of liability as provided by the
Village.
      5.   When operated on a roadway, a golf cart shall have its headlights
and tail lamps illuminated.
      6.   The golf cart shall be equipped with brakes, a steering wheel
apparatus, tires, a rearview mirror, windshield, horn or warning device, seat
belts for driver and passenger(s), red reflective warning devices in front and
rear, an approved slow moving vehicle emblem (as required of other vehicles in
625 ILCS 5/12-709 of the Illinois Vehicle Code) on the rear of the golf cart, a
headlight that emits a white light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
front, a tail lamp that emits a red light visible from at least 100 feet from
the rear, brake lights, and turn signals front and rear.
      7.   The golf cart driver must obey all traffic laws of the State of
Illinois and the Village of Minooka with regard to the movement and operation
of vehicles on the streets and roadways.
      8.   Golf carts may only be operated on Residential Streets with posted
speed limits of 35 miles per hour or less. This Subsection B. (8) does not
prohibit a golf cart from crossing a Village street at an intersection where
the Village street has a posted speed limit of more than 35 miles per hour.
      9.   A person driving a golf cart may make a direct crossing upon or
across a state road if the state road has a speed limit of 35 miles per hour or
less and the crossing is made at an intersection controlled by a traffic light
or a four-way stop sign.
      10.   The driver must not exceed 25 MPH.
      11.   Shall only be operated from sunrise to sunset.
      12.   A person who drives or is in actual physical control of the golf
cart on a roadway while under the influence is subject to 625 ILCS 5/11-500-02,
and applicable local ordinances.
      13.   Golf carts may not be operated on sidewalks, bicycle paths or other
public property not accessible to or authorized for vehicular traffic.
      14.   No “non-highway” vehicle as defined in 625 ILCS 5/11-1426.1 is
permitted on any Village street, road or highway except golf carts as defined
herein.
      15.   All crossings of streets, roads and highways which are permitted by
this Section must be direct crossings made at an intersection.
      16.   Compliance is required with the following provision of the Illinois
Child Passenger Protection Act whichever is more restrictive:
         a.   When transporting any child under eight years, the driver shall
be responsible for providing for the protection of the child by securing them
in an appropriate child restraint system. The parent or legal guardian of the
child under eight years shall provide a child restraint system to any person
who transports a child.
         b.   If the child being transported is under two years of age, the
driver is responsible for properly securing the child in a rear facing child
restraint system unless the child weighs 40 or more pounds or is 40 or more
inches tall.
         c.   For purposes of this Section a “child restraint system” means any
device which meets the standard of the United States Department of
Transportation designed to restrain, seat or position children, which also
includes a booster seat.
         d.   A child weighing more than 40 pounds may be transported in the
rear seat while only wearing a lap belt if the back seat is not equipped with a
combination lap and shoulder belt.
      17.   No person shall use a golf cart to tow any person, vehicle, or item
or thing, with the exception for purposes described in Subsection H. (Special
Events) below.
      18.   The capacity (number of occupants) of the golf cart shall not
exceed the manufacturer’s specifications.
      19.   Permitted golf carts are allowed to operate on Wapella Street.
   C.   Prohibited Crossings and Roadway Restrictions: It is prohibited by this
code to:
      1.   Operate a golf cart on any street, highway, or road, or section
thereof, that is not a Residential Street, except Wapella Street, including but
not limited to:
         a.   U.S. Route 6;
         b.   Ridge Road;
         c.   Brannick Rd;
         d.   Bell Road.
   D.   Seat Belt Usage Required: Each driver of and passenger, regardless of
age, in seats of a golf cart operated on streets within the Village, shall wear
a properly adjusted and fastened seat belt described in the Illinois Vehicle
Code or this Code; except that wearing seat belts is not required for any of
the following:
      1.   A driver or passenger possessing a written statement from a
physician that such person is unable, for medical or physical reasons, to wear
a seat belt.
      2.   A driver or passenger possessing an official certificate or license
endorsement issued by the appropriate agency in another state or country
indicating that the driver or passenger is unable for medical, physical, or
valid reasons to wear a seat belt.
   E.   Permits:
      1.   No person shall operate a golf cart on a Village street without
first obtaining a permit as provided herein. Permits shall expire on December
31 of each year. The cost of the permit shall be ten dollars. Applications for
a permit shall be made on a form supplied by the Village, shall be executed by
the applicant, and shall contain the following:
         a.   Name and address of applicant;
         b.   Driver’s license number;
         c.   Address and phone number;
         d.   Name of liability insurance carrier and policy number;
         e.   The serial number or VIN, make, model and description of golf
cart;
         f.   Waiver of liability on a form provided by the Village; and
         g.   Such other information as the Village may require.
      2.   No permit shall be granted unless the following conditions are met:
         a.   The vehicle is properly titled with the Illinois Secretary of
State, if able or required;
         b.   A physically handicapped applicant or operator must submit a
certificate signed by a physician, certifying that the applicant is able to
safely operate a golf cart on Village streets; and
         c.   The applicant must provide evidence of insurance in compliance
with the provisions of the Illinois statutes regarding minimum liability
insurance for passenger motor vehicles to be operated on the roads of the State
of Illinois.
      3.   Permits may be renewed upon demonstration of compliance with the
requirements for initial issuance of a permit and the payment of the permit
fee.
      4.   Permits are non-transferable.
      5.   Permit holders must inform the Minooka Police Department within ten
days of any change of address, phone number, and/or insurance coverage.
      6.   A permit shall be denied for the following reasons:
         a.   The vehicle is not properly titled with the Illinois Secretary of
State Office, if abled or required;
         b.   Insurance information cannot be verified;
         c.   Registered owner does not possess a valid driver’s license;
         d.   Owner has provided false information in their application;
         e.   Vehicle does not conform to the requirements of this Section;
         f.   Owner cannot safely operate golf cart; or
         g.   Owner owes the Village unpaid fines.
   F.   Seizure and Impoundment: Golf carts are subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to Title 8, Chapter 7, Section 1, of the code of
ordinances and 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq. All-terrain vehicles, off-highway
motorcycles, and recreational off-highway vehicles are subject to seizure and
impoundment pursuant to Title 8, Chapter 7, Section 1, of the code of
ordinances and 720 ILCS 5/36-1 et seq. and fines under this Section.
   G.   Revocation:
      1.   Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter, regardless
of whether that person is the holder of the permit, may subject the permitted
golf cart to revocation of permit(s) or non-renewal of permit(s), at the
discretion of the Police Chief, or designee, and subject to a monetary fine as
provided under Subsection K. (Penalty) of this section.
      2.   No refund of the permit fee will be granted in the event of a
revocation.
      3.   Any golf cart whose permit was revoked, or non-renewed, for
violating any portion of this chapter, cannot be permitted or operated on any
roadway for a period of one year.
      4.   Person(s) who violate provisions of this chapter may have their
ability to permit any golf cart revoked for a minimum of one year.
      5.   The Village may suspend or revoke a permit granted under this
Section if there is evidence that the permit holder cannot safely operate the
vehicle on designated roadways.
   H.   Special Events: Notwithstanding Subsection E. (Permits) of this
Section, a golf cart, recreational utility vehicle, recreational off-highway
vehicle, and all-terrain vehicle may be operated on approved streets of the
Village without a permit issued under Subsection E. (Permits) of this Section
as part of a special event for which the Village has granted approval;
provided, however, that all other provisions of the Village Code, the Illinois
Compiled Statutes and all other applicable laws and regulations shall apply to
such operation.
   I.   Parental Liability: It is unlawful for the parent or legal guardian of
any minor to permit or negligently fail to prevent the minor’s operation or use
of a golf cart or other recreational vehicle in violation of this Section. Any
parent or legal guardian who violates this Subsection I. is in violation of
this Section and shall be liable for all damages and injuries to persons or
property resulting therefrom.
   J.   Exemptions: Any golf cart, all-terrain vehicle, off-highway motorcycle,
or recreational off-highway vehicle belonging to any municipal, state, county,
district, federal, or tribal police, fire, Emergency Management Agency; or
anyone requested, summoned, or directed by the same; shall be exempt from this
Section.
   K.   Penalties: Any person who violates any provision of this Section shall
upon conviction be subject to the following fee schedule:
 
First Offense:  $250.00
Second Offense: $500.00
Third Offense:  $750.00
 
   To the extent that any violation of this section also constitutes a
violation of a criminal statute of the State of Illinois, then the violator
shall also be subject to criminal prosecution. (Ord. 2025-31, 9-23-2025)
CHAPTER 2
VEHICLE LICENSES
SECTION:
9-2-1 Definition
9-2-2 License Required, Fees
9-2-3 Time Of Payment, License Year
9-2-4 Application Of License, Issuance
9-2-5 Vehicle Tag
9-2-6 Penalty
9-2-1: DEFINITION:
MOTOR VEHICLE: Includes automobiles and all other vehicles propelled otherwise
than by muscular power, except traction engines and road rollers, the cars of
electric and steam railways and other motor vehicles running only upon rails or
tracks, but nothing in this Chapter shall be construed to apply to or affect
bicycles or tricycles or such other vehicles as are propelled exclusively by
human muscular power. (Ord., 10-22-1979)
9-2-2: LICENSE REQUIRED, FEES:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or a motor bicycle who resides
within the Village shall be required to pay each year to the Village Clerk a
tax or license fee for each motor vehicle or motor bicycle used on any public
street or highway within the Village.
The annual fees to be paid for vehicle licenses shall be as follows:
 
                                                Through April 30 After April 30
Passenger vehicles                              $5.00            $10.00
(except two-wheeled vehicles)
Trucks, commercial vehicles, motor homes,       7.50             15.00
campers and recreational licensed vehicles
Two-wheeled vehicles                            3.00             6.00
Persons 65 years of age or over are entitled to
one license for any of the abovementioned       0.50             1.00
vehicles at the following rates:
Licenses for all other vehicles shall be at
those rates shown above.
 
Nonresident licenses shall be issued for any vehicle for a fee of $1.00. (Ord.,
10-22-1979)
A transfer sticker shall be issued for any vehicle for a fee of $1.00 (Ord.
1987-2, 1-26-1987)
9-2-3: TIME OF PAYMENT, LICENSE YEAR:
The license fee or tax as set forth in Section
9-2-2 hereof shall be due and payable annually in advance on or before April 30
of each fiscal year and the license shall be for one year; provided, that each
owner or operator of such a motor vehicle or motor bicycle coming into
possession of such vehicle or bicycle after the expiration of six (6) months of
the fiscal year pay one-half (1/2) the annual fee provided for. (Ord., 10-22-
1979)
9-2-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE, ISSUANCE:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle desiring a license
for such motor vehicle or motor bicycle shall file an application with the
Village Clerk, upon a form prescribed by him, setting forth the name and
address of the applicant and a description of the motor vehicle or motor
bicycle for which the license is desired. Upon the payment by the applicant of
the fee prescribed, the Clerk shall issue or cause to be issued a license which
shall be attested by the Clerk, authorizing the use of such motor vehicle or
motor bicycle within the Village until the expiration of such license. (Ord.,
10-22-1979)
9-2-5: VEHICLE TAG:
Every owner or operator of a motor vehicle or motor bicycle who receives such
license shall receive at the time of payment of the fee a Village vehicle tag
without charge therefor; such vehicle tags shall be numbered serially and bear
the number and the year for which the license is issued. Each Village vehicle
tag shall be kept attached to the windshield of the vehicle for which it was
issued, in the lower right-hand corner so as to be readily readable at all
times which such vehicle is operated on any public highway in the Village, and
shall be attached in such manner that it cannot be removed without physical
destruction. (Ord., 1985; 1997 Code)
9-2-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person who fails to purchase a vehicle license on or before April
30 of each year shall be assessed a penalty of twice the purchase price of the
license for the late purchase. (Ord. 1987-1, 1-26-1987)
   B.   Notwithstanding provisions of subsection A, any person violating the
provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable as provided in Section
1-4-1 of this Village Code. (Ord., 1985)
CHAPTER 3
UNSCHEDULED INTERCITY BUSES
SECTION:
9-3-1: Definitions
9-3-2: Applicability
9-3-3: Notice And Application Required
9-3-4: Processing and Approval of Applications
9-3-5: Days And Hours Of Operation
9-3-6: Passenger Pick-up/Drop-Off Locations
9-3-7: Punctuality
9-3-8: Proof of Application and Approval
9-3-9: Penalty
9-3-10: Criminal Charges
9-3-11: Civil Remedies
 
9-3-1:DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of these Rules and Regulations, these definitions shall apply.
 
APPLICATION: A form that the Village of Minooka Chief of Police makes available for
             receiving and reviewing proposed intercity bus operations.
APPROVAL:    Written notice that the Chief of Police has received, reviewed, and determined
             that an application satisfies the requirements of the Village and the Policy.
CHIEF OF     The Village of Minooka Chief of Police.
POLICE:
POLICY:      This written policy.
REGULARLY    Intercity bus service that operates trips on a predictable and recurring
SCHEDULED    basis, following a schedule that is published in advance and available to the
SERVICE:     general public, and provides service in exchange for paying a fare.
             Any bus used for the transportation of persons between the Village of Minooka
             and locations outside of the Chicago-Minooka and Will County area that is not
             operating pursuant to authorization of the Chief of Police authorization via:
UNSCHEDULED  (i) an approved letter of permission or (ii) an approved schedule and/or
INTERCITY    approved pick-up/drop- off zone, as of the effective date of this Policy.
BUS:         “Unscheduled intercity bus” shall not include any bus used to transport
             passengers in a manner where they will be picked up by that same bus or
             another bus within the fleet of that same bus, from the approximately same
             drop of location, including but not limited to school students on field trips,
             wedding guests, or protestors exercising their first amendment rights.
VILLAGE:     The Village of Minooka, Illinois. (Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
 
9-3-2: APPLICABILITY:
The application, review, and approval process pursuant to the limitations and
requirements of this Policy for unscheduled intercity buses shall apply to all
operators seeking an unscheduled intercity bus service for a specified date,
time and location for the loading or unloading of passengers in accordance with
approved written authorization as herein required. (Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-3: NOTICE AND APPLICATION REQUIRED:
The operator of any unscheduled intercity bus must make application for an
approval to arrive and load/unload passengers in the Village on the appropriate
form made available by the Chief of Police. All applications for unscheduled
intercity bus service must be received by the Chief of Police a minimum of five
(5) full business days prior to the requested date of arrival in the
application.
All applications shall include the proposed passenger list, and the operator
shall be required to perform background checks on each passenger over the age
of eighteen, and shall provide copies of the same to the Chief of Police as
part of the application.
Each application for an unscheduled intercity bus drop off must include an
order authorizing the drop off executed by the head of the public body
originating the transfer of such passengers. (Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-4: PROCESSING AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATIONS:
Applications for unscheduled intercity buses will be reviewed on a first-come,
first-serve basis. No more than one (1) application, regardless of operator,
shall be approved by the Chief of Police for a given date, time, and location.
(Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-5: DAYS AND HOURS OF OPERATION:
Unscheduled intercity buses shall load/unload passengers within the Village
only between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday, and
not at any time on Saturdays, Sundays, or designated Village Holidays. (Ord.
2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-6: PASSENGER PICK-UP/DROP-OFF LOCATIONS:
Unscheduled intercity buses shall only load/unload passengers at locations
designated by the Chief of Police, which shall be listed on the approved
application. (Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-7: PUNCTUALITY:
For any given approval, unscheduled intercity buses must arrive no sooner than,
and no later than 30 minutes after, the approved arrival time, otherwise the
application shall be considered invalidated. Any loading/ unloading of
passengers outside of this scheduled window shall result in a $750.00 fine per
passenger to the operator. (Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-8: PROOF OF APPLICATION AND APPROVAL:
Operators of unscheduled intercity buses must carry a physical or electronic
copy of an approved application and present it for inspection at the place of
loading/unloading upon request by any employee or designee of the Village.
(Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-9: PENALTY:
Any operator of an unscheduled intercity bus that attempts to or does in fact
load/unload passengers without an approved application shall be subject to a
$750.00 fine per passenger upon the intercity bus operator.
Any operator of an unscheduled intercity bus that attempts to or does in fact
unload passengers based on an application that is false or incorrect shall be
sub subject to a $750.00 fine per passenger upon the intercity bus operator.
(Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-10: CRIMINAL CHARGES:
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to pursue criminal charges against any
(i) unscheduled intercity bus operator, (ii) unscheduled intercity bus driver,
or (iii) third-party employees who are charged with the oversight of the
passengers, when such individual attempts to or does discharge passengers where
such actions endanger the health, safety or welfare of passengers.
The Chief of Police shall consider the following when determining whether to
pursue criminal charges:
   A.   The location of the discharge or attempted discharge of passengers;
   B.   Extreme weather conditions, including temperatures below freezing,
snowfall, severe rain, or other inclement weather which poses a risk to
passengers;
   C.   Whether any of the passengers are minors; and
   D.   The time of day and access to shelter or transportation for passengers.
(Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
9-3-11: CIVIL REMEDIES:
The Village’s attorneys are hereby authorized and directed to pursue any and
all civil remedies against intercity bus operators that fail to or refuse to
comply with the Policy or these Rules and Regulations. Such civil remedies
include, but are not limited to, injunctive relief, declaratory judgements, and
debt collection actions. (Ord. 2024-41, 1-23-2024)
TITLE 10
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
SECTION:
10-1-1 Street Grades, Sidewalk Lines
10-1-2 Sidewalk Construction
10-1-3 Encroachments
10-1-4 Stagnant Water
10-1-5 Excavations Of Public Ways (Rep. by Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1-6 Mailboxes
10-1-1: STREET GRADES, SIDEWALK LINES:
   A.   All grades or elevations hereafter established by the village or which
are hereinafter fixed or referred to shall be measured from and have reference
to a datum or horizontal plane which is six hundred sixteen and seventy six
one-hundredths feet (616.76') below the top of the southeast corner of the iron
plate at the base of the southeast leg of the village water tower located on
lot 3, block 1, Gardner's Addition to Minooka, and which plane and bench mark
are hereby established.
   B.   In establishing grades, the elevations fixed at various points and
known as street grades shall be the grades of the curbing at said points; the
center of the roadways of streets shall also coincide or conform to such
grades; only varying therefrom with the necessity of proper drainage and
according to the location of the summits and inlets in pavements.
   C.   Sidewalk grades, unless otherwise especially provided for by
independent plots and ordinances, shall also conform to and be coincident with,
the established curb grade on any street at the curb line, and shall have a
slope or rise of one-third of an inch (1/3") for every foot (1') of horizontal
distance measured from the roadway face of the curb to and towards the adjacent
property line. (Ord. 1926-3, 10-26-1926)
   D.   The inside of a sidewalk shall be parallel to and one foot (1') from
the adjacent property line. (Ord. 1926-3, 10-26-1926; amd. 1997 Code)
   E.   In no case shall a grade be given for the building of any sidewalk in
the village until such grade is established by ordinance in the manner herein
provided. (Ord. 1926-3, 10-26-1926)
10-1-2: SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION:
All sidewalks within the village shall be built by or under the direction of
the public works committee and in such manner as the president and board of
trustees may provide. (1904 Code § 24.1; amd. 1977 Code)
The village president and board of trustees may, from time to time, order the
construction of sidewalks whenever they may deem the public interest requires
it, specifying the manner in which the sidewalks shall be constructed and
designate the width of the same. (1904 Code § 24.2)
10-1-3: ENCROACHMENTS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to build, erect, place or construct, or
cause to be built, erected, placed or constructed in whole or in part upon any
street, alley, avenue, public land or place within the village, any house,
shed, pen, fence, wall, foundation, cellar or any structure whatever. (1904
Code § 26.2)
10-1-4: STAGNANT WATER:
All lots or parcels of land within the limits of the village shall be so
drained or graded by the owners or occupants thereof as to prevent water
standing thereon; and the owner or occupant of each and every lot or parcel of
land whereon such standing or stagnant water shall be notified in writing by
the chairman of the public works committee of the village to fill up, grade or
drain the same within a reasonable time, so as to prevent any such stagnant or
standing water. Any such person so notified who shall fail to comply with such
notice shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to penalty; and in case of
continued failure or neglect of such owner or occupant, after being duly
notified as aforesaid, and in case such owner of such lots or parcels of ground
is a nonresident, such filling up, draining or grading such lots or parcels of
ground shall be done by the chairman of the public works committee and the cost
thereof shall be borne by said lots or parcels of ground, and collected in a
manner provided by law. (1904 Code § 26.7)
10-1-5: EXCAVATIONS OF PUBLIC WAYS:
(Rep. by Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1-6: MAILBOXES:
   A.   Mailbox Specifications: Mailboxes and their installation shall conform
to the specifications of the U.S. postal service, guidelines issued by the
American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO),
and "U.S. mail" and "approved by the postmaster general" standards, which are
incorporated herein by reference. Address numbers must be inscribed in
contrasting color in neat letters and numerals not less than one inch (1") high
on the side of the box visible to the carrier's regular approach or on the door
if boxes are grouped.
   B.   Unapproved Mailboxes: For purposes of this section, an "unapproved
mailbox" is defined as a mailbox which is not approved by the U.S. postal
service, whose installation does not comply with specifications of the U.S.
postal service or guidelines issued by the American Association of State
Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), or which is a masonry mailbox
stand.
   C.   Limitations On Unapproved Mailboxes: Citizens must seek approval from
the public works superintendent or his designee prior to the installation of
any unapproved mailbox. Unapproved mailboxes must conform to the same
requirements as approved manufactured boxes relative to flag, size, height,
strength, and quality of construction, shall not present or create an
unreasonable, dangerous or hazardous obstruction, and shall comply with the
specifications as set forth by the public works superintendent or his designee.
Masonry mailbox stands are allowed only on residential streets with a speed
limit no greater than twenty five (25) miles per hour, and shall not be
permanently mounted (with footings or otherwise) to the ground. An appropriate
waiver and/or release holding the village harmless must be executed and the
approval from the postmaster (if applicable) shall be filed with the village
clerk.
   D.   Notification: Upon notification by the U.S. postal service or the
village, the postal patron shall remove any mailbox that is found to violate
the intent of the specifications and guidelines as set forth herein.
   E.   Replacement Of Mailbox: If any mailbox was installed and properly
maintained in accordance with the specifications of the U.S. postal service and
guidelines issued by the American Association of State Highway and
Transportation Officials (AASHTO) and is damaged or knocked down by the
village's snow removal or other village maintenance activities, the village
will: 1) repair the mailbox (temporarily or permanently) or 2) reimburse the
resident for the cost of materials for the standard type mailbox and post and
it shall be the responsibility of the resident to purchase and install the
mailbox and/or post. The village's liability per occurrence is limited to the
actual cost of a standard "approved by the postmaster general" mailbox
(selected at the village's discretion), or a cash settlement not to exceed
fifty dollars ($50.00), and any difference in cost between the damaged and
replacement mailbox will not be reimbursed. (Ord. 2007-45, 10-23-2007)
CHAPTER 1A
CONSTRUCTION OF FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS OF WAY
SECTION:
10-1A-1: Purpose And Scope
10-1A-2: Definitions
10-1A-3: Annual Registration Required
10-1A-4: Permit Required; Applications And Fees
10-1A-5: Action On Permit Applications
10-1A-6: Effect Of Permit
10-1A-7: Revised Permit Drawings
10-1A-8: Insurance
10-1A-9: Indemnification
10-1A-10: Security
10-1A-11: Permit Suspension And Revocation
10-1A-12: Change Of Ownership Or Owner's Identity Or Legal Status
10-1A-13: General Construction Standards
10-1A-14: Traffic Control
10-1A-15: Location Of Facilities
10-1A-16: Construction Methods And Materials
10-1A-17: Vegetation Control
10-1A-18: Removal, Relocation, Or Modifications Of Utility Facilities
10-1A-19: Cleanup And Restoration
10-1A-20: Maintenance And Emergency Maintenance
10-1A-21: Variances
10-1A-22: Penalties
10-1A-23: Enforcement
10-1A-1: PURPOSE AND SCOPE:
   A.   Purpose: The purpose of this chapter is to establish policies and
procedures for constructing facilities on rights of way within the village's
jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent with the
preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the village
rights of way and the village as a whole.
   B.   Intent: In enacting this chapter, the village intends to exercise its
authority over the rights of way in the village and, in particular, the use of
the public ways and property by utilities, by establishing uniform standards to
address issues presented by utility facilities, including, without limitation:
      1.   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      2.   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      3.   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of the
village's utilities and of other utilities lawfully located in rights of way or
public property;
      4.   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees,
from the installation of utility facilities;
      5.   Protect against increased storm water runoff due to structures and
materials that increase impermeable surfaces;
      6.   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed;
      7.   Preserve open space, particularly the tree lined parkways that
characterize the village's residential neighborhoods;
      8.   Prevent visual blight from the proliferation of facilities in the
rights of way; and
      9.   Assure the continued safe use and enjoyment of private properties
adjacent to utility facilities locations.
   C.   Facilities Subject To This Chapter: This chapter applies to all
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public
rights of way within the jurisdiction of the village. A facility lawfully
established prior to the effective date of this chapter may continue to be
maintained, repaired and operated by the utility as presently constructed and
located, except as may be otherwise provided in any applicable franchise,
license or similar agreement.
   D.   Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements: The village, in its
discretion and as limited by law, may require utilities to enter into a
franchise, license or similar agreement for the privilege of locating their
facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the village
rights of way. Utilities that are not required by law to enter into such an
agreement may request that the village enter into such an agreement. In such an
agreement, the village may provide for terms and conditions inconsistent with
this chapter.
   E.   Effect Of Franchises, Licenses, Or Similar Agreements:
      1.   Utilities Other Than Telecommunications Providers: In the event that
a utility other than a telecommunications provider has a franchise, license or
similar agreement with the village, such franchise, license or similar
agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement and any
lawful renewal or extension thereof.
      2.   Telecommunications Providers: In the event of any conflict with, or
inconsistency between, the provisions of this chapter and the provisions of any
franchise, license or similar agreement between the village and any
telecommunications provider, the provisions of such franchise, license or
similar agreement shall govern and control during the term of such agreement
and any lawful renewal or extension thereof.
   F.   Conflicts With Other Chapters: This chapter supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the
extent of such conflict.
   G.   Conflicts With State And Federal Laws: In the event that applicable
federal or state laws or regulations conflict with the requirements of this
chapter, the utility shall comply with the requirements of this chapter to the
maximum extent possible without violating federal or state laws or regulations.
   H.   Sound Engineering Judgment: The village shall use sound engineering
judgment when administering this chapter and may vary the standards,
conditions, and requirements expressed in this chapter when the village so
determines. Nothing herein shall be construed to limit the ability of the
village to regulate its rights of way for the protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter and unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the
words and terms listed shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section. Any term not defined in this section shall have the meaning ascribed
to it in 92 Illinois administrative code section 530.30, unless the context
clearly requires otherwise.
AASHTO: American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials.
ANSI: American National Standards Institute.
ASTM: American Society for Testing and Materials.
APPLICANT: A person applying for a permit under this chapter.
BACKFILL: The methods or materials for replacing excavated material in a trench
or pit.
BORE OR BORING: To excavate an underground cylindrical cavity for the insertion
of a pipe or electrical conductor.
CABLE OPERATOR: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(5).
CABLE SERVICE: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(6).
CABLE SYSTEM: That term as defined in 47 USC 522(7).
CARRIER PIPE: The pipe enclosing the liquid, gas or slurry to be transported.
CASING: A structural protective enclosure for transmittal devices such as:
carrier pipes, electrical conductors, and fiber optic devices.
CLEAR ZONE: The total roadside border area, starting at the edge of the
pavement, available for safe use by errant vehicles. This area may consist of a
shoulder, a recoverable slope, a nonrecoverable slope, and a clear run out
area. The desired width is dependent upon the traffic volumes and speeds, and
on the roadside geometry. Distances are specified in the AASHTO "Roadside
Design Guide".
COATING: Protective wrapping or mastic cover applied to buried pipe for
protection against external corrosion.
CODE: The municipal code of the village of Minooka.
CONDUCTOR: Wire carrying electrical current.
CONDUIT: A casing or encasement for wires or cables.
CONSTRUCTION OR CONSTRUCT: The installation, repair, maintenance, placement,
alteration, enlargement, demolition, modification or abandonment in place of
facilities.
COVER: The depth of earth or backfill over buried utility pipe or conductor.
CROSSING FACILITY: A facility that crosses one or more right of way lines of a
right of way.
DISRUPT THE RIGHT OF WAY: For the purposes of this chapter, any work that
obstructs the right of way or causes a material adverse effect on the use of
the right of way for its intended use. Such work may include, without
limitation, the following: excavating or other cutting; placement (whether
temporary or permanent) of materials, equipment, devices, or structures; damage
to vegetation; and compaction or loosening of the soil, and shall not include
the parking of vehicles or equipment in a manner that does not materially
obstruct the flow of traffic on a highway.
EMERGENCY: Any immediate maintenance to the facility required for the safety of
the public using or in the vicinity of the right of way or immediate
maintenance required for the health and safety of the general public served by
the utility.
ENCASEMENT: Provision of a protective casing.
EQUIPMENT: Materials, tools, implements, supplies, and/or other items used to
facilitate construction of facilities.
EXCAVATION: The making of a hole or cavity by removing material, or laying bare
by digging.
EXTRA HEAVY PIPE: Pipe meeting ASTM standards for this pipe designation.
FACILITY: All structures, devices, objects, and materials (including, but not
limited to, track and rails, wires, ducts, fiber optic cable, antennas, vaults,
boxes, equipment enclosures, cabinets, pedestals, poles, conduits, grates,
covers, pipes, cables, and appurtenances thereto) located on, over, above,
along, upon, under, across, or within rights of way under this chapter. For
purposes of this chapter, the term "facility" shall not include any facility
owned or operated by the village.
FREESTANDING FACILITY: A facility that is not a crossing facility or a parallel
facility, such as an antenna, transformer, pump, or meter station.
FRONTAGE ROAD: Roadway, usually parallel, providing access to land adjacent to
the highway where it is precluded by control of access to a highway.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS: Any substance or material which, due to its quantity,
form, concentration, location, or other characteristics, is determined by the
superintendent of public works to pose an unreasonable and imminent risk to the
life, health or safety of persons or property or to the ecological balance of
the environment, including, but not limited to, explosives, radioactive
materials, petroleum or petroleum products or gases, poisons, etiology
(biological) agents, flammables, corrosives or any substance determined to be
hazardous or toxic under any federal or state law, statute or regulation.
HIGHWAY: A specific type of right of way used for vehicular traffic including
rural or urban roads or streets. "Highway" includes all highway land and
improvements, including roadways, ditches and embankments, bridges, drainage
structures, signs, guardrails, protective structures and appurtenances
necessary or convenient for vehicle traffic.
HIGHWAY CODE: The Illinois highway code, 605 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/1-101
et seq., as amended from time to time.
HOLDER: A person or entity that has received authorization to offer or provide
cable or video service from the ICC pursuant to the Illinois cable and video
competition law, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/21-401.
ICC: Illinois commerce commission.
IDOT: Illinois department of transportation.
JULIE: The joint utility locating information for excavators utility
notification program.
JACKING: Pushing a pipe horizontally under a roadway by mechanical means with
or without boring.
JETTING: Pushing a pipe through the earth using water under pressure to create
a cavity ahead of the pipe.
JOINT USE: The use of pole lines, trenches or other facilities by two (2) or
more utilities.
MAJOR INTERSECTION: The intersection of two (2) or more major arterial
highways.
OCCUPANCY: The presence of facilities on, over or under right of way.
PARALLEL FACILITY: A facility that is generally parallel or longitudinal to the
centerline of a right of way.
PARKWAY: Any portion of the right of way not improved by street or sidewalk.
PAVEMENT CUT: The removal of an area of pavement for access to a facility or
for the construction of a facility.
PERMITTEE: That entity to which a permit has been issued pursuant to sections
10-1A-4 and 10-1A-5 of this chapter.
PETROLEUM PRODUCTS PIPELINES: Pipelines carrying crude or refined liquid
petroleum products including, but not limited to, gasoline, distillates,
propane, butane, or coal slurry.
PRACTICABLE: That which is performable, feasible or possible, rather than that
which is simply convenient.
PRESSURE: The internal force acting radially against the walls of a carrier
pipe expressed in pounds per square inch gauge (psig).
PROMPT: That which is done within a period of time specified by the village. If
no time period is specified, the period shall be thirty (30) calendar days.
PUBLIC ENTITY: A legal entity that constitutes or is part of the government,
whether at local, state or federal level.
RESTORATION: The repair of a right of way, easement, highway, roadway, or other
area disrupted by the construction of a facility.
RIGHT OF WAY OR RIGHTS OF WAY: Any street, alley, other land or waterway,
dedicated or commonly used for pedestrian or vehicular traffic or other similar
purposes, including utility and/or drainage easements, in which the village has
the right and authority to authorize, regulate or permit the location of
facilities other than those of the village. "Right of way" or "rights of way"
shall not include any real or personal village property that is not
specifically described in the previous two (2) sentences and shall not include
village buildings, fixtures and other structures or improvements, regardless of
whether they are situated in the right of way.
ROADWAY: That part of the highway that includes the pavement and shoulders.
SALE OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS AT RETAIL: The transmitting, supplying, or
furnishing of telecommunications and all services rendered in connection
therewith for a consideration, other than between a parent corporation and its
wholly owned subsidiaries or between wholly owned subsidiaries, when the gross
charge made by one such corporation to another such corporation is not greater
than the gross charge paid to the retailer for their use or consumption and not
for sale.
SECURITY FUND: That amount of security required pursuant to section 10-1A-10 of
this chapter.
SHOULDER: A width of roadway, adjacent to the pavement, providing lateral
support to the pavement edge and providing an area for emergency vehicular
stops and storage of snow removed from the pavement.
SOUND ENGINEERING JUDGMENT: A decision(s) consistent with generally accepted
engineering principles, practices and experience.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS: The village of Minooka superintendent of public
works or his or her designee.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS: This term includes, but is not limited to, messages or
information transmitted through use of local, toll and wide area telephone
service, channel services, telegraph services, teletypewriter service, computer
exchange service, private line services, mobile radio services, cellular mobile
telecommunications services, stationary two-way radio, paging service and any
other form of mobile or portable one-way or two-way communications, and any
other transmission of messages or information by electronic or similar means,
between or among points by wire, cable, fiber optics, laser, microwave, radio,
satellite, or similar facilities. "Private line" means a dedicated nontraffic
sensitive service for a single customer that entitles the customer to exclusive
or priority use of a communications channel, or a group of such channels, from
one or more specified locations to one or more other specified locations.
"Telecommunications" shall not include value added services in which computer
processing applications are used to act on the form, content, code and protocol
of the information for purposes other than transmission. "Telecommunications"
shall not include purchase of telecommunications by a telecommunications
service provider for use as a component part of the service provided by such
provider to the ultimate retail consumer who originates or terminates the end
to end communications. "Telecommunications" shall not include the provision of
cable services through a cable system as defined in the cable communications
act of 1984 (47 USC section 521 and following), as now or hereafter amended, or
cable or other programming services subject to an open video system fee payable
to the village through an open video system as defined in the rules of the
federal communications commission (47 CFR section 76.1500 and following), as
now or hereafter amended.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: Any person that installs, owns, operates or
controls facilities in the right of way used or designed to be used to transmit
telecommunications in any form.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS RETAILER: Means and includes every person engaged in making
sales of telecommunications at retail as defined herein.
TRENCH: A relatively narrow open excavation for the installation of an
underground facility.
UTILITY: The individual or entity owning or operating any "facility" as defined
in this chapter.
VENT: A pipe to allow the dissipation into the atmosphere of gases or vapors
from an underground casing.
VIDEO SERVICE: That term as defined in section 21-201(v) of the Illinois cable
and video competition law of 2007, 220 Illinois Compiled Statutes 21-201(v).
VILLAGE: The village of Minooka.
WATER LINES: Pipelines carrying raw or potable water.
WET BORING: Boring using water under pressure at the cutting auger to soften
the earth and to provide a sluice for the excavated material. (Ord. 2007-56,
12-19-2007)
10-1A-3: ANNUAL REGISTRATION REQUIRED:
Every utility that occupies right of way within the village shall register on
January 1 of each year with the superintendent of public works, providing the
utility's name, address and regular business telephone and telecopy numbers,
the name of one or more contact persons who can act on behalf of the utility in
connection with emergencies involving the utility's facilities in the right of
way and a twenty four (24) hour telephone number for each such person, and
evidence of insurance as required in section 10-1A-8 of this chapter, in the
form of a certificate of insurance. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-4: PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATIONS AND FEES:
   A.   Permit Required: No person shall construct (as defined in this chapter)
any facility on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within any village
right of way which: 1) changes the location of the facility, 2) adds a new
facility, 3) disrupts the right of way (as defined in this chapter), or 4)
materially increases the amount of area or space occupied by the facility on,
over, above, along, under, across or within the right of way, without first
filing an application with the superintendent of public works and obtaining a
permit from the village therefor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.
No permit shall be required for installation and maintenance of service
connections to customers' premises where there will be no disruption of the
right of way.
   B.   Permit Application: All applications for permits pursuant to this
chapter shall be filed on a form provided by the village clerk and shall be
filed in such number of duplicate copies as the village may designate. The
applicant may designate those portions of its application materials that it
reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as
"proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials
accordingly.
   C.   Minimum General Application Requirements: The application shall be made
by the utility or its duly authorized representative and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following:
      1.   The utility's name and address and telephone and telecopy numbers;
      2.   The applicant's name and address, if different than the utility, its
telephone and telecopy numbers, e-mail address, and its interest in the work;
      3.   The names, addresses and telephone and telecopy numbers and e-mail
addresses of all professional consultants, if any, advising the applicant with
respect to the application;
      4.   A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and
intent of the facility and the uses to which the facility will be put. The
scope and detail of such description shall be appropriate to the nature and
character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters
likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed;
      5.   Evidence that the utility has placed on file with the village clerk:
         a.   A written traffic control plan demonstrating the protective
measures and devices that will be employed consistent with the "Illinois Manual
On Uniform Traffic Control Devices", to prevent injury or damage to persons or
property and to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular
traffic; and
         b.   An emergency contingency plan which shall specify the nature of
potential emergencies, including, without limitation, construction and
hazardous materials emergencies, and the intended response by the applicant.
The intended response shall include notification to the superintendent of
public works and shall promote protection of the safety and convenience of the
public. Compliance with ICC regulations for emergency contingency plans
constitutes compliance with this section unless the superintendent of public
works finds that additional information or assurances are needed;
      6.   Drawings, plans and specifications showing the work proposed,
including the certification of an engineer that such drawings, plans, and
specifications comply with applicable codes, rules, and regulations;
      7.   Evidence of insurance as required in section 10-1A-8 of this
chapter;
      8.   Evidence of posting of the security fund as required in section 10-
1A-10 of this chapter;
      9.   Any request for a variance from one or more provisions of this
chapter (see section 10-1A-21 of this chapter); and
      10.   Such additional information or a preconstruction meeting as may be
reasonably required by the village.
   D.   Supplemental Application Requirements For Specific Types Of Utilities:
In addition to the requirements of subsection C of this section, the permit
application shall include the following items, as applicable to the specific
utility that is the subject of the permit application:
      1.   In the case of the installation of a new electric power,
communications, telecommunications, cable television service, video service or
natural gas distribution system, evidence that any "certificate of public
convenience and necessity" or other regulatory authorization that the applicant
is required by law to obtain, or that the applicant has elected to obtain, has
been issued by the ICC or other jurisdictional authority;
      2.   In the case of natural gas systems, state the proposed pipe size,
design, construction class, and operating pressures;
      3.   In the case of water lines, indicate that all requirements of the
Illinois environmental protection agency, division of public water supplies,
have been satisfied;
      4.   In the case of sewer line installations, indicate that the land and
water pollution requirements of the Illinois environmental protection agency,
division of water pollution control and other local or state entities with
jurisdiction, have been satisfied; or
      5.   In the case of petroleum products pipelines, state the type or types
of petroleum products, pipe size, maximum working pressure, and the design
standard to be followed.
   E.   Applicant's Duty To Update Information: Throughout the entire permit
application review period and the construction period authorized by the permit,
any amendments to information contained in a permit application shall be
submitted by the utility in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30)
days after the change necessitating the amendment.
   F.   Application Fees: Unless otherwise provided by franchise, license, or
similar agreement, all applications for permits pursuant to this chapter shall
be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00). No application fee is required to be paid by any electricity
utility that is paying the municipal electricity infrastructure maintenance fee
pursuant to the electricity infrastructure maintenance fee act. (Ord. 2007-56,
12-19-2007)
10-1A-5: ACTION ON PERMIT APPLICATIONS:
   A.   Village Review Of Permit Applications: Completed permit applications,
containing all required documentation, shall be examined by the superintendent
of public works within a reasonable time after filing. If the application does
not conform to the requirements of all applicable ordinances, codes, laws,
rules, and regulations, the superintendent of public works shall reject such
application in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the superintendent of
public works is satisfied that the proposed work conforms to the requirements
of this chapter and applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules, and regulations,
the superintendent of public works shall issue a permit therefor as soon as
practicable. In all instances, it shall be the duty of the applicant to
demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the superintendent of public works, that
the construction proposed under the application shall be in full compliance
with the requirements of this chapter.
   B.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Telecommunications
Retailers:
      1.   Pursuant to section 4 of the telephone company act, 220 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 65/4, a telecommunications retailer shall notify the village
clerk that it intends to commence work governed by this chapter for facilities
for the provision of telecommunications services. Such notice shall consist of
plans, specifications, and other documentation sufficient to demonstrate the
purpose and intent of the facilities, and shall be provided by the
telecommunications retailer to the village clerk not less than ten (10) days
prior to the commencement of work requiring no excavation and not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the commencement of work requiring excavation. The
superintendent of public works shall specify the portion of the right of way
upon which the facility may be placed, used and constructed.
      2.   In the event that the superintendent of public works fails to
provide such specification of location to the telecommunications retailer
within either: a) ten (10) days after service of notice to the village clerk by
the telecommunications retailer in the case of work not involving excavation
for new construction or b) twenty five (25) days after service of notice by the
telecommunications retailer in the case of work involving excavation for new
construction, the telecommunications retailer may commence work without
obtaining a permit under this chapter.
      3.   Upon the provision of such specification by the village, where a
permit is required for work pursuant to section 10-1A-4 of this chapter the
telecommunications retailer shall submit to the village clerk an application
for a permit and any and all plans, specifications and documentation available
regarding the facility to be constructed. Such application shall be subject to
the requirements of subsection A of this section.
   C.   Additional Village Review Of Applications Of Holders Of State
Authorization Under The Cable And Video Competition Law Of 2007: Applications
by a utility that is a holder of a state issued authorization under the cable
and video competition law of 2007 shall be deemed granted forty five (45) days
after submission to the village clerk, unless otherwise acted upon by the
village, provided the holder has complied with applicable village codes,
ordinances, and regulations. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-6: EFFECT OF PERMIT:
   A.   Authority Granted; No Property Right Or Other Interest Created: A
permit from the village authorizes a permittee to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this chapter on village rights of way, and does
not create a property right or grant authority to the permittee to impinge upon
the rights of others who may have an interest in or adjacent to the public
rights of way.
   B.   Duration: No permit issued under this chapter shall be valid for a
period longer than six (6) months unless construction is actually begun within
that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion.
   C.   Preconstruction Meeting Required: No construction shall begin pursuant
to a permit issued under this chapter prior to attendance by the permittee and
all major contractors and subcontractors who will perform any work under the
permit at a preconstruction meeting. The preconstruction meeting shall be held
at a date, time and place designated by the village with such village
representatives in attendance as the village deems necessary. The meeting shall
be for the purpose of reviewing the work under the permit, and reviewing
special considerations necessary in the areas where work will occur, including,
without limitation, presence or absence of other utility facilities in the area
and their locations, procedures to avoid disruption of other utilities, use of
rights of way by the public during construction, and access and egress by
adjacent property owners.
   D.   Compliance With All Laws Required: The issuance of a permit by the
village does not excuse the permittee from complying with other requirements of
the village and all applicable statutes, laws, ordinances, rules, and
regulations. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-7: REVISED PERMIT DRAWINGS:
In the event that the actual locations of any facilities deviate in any
material respect from the locations identified in the plans, drawings and
specifications submitted with the permit application, the permittee shall
submit a revised set of drawings or plans to the village clerk within ninety
(90) days after the completion of the permitted work. The revised drawings or
plans shall specifically identify where the locations of the actual facilities
deviate from the locations approved in the permit. If any deviation from the
permit also deviates from the requirements of this chapter, it shall be treated
as a request for variance in accordance with section 10-1A-21 of this chapter.
If the village denies the request for a variance, then the permittee shall
either remove the facility from the right of way or modify the facility so that
it conforms to the permit and submit revised drawings or plans therefor. (Ord.
2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-8: INSURANCE:
   A.   Required Coverages And Limits: Unless otherwise provided by franchise,
license, or similar agreement, each utility occupying right of way or
constructing any facility in the right of way shall secure and maintain the
following liability insurance policies insuring the utility as named insured
and naming the village, and its elected and appointed officers, officials,
consultants, agents, representatives, and employees as additional insureds on
the policies listed in subsections A1 and A2 of this section.
      1.   Commercial general liability insurance, including premises-
operations, explosion, collapse, and underground hazard (commonly referred to
as "X", "C", and "U" coverages) and products- completed operations coverage
with limits not less than:
         a.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for bodily injury or death
to each person;
         b.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for property damage
resulting from any one accident; and
         c.   Five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) for all other types of
liability;
      2.   Automobile liability for owned, nonowned and hired vehicles with a
combined single limit of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for personal
injury and property damage for each accident;
      3.   Workers' compensation with statutory limits; and
      4.   Employer's liability insurance with limits of not less than one
million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per employee and per accident.
   If the utility is not providing such insurance to protect the contractors
and subcontractors performing the work, then such contractors and
subcontractors shall comply with this section.
   B.   Excess Or Umbrella Policies: The coverages required by this section may
be in any combination of primary, excess, and umbrella policies. Any excess or
umbrella policy must provide excess coverage over underlying insurance on a
following form basis such that when any loss covered by the primary policy
exceeds the limits under the primary policy, the excess or umbrella policy
becomes effective to cover such loss.
   C.   Copies Required: The utility shall provide copies of any of the
policies required by this section to the village clerk within ten (10) days
following receipt of a written request.
   D.   Maintenance And Renewal Of Required Coverages: The insurance policies
required by this section shall contain the following endorsement:
      It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled
nor the intention not to renew be stated until thirty (30) days after receipt
by the Village Clerk, by registered mail or certified mail, return receipt
requested, of a written notice addressed to the Village Administrator of such
intent to cancel or not to renew.
   Within ten (10) days after receipt by the village clerk of said notice, and
in no event later than ten (10) days prior to said cancellation, the utility
shall obtain and furnish to the village clerk evidence of replacement insurance
policies meeting the requirements of this section.
   E.   Self-Insurance: A utility may self-insure all or a portion of the
insurance coverage and limit requirements required by subsection A of this
section. A utility that self-insures is not required, to the extent of such
self-insurance, to comply with the requirement for the naming of additional
insureds under subsection A of this section, or the requirements of subsections
B, C and D of this section. A utility that elects to self-insure shall provide
to the village clerk evidence sufficient to demonstrate its financial ability
to self-insure the insurance coverage and limit requirements required under
subsection A of this section, such as evidence that the utility is a "private
self-insurer" under the workers' compensation act.
   F.   Effect Of Insurance And Self-Insurance On Utility's Liability: The
legal liability of the utility to the village and any person for any of the
matters that are the subject of the insurance policies or self-insurance
required by this section shall not be limited by such insurance policies or
self-insurance or by the recovery of any amounts thereunder.
   G.   Insurance Companies: All insurance provided pursuant to this section
shall be effected under valid and enforceable policies, issued by insurers
legally able to conduct business with the licensee in the state of Illinois.
All insurance carriers and surplus line carriers shall be rated "A-" or better
and of a class size "X" or higher by A.M. Best Company. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-
2007)
10-1A-9: INDEMNIFICATION:
By occupying or constructing facilities in the right of way, a utility shall be
deemed to agree to defend, indemnify and hold the village and its elected and
appointed officers, officials, consultants, agents, representatives, and
employees harmless from and against any and all injuries, claims, demands,
judgments, damages, losses and expenses, including reasonable attorney fees and
costs of suit or defense, arising out of, resulting from or alleged to arise
out of or result from the negligent, careless or wrongful acts, omissions,
failures to act or misconduct of the utility or its affiliates, officers,
employees, agents, contractors or subcontractors in the construction of
facilities or occupancy of the rights of way, and in providing or offering
service over the facilities, whether such acts or omissions are authorized,
allowed or prohibited by this chapter or by a franchise, license, or similar
agreement; provided, however, that the utility's indemnity obligations
hereunder shall not apply to any injuries, claims, demands, judgments, damages,
losses or expenses arising out of or resulting from the negligence, misconduct
or breach of this chapter by the village, its officials, officers, employees,
agents or representatives. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-10: SECURITY:
   A.   Purpose: The permittee shall establish a security fund in a form and in
an amount as set forth in this section. The security fund shall be continuously
maintained in accordance with this section at the permittee's sole cost and
expense until the completion of the work authorized under the permit. The
security fund shall serve as security for:
      1.   The faithful performance by the permittee of all the requirements of
this chapter;
      2.   Any expenditure, damage, or loss incurred by the village occasioned
by the permittee's failure to comply with any codes, rules, regulations,
orders, permits and other directives of the village issued pursuant to this
chapter; and
      3.   The payment by permittee of all liens and all damages, claims,
costs, or expenses that the village may pay or incur by reason of any action or
nonperformance by permittee in violation of this chapter including, without
limitation, any damage to public property or restoration work the permittee is
required by this chapter to perform that the village must perform itself or
have completed as a consequence solely of the permittee's failure to perform or
complete, and all other payments due the village from the permittee pursuant to
this chapter or any other applicable law.
   B.   Form: The permittee shall provide the security fund to the village
clerk in the form, at the permittee's election, of cash, a surety bond in a
form acceptable to the village board, or an unconditional letter of credit in a
form acceptable to the village board. Any surety bond or letter of credit
provided pursuant to this subsection shall, at a minimum:
      1.   Provide that it will not be canceled without prior notice to the
village clerk and the permittee;
      2.   Not require the consent of the permittee prior to the collection by
the village of any amounts covered by it; and
      3.   Shall provide a location convenient to the village and within the
state of Illinois at which it can be drawn.
   C.   Amount: The dollar amount of the security fund shall be sufficient to
provide for the reasonably estimated cost to restore the right of way to at
least as good a condition as that existing prior to the construction under the
permit, as determined by the superintendent of public works, and may also
include reasonable, directly related costs, including attorney fees, that the
village estimates are likely to be incurred if the permittee fails to perform
such restoration. The reasonably estimated cost as described above shall be
multiplied by one hundred twenty five percent (125%) to establish the security
fund amount. Where the construction of facilities proposed under the permit
will be performed in phases in multiple locations in the village, with each
phase consisting of construction of facilities in one location or a related
group of locations, and where construction in another phase will not be
undertaken prior to substantial completion of restoration in the previous phase
or phases, the superintendent of public works may, in the exercise of sound
discretion, allow the permittee to post a single amount of security which shall
be applicable to each phase of the construction under the permit. The amount of
the security fund for phased construction shall be equal to the greatest amount
that would have been required under the provisions of this subsection for any
single phase.
   D.   Withdrawals: The village, upon fourteen (14) days' advance written
notice clearly stating the reason for, and its intention to exercise withdrawal
rights under this subsection, may withdraw an amount from the security fund,
provided that the permittee has not reimbursed the village for such amount
within the fourteen (14) day notice period. Withdrawals may be made if the
permittee:
      1.   Fails to make any payment required to be made by the permittee
hereunder;
      2.   Fails to pay any liens relating to the facilities that are due and
unpaid;
      3.   Fails to reimburse the village for any damages, claims, costs or
expenses which the village has been compelled to pay or incur by reason of any
action or nonperformance by the permittee; or
      4.   Fails to comply with any provision of this chapter that the village
determines can be remedied by an expenditure of an amount in the security fund.
   E.   Replenishment: Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of written
notice from the village that any amount has been withdrawn from the security
fund, the permittee shall restore the security fund to the amount specified in
subsection C of this section.
   F.   Interest: The permittee may request that any and all interest accrued
on the amount in the security fund be returned to the permittee by the village,
upon written request for said withdrawal to the village, provided that any such
withdrawal does not reduce the security fund below the minimum balance required
in subsection C of this section.
   G.   Closing And Return Of Security Fund: Upon completion of the work
authorized under the permit, the permittee shall be entitled to the return of
the security fund, or such portion thereof as remains on deposit, within a
reasonable time after account is taken for all offsets necessary to compensate
the village for failure by the permittee to comply with any provisions of this
chapter or other applicable law. In the event of any revocation of the permit,
the security fund, and any and all accrued interest therein, shall become the
property of the village to the extent necessary to cover any reasonable costs,
loss or damage incurred by the village as a result of said revocation, provided
that any amounts in excess of said costs, loss or damage shall be refunded to
the permittee.
   H.   Rights Not Limited: The rights reserved to the village with respect to
the security fund are in addition to all other rights of the village, whether
reserved by this chapter or otherwise authorized by law, and no action,
proceeding or exercise of right with respect to said security fund shall affect
any other right the village may have. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
village shall not be entitled to a double monetary recovery with respect to any
of its rights which may be infringed or otherwise violated. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-
19-2007)
10-1A-11: PERMIT SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION:
   A.   Village Right To Revoke Permit: The village may revoke or suspend a
permit issued pursuant to this chapter for one or more of the following
reasons:
      1.   Fraudulent, false, misrepresenting, or materially incomplete
statements in the permit application;
      2.   Noncompliance with this chapter;
      3.   Permittee's physical presence or presence of permittee's facilities
on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way
presents a direct or imminent threat to the public health, safety, or welfare;
or
      4.   Permittee's failure to construct the facilities substantially in
accordance with the permit and approved plans.
   B.   Notice Of Revocation Or Suspension: The village shall send written
notice of its intent to revoke or suspend a permit issued pursuant to this
chapter stating the reason or reasons for the revocation or suspension and the
alternatives available to permittee under this section.
   C.   Permittee Alternatives Upon Receipt Of Notice Of Revocation Or
Suspension: Upon receipt of a written notice of revocation or suspension from
the village, the permittee shall have the following options:
      1.   Immediately provide the superintendent of public works with evidence
that no cause exists for the revocation or suspension;
      2.   Immediately correct, to the satisfaction of the village, the
deficiencies stated in the written notice, providing written proof of such
correction to the superintendent of public works within five (5) working days
after receipt of the written notice of revocation; or
      3.   Immediately remove the facilities located on, over, above, along,
upon, under, across, or within the public rights of way and restore the rights
of way to the satisfaction of the village providing written proof of such
removal to the superintendent of public works within ten (10) days after
receipt of the written notice of revocation.
   The village may, in its discretion, for good cause shown, extend the time
periods provided in this subsection.
   D.   Stop Work Order: In addition to the issuance of a notice of revocation
or suspension, the village may issue a stop work order immediately upon
discovery of any of the reasons for revocation set forth within subsection A of
this section.
   E.   Failure Or Refusal Of The Permittee To Comply: If the permittee fails
to comply with the provisions of subsection C of this section, the village or
its designee may, at the option of the village: 1) correct the deficiencies; 2)
upon not less than twenty (20) days' notice to the permittee, remove the
subject facilities or equipment; or 3) after not less than thirty (30) days'
notice to the permittee of failure to cure the noncompliance, deem them
abandoned and property of the village. The permittee shall be liable in all
events to the village for all costs of removal. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-12: CHANGE OF OWNERSHIP OR OWNER'S IDENTITY OR LEGAL STATUS:
   A.   Notification Of Change: A utility shall notify the village clerk no
less than thirty (30) days prior to the transfer of ownership of any facility
in the right of way or change in identity of the utility. The new owner of the
utility or the facility shall have all the obligations and privileges enjoyed
by the former owner under the permit, if any, and applicable laws, ordinances,
rules and regulations, including this chapter, with respect to the work and
facilities in the right of way.
   B.   Amended Permit: A new owner shall request that any current permit be
amended to show current ownership. If the new owner fails to have a new or
amended permit issued in its name, the new owner shall be presumed to have
accepted, and agreed to be bound by, the terms and conditions of the permit if
the new owner uses the facility or allows it to remain on the village's right
of way.
   C.   Insurance And Bonding: All required insurance coverage or bonding must
be changed to reflect the name of the new owner upon transfer. (Ord. 2007-56,
12-19-2007)
10-1A-13: GENERAL CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS:
   A.   Standards And Principles: All construction in the right of way shall be
consistent with applicable ordinances, codes, laws, rules and regulations, and
commonly recognized and accepted traffic control and construction principles,
sound engineering judgment and, where applicable, the principles and standards
set forth in the following IDOT publications, as amended from time to time:
      1.   "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction";
      2.   "Supplemental Specifications And Recurring Special Provisions";
      3.   "Highway Design Manual";
      4.   "Highway Standards Manual";
      5.   "Standard Specifications For Traffic Control Items";
      6.   "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices" (92 Ill. adm.
code section 545);
      7.   "Flagger's Handbook"; and
      8.   "Work Site Protection Manual For Daylight Maintenance Operations".
   B.   Interpretation Of Municipal Standards And Principles: If a discrepancy
exists between or among differing principles and standards required by this
chapter, the superintendent of public works shall determine, in the exercise of
sound engineering judgment, which principles apply and such decision shall be
final. If requested, the superintendent of public works shall state which
standard or principle will apply to the construction, maintenance, or operation
of a facility in the future. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-14: TRAFFIC CONTROL:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: The village's minimum requirements for traffic
protection are contained in IDOT's "Illinois Manual On Uniform Traffic Control
Devices" and this code.
   B.   Warning Signs, Protective Devices, And Flaggers: The utility is
responsible for providing and installing warning signs, protective devices and
flaggers, when necessary, meeting all applicable federal, state, and local
requirements for protection of the public and the utility's workers when
performing any work on the public rights of way.
   C.   Interference With Traffic: All work shall be phased so that there is
minimum interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
   D.   Notice When Access Is Blocked: At least forty eight (48) hours prior to
beginning work that will partially or completely block access to any residence,
business or institution, the utility shall notify the resident, business or
institution of the approximate beginning time and duration of such work;
provided, however, that in cases involving emergency repairs pursuant to
section 10-1A-20 of this chapter, the utility shall provide such notice as is
practicable under the circumstances.
   E.   Compliance: The utility shall take immediate action to correct any
deficiencies in traffic protection requirements that are brought to the
utility's attention by the village. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-15: LOCATION OF FACILITIES:
   A.   General Requirements: In addition to location requirements applicable
to specific types of utility facilities, all utility facilities, regardless of
type, shall be subject to the general location requirements of this subsection.
      1.   No Interference With Village Facilities: No utility facilities shall
be placed in any location if the superintendent of public works determines that
the proposed location will require the relocation or displacement of any of the
village's utility facilities or will otherwise interfere with the operation or
maintenance of any of the village's utility facilities.
      2.   Underground facilities for electric, video service, cable service,
or telecommunications utilities shall be located in easements along rear or
side lot lines that shall provide for the right of the respective utilities to
install, lay, construct, renew, operate, and maintain such conduits and all
underground facilities with all necessary normal equipment or appurtenances for
the purpose of providing subdivisions with adequate cable TV, electric or
telephone services.
      3.   Minimum Interference And Impact: The proposed location shall cause
only the minimum possible interference with the use of the right of way and
shall cause only the minimum possible impact upon, and interference with the
rights and reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin said right of
way.
      4.   No Interference With Travel: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location that interferes with the usual travel on such right of way.
      5.   No Limitations On Visibility: No utility facility shall be placed in
any location so as to limit visibility of or by users of the right of way.
      6.   Size Of Utility Facilities: The proposed installation shall use the
smallest suitable vaults, boxes, equipment enclosures, power pedestals, and/or
cabinets then in use by the facility owner, regardless of location, for the
particular application.
   B.   Parallel Facilities Located Within Highways:
      1.   Overhead Parallel Facilities: An overhead parallel facility may be
located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   Lines are located as near as practicable to the right of way line
and as nearly parallel to the right of way line as reasonable pole alignment
will permit;
         b.   Where pavement is curbed, poles are as remote as practicable from
the curb with a minimum distance of two feet (2') behind the face of the curb,
where available;
         c.   Where pavement is uncurbed, poles are as remote from pavement
edge as practicable with minimum distance of four feet (4') outside the outer
shoulder line of the roadway and are not within the clear zone;
         d.   No pole is located in the ditch line of a highway; and
         e.   Any ground mounted appurtenance is located within one foot (1')
of the right of way line or as near as possible to the right of way line.
      2.   Underground Parallel Facilities: An underground parallel facility
may be located within the right of way lines of a highway only if:
         a.   The facility is located as near the right of way line as
practicable and not more than eight feet (8') from and parallel to the right of
way line;
         b.   A new facility may be located under the paved portion of a
highway only if other locations are impracticable or inconsistent with sound
engineering judgment (e.g., a new cable may be installed in existing conduit
without disrupting the pavement); and
         c.   In the case of an underground power or communications line, the
facility shall be located as near the right of way line as practicable and not
more than five feet (5') from the right of way line and any above grounded
appurtenance shall be located within one foot (1') of the right of way line or
as near as practicable.
   C.   Facilities Crossing Highways:
      1.   No Future Disruption: The construction and design of crossing
facilities installed between the ditch lines or curb lines of village highways
may require the incorporation of materials and protections (such as encasement
or additional cover) to avoid settlement or future repairs to the roadbed
resulting from the installation of such crossing facilities.
      2.   Cattle Passes, Culverts, Or Drainage Facilities: Crossing facilities
shall not be located in cattle passes, culverts, or drainage facilities.
      3.   Ninety Degree Crossing Required: Crossing facilities shall cross at
or as near to a ninety degree (90°) angle to the centerline as practicable.
      4.   Overhead Power Or Communication Facility: An overhead power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   It has a minimum vertical line clearance as required by ICC's
rules entitled, "construction of electric power and communication lines" (83
Ill. adm. code 305);
         b.   Poles are located within one foot (1') of the right of way line
of the highway and outside of the clear zone; and
         c.   Overhead crossings at major intersections are avoided.
      5.   Underground Power Or Communication Facility: An underground power or
communication facility may cross a highway only if:
         a.   The design materials and construction methods will provide
maximum maintenance free service life; and
         b.   Capacity for the utility's foreseeable future expansion needs is
provided in the initial installation.
      6.   Markers: The village may require the utility to provide a marker at
each right of way line where an underground facility other than a power or
communication facility crosses a highway. Each marker shall identify the type
of facility, the utility, and an emergency phone number. Markers may also be
eliminated as provided in current federal regulations (49 CFR section 192.707
(1989)).
   D.   Facilities To Be Located Within Particular Rights Of Way: The village
may require that facilities be located within particular rights of way that are
not highways, rather than within particular highways.
   E.   Freestanding Facilities:
      1.   The village may restrict the location and size of any freestanding
facility located within a right of way.
      2.   The village may require any freestanding facility located within a
right of way to be screened from view. Cable and video service providers shall
bear the sole responsibility of installation, replacement and maintenance of
all required screening and landscaping, so long as the facilities remain in the
right of way.
   F.   Facilities Installed Aboveground: Aboveground facilities may be
installed only if:
      1.   No other existing facilities in the area are located underground;
      2.   New underground installation is not technically feasible; and
      3.   The proposed installation will be made at a location, and will
employ suitable design and materials, to provide the greatest protection of
aesthetic qualities of the area being traversed without adversely affecting
safety. Suitable designs include, but are not limited to, self-supporting
armless, single pole construction with vertical configuration of conductors and
cable. Existing utility poles and light standards shall be used wherever
practicable; the installation of additional utility poles is strongly
discouraged. Pedestal facilities for electric, video service, cable service, or
telecommunications shall be located in rear lot easements.
   G.   Facility Attachments To Bridges Or Roadway Structures:
      1.   Facilities may be installed as attachments to bridges or roadway
structures only where the utility has demonstrated that all other means of
accommodating the facility are not practicable. Other means shall include, but
are not limited to, underground, underwater, independent poles, cable supports
and tower supports, all of which are completely separated from the bridge or
roadway structure. Facilities transmitting commodities that are volatile,
flammable, corrosive, or energized, especially those under significant pressure
or potential, present high degrees of risk and such installations are not
permitted.
      2.   A utility shall include in its request to accommodate a facility
installation on a bridge or roadway structure supporting data demonstrating the
impracticability of alternate routing. Approval or disapproval of an
application for facility attachment to a bridge or roadway structure will be
based upon the following considerations:
         a.   The type, volume, pressure or voltage of the commodity to be
transmitted and an evaluation of the resulting risk to persons and property in
the event of damage to or failure of the facility;
         b.   The type, length, value, and relative importance of the highway
structure in the transportation system;
         c.   The alternative routings available to the utility and their
comparative practicability;
         d.   The proposed method of attachment;
         e.   The ability of the structure to bear the increased load of the
proposed facility;
         f.   The degree of interference with bridge maintenance and painting;
         g.   The effect on the visual quality of the structure; and
         h.   The public benefit expected from the utility service as compared
to the risk involved.
   H.   Appearance Standards:
      1.   The village may prohibit the installation of facilities in
particular locations in order to preserve visual quality.
      2.   A facility may be constructed only if its construction does not
require extensive removal or alteration of trees or terrain features visible to
the right of way user or to adjacent residents and property owners, and if it
does not impair the aesthetic quality of the lands being traversed. (Ord. 2007-
56, 12-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-8, 2-25-2020)
10-1A-16: CONSTRUCTION METHODS AND MATERIALS:
   A.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Construction
Methods:
      1.   Boring Or Jacking: All work shall be done in accordance with the
applicable articles of section 552 of the IDOT "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction".
         a.   Pits And Shoring: Boring or jacking under rights of way shall be
accomplished from pits located at a minimum distance specified by the
superintendent of public works from the edge of the pavement. Pits for boring
or jacking shall be excavated no more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of
boring or jacking operations and backfilled within forty eight (48) hours after
boring or jacking operations are completed. While pits are open, they shall be
clearly marked and protected by barricades. Shoring shall be designed, erected,
supported, braced, and maintained so that it will safely support all vertical
and lateral loads that may be imposed upon it during the boring or jacking
operation.
         b.   Wet Boring Or Jetting: Wet boring or jetting shall not be
permitted under the roadway.
         c.   Borings With Diameters Greater Than Six Inches: Borings over six
inches (6") in diameter shall be accomplished by directional drilling or with
an auger and following pipe, and the diameter of the auger shall not exceed the
outside diameter of the following pipe by more than one inch (1").
         d.   Borings With Diameters Six Inches Or Less: Borings of six inches
(6") or less in diameter may be accomplished by either jacking, directional
drilling, guided with auger, or auger and following pipe method.
         e.   Tree Preservation: Any facility located within the drip line of
any tree designated by the village to be preserved or protected shall be bored
under or around the root system.
      2.   Trenching: Trenching for facility installation, repair, or
maintenance on rights of way shall be done in accord with the applicable
portions of section 603 of IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And Bridge
Construction".
         a.   Length: The length of open trench shall be kept to the
practicable minimum consistent with requirements for pipeline testing. Only
one-half (1/2) of any intersection may have an open trench at any time unless
special permission is obtained from the superintendent of public works.
         b.   Open Trench And Excavated Material: Open trench and windrowed
excavated material shall be protected as required by chapter 6 of the "Illinois
Manual On Uniform Traffic Control Devices". Where practicable, the excavated
material shall be deposited between the roadway and the trench as added
protection. Excavated material shall not be allowed to remain on the paved
portion of the roadway. Where right of way width does not allow for windrowing
excavated material off the paved portion of the roadway, excavated material
shall be hauled to an off road location.
         c.   Drip Line Of Trees: The utility shall not trench within the drip
line of any tree designated by the village to be preserved.
      3.   Backfilling:
         a.   Any pit, trench, or excavation created during the installation of
facilities shall be backfilled for its full width, depth, and length using
methods and materials in accordance with IDOT's "Standard Specifications For
Road And Bridge Construction". When excavated material is hauled away or is
unsuitable for backfill, suitable granular backfill shall be used.
         b.   For a period of three (3) years from the date construction of a
facility is completed, the utility shall be responsible to remove and restore
any backfilled area that has settled due to construction of the facility. If so
ordered by the superintendent of public works, the utility, at its expense,
shall, within ten (10) calendar days of such order, remove any pavement and
backfill material to the top of the installed facility, place and properly
compact new backfill material, and restore new pavement, sidewalk, curbs, and
driveways to the proper grades, as determined by the superintendent of public
works.
      4.   Pavement Cuts: Pavement cuts for facility installation or repair
shall be permitted on a highway only if that portion of the highway is closed
to traffic. If a variance to the limitation set forth in this subsection A4 is
permitted under section 10-1A-21 of this chapter, the following requirements
shall apply:
         a.   Any excavation under pavements shall be backfilled and compacted
as soon as practicable with granular material of CA-6 or CA-10 gradation, as
designated by the superintendent of public works.
         b.   Restoration of pavement, in kind, shall be accomplished as soon
as practicable, and temporary repair with bituminous mixture shall be provided
immediately. Any subsequent failure of either the temporary repair or the
restoration shall be rebuilt upon notification by the village.
         c.   All pavement removals shall be accomplished by straight, full
depth saw cuts.
         d.   For all rights of way which have been reconstructed with a
concrete surface/base in the last seven (7) years, or resurfaced in the last
three (3) years, permits shall not be issued unless such work is determined to
be an emergency repair or other work considered necessary and unforeseen before
the time of the reconstruction or unless a pavement cut is necessary for a
JULIE locate.
      5.   Encasement:
         a.   Casing pipe shall be designed to withstand the load of the
highway and any other superimposed loads. The casing shall be continuous either
by one piece fabrication or by welding or jointed installation approved by the
village.
         b.   The venting, if any, of any encasement shall extend within one
foot (1') of the right of way line. No aboveground vent pipes shall be located
in the area established as clear zone for that particular section of the
highway.
         c.   In the case of water main or service crossing, encasement shall
be furnished between bore pits unless continuous pipe or village approved
jointed pipe is used under the roadway. Casing may be omitted only if pipe is
installed prior to highway construction and carrier pipe is continuous or
mechanical joints are of a type approved by the village. Bell and spigot type
pipe shall be encased regardless of installation method.
         d.   In the case of gas pipelines of sixty (60) psig or less,
encasement may be eliminated.
         e.   In the case of gas pipelines or petroleum products pipelines with
installations of more than sixty (60) psig, encasement may be eliminated only
if: 1) extra heavy pipe is used that precludes future maintenance or repair and
2) cathodic protection of the pipe is provided.
         f.   If encasement is eliminated for a gas or petroleum products
pipeline, the facility shall be located so as to provide that construction does
not disrupt the right of way.
      6.   Minimum Cover Of Underground Facilities: Cover shall be provided and
maintained at least in the amount specified in the following table for minimum
cover for the type of facility:
 
Type Of Facility                          Minimum Cover
Electric lines                            30 inches
Communication, cable or video service     18 to 24 inches (as determined by
lines                                     village)
Gas or petroleum products                 30 inches
Water line                                Sufficient cover to provide freeze
                                          protection
Sanitary sewer, storm sewer, or drainage  Sufficient cover to provide freeze
line                                      protection
 
   B.   Standards And Requirements For Particular Types Of Facilities:
      1.   Electric Power Or Communication Lines:
         a.   Code Compliance: Electric power or communications facilities
within village rights of way shall be constructed, operated, and maintained in
conformity with the provisions of 83 Illinois administrative code part 305
(formerly general order 160 of the Illinois commerce commission) entitled
"rules for construction of electric power and communication lines", and the
national electrical safety code.
         b.   Overhead Facilities: Overhead power or communication facilities
shall use single pole construction and, where practicable, joint use of poles
shall be used. Utilities shall make every reasonable effort to design the
installation so guys and braces will not be needed. Variances may be allowed if
there is no feasible alternative and if guywires are equipped with guy guards
for maximum visibility.
         c.   Underground Facilities:
            (1) Cable may be installed by trenching or plowing, provided that
special consideration is given to boring in order to minimize damage when
crossing improved entrances and side roads.
            (2) If a crossing is installed by boring or jacking, encasement
shall be provided between jacking or bore pits.
            (3) Cable shall be grounded in accordance with the national
electrical safety code.
         d.   Burial Of Drops: All temporary service drops placed between
November 1 of the prior year and March 15 of the current year, also known as
snow drops, shall be buried by May 31 of the current year, weather permitting,
unless otherwise permitted by the village. Weather permitting, utilities shall
bury all temporary drops, excluding snow drops, within ten (10) business days
after placement.
      2.   Underground Facilities Other Than Electric Power Or Communication
Lines: Underground facilities other than electric power or communication lines
may be installed by:
         a.   The use of "moles", "whip augers", or other approved methods
which compress the earth to move the opening for the pipe;
         b.   Jacking or boring with vented encasement provided between the
ditch lines or toes of slopes of the highway;
         c.   Open trench with vented encasement between ultimate ditch lines
or toes of slopes, but only if prior to roadway construction; or
         d.   Tunneling with vented encasement, but only if installation is not
possible by other means.
      3.   Gas Transmission, Distribution And Service: Gas pipelines within
rights of way shall be constructed, maintained, and operated in a village
approved manner and in conformance with the federal code of the office of
pipeline safety operations, department of transportation, part 192 -
transportation of natural and other gas by pipeline: minimum federal safety
standards (49 CFR section 192), IDOT's "Standard Specifications For Road And
Bridge Construction", and all other applicable laws, rules, and regulations.
      4.   Petroleum Products Pipelines: Petroleum products pipelines within
rights of way shall conform to the applicable sections of ANSI standard code
for pressure piping (liquid petroleum transportation piping systems ANSI-
B 31.4).
      5.   Water Lines, Sanitary Sewer Lines, Storm Water Sewer Lines Or
Drainage Lines: Water lines, sanitary sewer lines, storm sewer lines, and
drainage lines within rights of way shall meet or exceed the recommendations of
the current "Standard Specifications For Water And Sewer Main Construction In
Illinois".
      6.   Ground Mounted Appurtenances: Ground mounted appurtenances to
overhead or underground facilities, when permitted within a right of way, shall
be provided with a vegetation free area extending one foot (1') in width beyond
the appurtenance in all directions. The vegetation free area may be provided by
an extension of the mounting pad, or by heavy duty plastic or similar material
approved by the superintendent of public works. With the approval of the
superintendent of public works, shrubbery surrounding the appurtenance may be
used in place of vegetation free area. The housing for ground mounted
appurtenances shall be painted a neutral color to blend with the surroundings.
   C.   Materials:
      1.   General Standards: The materials used in constructing facilities
within rights of way shall be those meeting the accepted standards of the
appropriate industry, the applicable portions of IDOT's "Standard
Specifications For Road And Bridge Construction", the requirements of the
Illinois commerce commission, or the standards established by other official
regulatory agencies for the appropriate industry.
      2.   Material Storage On Right Of Way: No material shall be stored on the
right of way without the prior written approval of the superintendent of public
works. When such storage is permitted, all pipe, conduit, wire, poles, cross
arms, or other materials shall be distributed along the right of way prior to
and during installation in a manner to minimize hazards to the public or an
obstacle to right of way maintenance or damage to the right of way and other
property. If material is to be stored on right of way, prior approval must be
obtained from the village.
      3.   Hazardous Materials: The plans submitted by the utility to the
village shall identify any hazardous materials that may be involved in the
construction of the new facilities or removal of any existing facilities.
   D.   Operational Restrictions:
      1.   Construction operations on rights of way may, at the discretion of
the village, be required to be discontinued when such operations would create
hazards to traffic or the public health, safety, and welfare. Such operations
may also be required to be discontinued or restricted when conditions are such
that construction would result in extensive damage to the right of way or other
property.
      2.   These restrictions may be waived by the superintendent of public
works when emergency work is required to restore vital utility services.
      3.   Unless otherwise permitted by the village, the hours of construction
are seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
   E.   Location Of Existing Facilities: Any utility proposing to construct
facilities in the village shall contact JULIE and ascertain the presence and
location of existing aboveground and underground facilities within the rights
of way to be occupied by its proposed facilities. The village will make its
permit records available to a utility for the purpose of identifying possible
facilities. When notified of an excavation or when requested by the village or
by JULIE, a utility shall locate and physically mark its underground facilities
within forty eight (48) hours, excluding weekends and holidays, in accordance
with the Illinois underground facilities damage prevention act1. 220 ILCS 50/
1 et seq.1. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007; amd. Ord. 2020-8, 2-25-2020)
10-1A-17: VEGETATION CONTROL:
   A.   Electric Utilities; Compliance With State Laws And Regulations: An
electric utility shall conduct all tree trimming and vegetation control
activities in the right of way in accordance with applicable Illinois laws and
regulations, and additionally, with such local franchise or other agreement
with the village as permitted by law.
   B.   Other Utilities; Tree Trimming Permit Required: Tree trimming that is
done by any other utility with facilities in the right of way and that is not
performed pursuant to applicable Illinois laws and regulations specifically
governing same, or as required under this chapter, shall not be considered a
normal maintenance operation, but shall require the application for, and the
issuance of, a permit, in addition to any other permit required under this
chapter.
      1.   Application For Tree Trimming Permit: Applications for tree trimming
permits shall include assurance that the work will be supervised and
accomplished by competent workers who are experienced in accepted tree pruning
practices. Tree trimming permits shall designate an expiration date in the
interest of assuring that the work will be expeditiously accomplished.
      2.   Damage To Trees: Poor pruning practices resulting in damaged or
misshapen trees will not be tolerated and shall be grounds for cancellation of
the tree trimming permit and for assessment of damages. The village will
require compensation for trees extensively damaged and for trees removed
without authorization. The formula developed by the International Society of
Arboriculture will be used as a basis for determining the compensation for
damaged trees or unauthorized removal of trees. The village may require the
removal and replacement of trees if trimming or radical pruning would leave
them in an unacceptable condition.
   C.   Specimen Trees Or Trees Of Special Significance: The village may
require that special measures be taken to preserve specimen trees or trees of
special significance. The required measures may consist of higher poles, side
arm extensions, covered wire or other means.
   D.   Chemical Use:
      1.   Except as provided in the following subsection, no utility shall
spray, inject or pour any chemicals on or near any trees, shrubs or vegetation
in the village for any purpose, including the control of growth, insects or
disease.
      2.   Spraying of any type of brush killing chemicals will not be
permitted on rights of way unless the utility demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the superintendent of public works that such spraying is the only
practicable method of vegetation control. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-18: REMOVAL, RELOCATION, OR MODIFICATIONS OF UTILITY FACILITIES:
   A.   Notice: Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the
village, a utility shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
utility facilities within the rights of way whenever the corporate authorities
have determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is
reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation
of any village improvement in or upon, or the operations of the village in or
upon, the rights of way.
   B.   Removal Of Unauthorized Facilities: Within thirty (30) days following
written notice from the village, any utility that owns, controls, or maintains
any unauthorized facility or related appurtenances within the public rights of
way shall, at its own expense, remove all or any part of such facilities or
appurtenances from the public rights of way. A facility is unauthorized and
subject to removal in the following circumstances:
      1.   Upon expiration or termination of the permittee's license or
franchise, unless otherwise permitted by applicable law;
      2.   If the facility was constructed or installed without the prior grant
of a license or franchise, if required;
      3.   If the facility was constructed or installed without prior issuance
of a required permit in violation of this chapter; or
      4.   If the facility was constructed or installed at a location not
permitted by the permittee's license or franchise.
   C.   Emergency Removal Or Relocation Of Facilities: The village retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any facilities located within the rights of
way of the village, as the village may determine to be necessary, appropriate
or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the municipality shall attempt to notify the utility, if
known, prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the utility, if
known, after cutting or removing a facility.
   D.   Abandonment Of Facilities: Upon abandonment of a facility within the
public rights of way of the village, the utility shall notify the village clerk
within ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the village may
direct the utility to remove all or any portion of the facility if the
superintendent of public works determines that such removal will be in the best
interest of the public health, safety and welfare. In the event that the
village does not direct the utility that abandoned the facility to remove it,
by giving notice of abandonment to the village clerk, the abandoning utility
shall be deemed to consent to the alteration or removal of all or any portion
of the facility by another utility or person. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-19: CLEANUP AND RESTORATION:
The utility shall remove all excess material and restore all turf and terrain
and other property within ten (10) days after any portion of the rights of way
are disturbed, damaged or destroyed due to construction or maintenance by the
utility, all to the satisfaction of the village. This includes restoration of
entrances and side roads. Restoration of roadway surfaces shall be made using
materials and methods approved by the superintendent of public works. Such
cleanup and repair may be required to consist of backfilling, regrading,
reseeding, resodding, or any other requirement to restore the right of way to a
condition substantially equivalent to that which existed prior to the
commencement of the project. The time period provided in this section may be
extended by the superintendent of public works for good cause shown. (Ord.
2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-20: MAINTENANCE AND EMERGENCY MAINTENANCE:
   A.   General: Facilities on, over, above, along, upon, under, across, or
within rights of way are to be maintained by or for the utility in a manner
satisfactory to the village and at the utility's expense.
   B.   Emergency Maintenance Procedures: Emergencies may justify noncompliance
with normal procedures for securing a permit:
      1.   If an emergency creates a hazard on the traveled portion of the
right of way, the utility shall take immediate steps to provide all necessary
protection for traffic on the highway or the public on the right of way
including the use of signs, lights, barricades or flaggers. If a hazard does
not exist on the traveled way, but the nature of the emergency is such as to
require the parking on the shoulder of equipment required in repair operations,
adequate signs and lights shall be provided. Parking on the shoulder in such an
emergency will only be permitted when no other means of access to the facility
is available.
      2.   In an emergency, the utility shall, as soon as possible, notify the
superintendent of public works or his or her duly authorized agent of the
emergency, informing him or her as to what steps have been taken for protection
of the traveling public and what will be required to make the necessary
repairs. If the nature of the emergency is such as to interfere with the free
movement of traffic, the village police shall be notified immediately.
      3.   In an emergency, the utility shall use all means at hand to complete
repairs as rapidly as practicable and with the least inconvenience to the
traveling public.
   C.   Emergency Repairs: The utility must file in writing with the village
clerk a description of the repairs undertaken in the right of way within forty
eight (48) hours after an emergency repair. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-21: VARIANCES:
   A.   Request For Variance: A utility requesting a variance from one or more
of the provisions of this chapter must do so in writing to the superintendent
of public works as a part of the permit application. The request shall identify
each provision of this chapter from which a variance is requested and the
reasons why a variance should be granted.
   B.   Authority To Grant Variances: The superintendent of public works shall
decide whether a variance is authorized for each provision of this chapter
identified in the variance request on an individual basis.
   C.   Conditions For Granting Of Variance: The superintendent of public works
may authorize a variance only if the utility requesting the variance has
demonstrated that:
      1.   One or more conditions not under the control of the utility (such as
terrain features or an irregular right of way line) create a special hardship
that would make enforcement of the provision unreasonable, given the public
purposes to be achieved by the provision; and
      2.   All other designs, methods, materials, locations or facilities that
would conform with the provision from which a variance is requested are
impracticable in relation to the requested approach.
   D.   Additional Conditions For Granting Of A Variance: As a condition for
authorizing a variance, the superintendent of public works may require the
utility requesting the variance to meet reasonable standards and conditions
that may or may not be expressly contained within this chapter but which carry
out the purposes of this chapter.
   E.   Denial Of A Variance: A permit shall be deemed rejected and, if
applicable, the forty five (45) day time period as set forth in section 10-1A-
5 of this chapter shall be immediately tolled, upon the right of way manager's
denial of a request for a variance.
   F.   Right To Appeal: Any utility aggrieved by any order, requirement,
decision or determination, including denial of a variance, made by the
superintendent of public works under the provisions of this chapter, shall have
the right to appeal to the village board, or such other board or commission as
the village board may designate. The application for appeal shall be submitted
in writing to the village clerk within thirty (30) days after the date of such
order, requirement, decision or determination. The village board shall commence
its consideration of the appeal at the village board's next regularly scheduled
meeting occurring at least seven (7) days after the filing of the appeal. The
village board shall timely decide the appeal by a vote of a majority of the
commissioners present at said meeting. (Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-22: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with
any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine not less than
one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; and a separate violation shall be deemed committed for each
violation, and on each day during and on which a violation occurs or continues.
There may be times when the village will incur delay or other costs, including
third party claims, because the utility will not or cannot perform its duties
under its permit and this chapter. Unless the utility shows that another
allocation of the cost of undertaking the requested action is appropriate, the
utility shall bear the village's costs of damages and its costs of installing,
maintaining, modifying, relocating, or removing the facility that is the
subject of the permit. No other administrative agency or commission may review
or overrule a permit related cost apportionment of the village. Sanctions may
be imposed upon a utility that does not pay the costs apportioned to it. (Ord.
2007-56, 12-19-2007)
10-1A-23: ENFORCEMENT:
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any additional or
further remedies that the village may have for enforcement of this chapter.
(Ord. 2007-56, 12-19-2007)
CHAPTER 1B
MINOOKA ADOPT-A-HIGHWAY PROGRAM
SECTION:
10-1B-1: Purpose
10-1B-2: Definitions
10-1B-3: Duties Of The Department
10-1B-4: Application, Acceptance, And Rejection
10-1B-5: Adoption Agreement
10-1B-6: Participating Group's Responsibilities
10-1B-7: Revocation
10-1B-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of the Minooka adopt-a-highway program is to allow private citizens
to support the village's antilitter efforts by allowing groups to adopt
sections of public highways within the village for the purpose of litter
collection. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-2: DEFINITIONS:
ADOPTED SECTION: A length of municipal, township, county, or state right of way
within the village's geographic jurisdiction and identified by the village as a
safe, adoptable section of right of way for adoption by a group. Sections of
rights of way may be determined inappropriate for adoption for safety reasons.
No interstate highway shall be an adopted section.
DEPARTMENT: The public works department of the village of Minooka.
GROUP: Members or employees of civic or not for profit organizations, and
commercial or private enterprises, who have requested to participate, or are
participating in, the Minooka adopt-a-highway program.
GROUP COORDINATOR: The individual selected by a group to serve as its liaison
with the village.
GROUP PRESIDENT: The individual who is the recognized leader, president, or
chairman for a group.
LITTER: Any unsightly or offensive matter that may include, but is not limited
to, disposable packaging, containers, cans, bottles, paper, ashes, and cigar
and cigarette butts. Litter does not include hazardous, heavy, large items, or
carcasses. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-3: DUTIES OF THE DEPARTMENT:
   A.   The public works department shall oversee every aspect of the Minooka
adopt-a- highway program. As part of such oversight, the department shall:
      1.   Consider each application for adoption filed with the village as set
out in section 10-1B-4 of this chapter.
      2.   Determine what specific sections of public rights of way within the
village's geographic jurisdiction are adopted by any given group pursuant to
said group's adoption agreement.
      3.   Erect signs at each end of every adopted section with the name or
acronym of the group displayed. In so doing, the department shall ensure that
all such signs conform with the requirements of section 35 of the Illinois
adopt-a-highway act1. 605 ILCS 120/35.1.
      4.   Provide each group with such trash bags as are necessary to complete
litter collection activities on their respective adopted section in conformance
with said group's adoption agreement.
      5.   Provide each group with such safety apparel as is necessary to
protect all of the group's members, employees, agents, and volunteers engaged
in litter collection on said group's adopted section.
      6.   Provide each group with such warning signage as is necessary to
caution the public during litter collection activities on the group's adopted
section, and pick up such warning signage within a reasonable time after the
group's litter collection activities have been completed.
      7.   Remove filled trash bags from an adopted section as soon as
practical after litter collection has occurred. Beyond such removal of trash
bags, the department shall not be responsible for collecting or removing any
litter from any adopted section except under unusual circumstances such as to
remove large, heavy, or hazardous items.
      8.   Develop the safety training programs that are to be utilized by
group coordinators in compliance with section
10-1B-6 of this chapter and section 25 of the Illinois adopt-a- highway act1.
605 ILCS 120/25.1. Such safety training programs shall be appropriate for the
various types of roadway that may be adopted within a jurisdiction. (Ord. 2016-
36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-4: APPLICATION, ACCEPTANCE, AND REJECTION:
   A.   Any group wishing to participate in the Minooka adopt-a-highway program
must complete the village's application form in its entirety and return such
completed form to the public works department.
   B.   The department shall consider every application filed by every group
and shall approve or reject each such application within fourteen (14) business
days after receipt of the same. In determining whether to approve or reject any
particular group's application, the department shall consider the group's
ability to comply fully with the obligations imposed on it pursuant to its
adoption agreement, this chapter, and the Illinois adopt-a-highway act, as well
as any and all other factors that the department deems relevant to its
determination.
   C.   Upon deciding whether to approve or reject any group's application, the
department shall provide the group coordinator and group president of the
applicant group with written notice of such approval or denial, directed to the
group's address as reflected in its application. Under no circumstances will a
notice delivered to the group's address pursuant to this section be deemed
invalid or ineffective by virtue of the fact that either the group coordinator
or group president do not reside at said address. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-5: ADOPTION AGREEMENT:
   A.   In the event that the department approves any group's application, the
group coordinator and group president shall execute a written adoption
agreement with the village that provides for the group's participation in the
Minooka adopt-a-highway program.
   B.   Said adoption agreement shall be in the form prescribed from time to
time by the department, but shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
      1.   An acknowledgment by the group of the hazardous nature of the work
involved in participating in the adopt-a-highway program;
      2.   An agreement to comply with the terms and conditions in the act and
any other terms and conditions required by the sponsoring jurisdiction;
      3.   An agreement that the group, its members, employees, agents, and
volunteers shall assume all liability for and hold the state of Illinois and
state's agents or employees harmless from any and all claims of action
resulting from the group's members', employees', agents', or volunteers' work
in the program, except for the negligent acts of the state of Illinois, the
state's agents, or the state's employees;
      4.   An agreement that the group, its members, employees, agents, and
volunteers shall assume all liability for and hold the village of Minooka and
the village's agents or employees harmless from any and all claims of action
resulting from the group's members', employees', agents', or volunteers' work
in the program, except for the negligent acts of the village and the village's
agents or employees;
      5.   An agreement that the group, its members, employees, agents, and
volunteers are jointly and severally bound by the terms and conditions set
forth in the agreement; and
      6.   The respective responsibilities of the group and the village as set
forth in section
10-1B-6 of this chapter and in sections 25 and 30 of the Illinois adopt-a-
highway act2. 605 ILCS 120/25, 120/30.2. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-6: PARTICIPATING GROUP'S RESPONSIBILITIES:
   A.   Groups participating in the Minooka adopt-a-highway program shall:
      1.   Obey and abide by all laws and regulations relating to safety,
including the village's adopt-a-highway rules, regulations, and safety
guidelines, as well as all other terms and conditions contained in the group's
adoption agreement;
      2.   Provide one adult supervisor for every five (5) youths when persons
under age eighteen (18) are present on an adopted section;
      3.   Not allow any person under the age of ten (10) to be a member of the
group of persons who will be engaged in litter collection on the adopted
section;
      4.   Require all group members, agents, and volunteers to attend a safety
meeting conducted by the group before participation in any litter collection
along an adopted section;
      5.   Require the group coordinator, or his or her designee, to conduct
group safety meetings and to receive safety training as required by the
department;
      6.   Adopt its adopted section for a minimum of two (2) years;
      7.   Collect litter along any adopted section adopted by the group at
least four (4) times a year;
      8.   Require the group coordinator to provide prior notice, as required
by the department, whenever the group intends to collect litter along its
adopted section;
      9.   Require the group members, agents, and volunteers to properly wear
any safety apparel provided by the village at all times that litter collection
is ongoing along an adopted section;
      10.   Be responsible for prohibiting the group's members, employees,
agents, and/or volunteers from possessing, consuming, or being under the
influence of alcohol or drugs while engaged in litter collection on an adopted
section;
      11.   Maintain a first aid kit and an adequate supply of drinking water
while the group's members, employees, agents, and/or volunteers are collecting
litter along an adopted section;
      12.   Place litter in trash bags provided by the department and collect
all filled trash bags at a location along the adopted section as designated by
the department; and
      13.   Not subcontract or assign its duties or responsibilities to any
other group or organization. (Ord. 2016-36, 12-13-2016)
10-1B-7: REVOCATION:
In the event that any group violates any provision of this chapter, the
Illinois adopt-a- highway act, or the village's rules, regulations, or safety
guidelines as set out from time to time by the department, the department may
revoke any and all adoption agreements that the group may have with the
village. Upon such revocation, the department shall provide the group
coordinator and group president of the applicant group with written notice of
such revocation directed to the group's address as reflected in its
application. Under no circumstances will a notice delivered to the group's
address be deemed invalid by virtue of the fact that either the group
coordinator or group president does not reside at said address. (Ord. 2016-36,
12-13-2016)
CHAPTER 1C
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
SECTION:
10-1C-1: Purpose
10-1C-2: Conflicts With State And Federal Laws
10-1C-3: Definitions
10-1C-4: Permitted Use
10-1C-5: Permit Required
10-1C-6: Permit Application Requirements
10-1C-7: Application Fees
10-1C-8: Application/Permit Exceptions
10-1C-9: Work Within Right-Of-Way Affecting Traffic
10-1C-10: Completeness Of Application
10-1C-11: Tolling
10-1C-12: Consolidated Applications
10-1C-13: Application Process
10-1C-14: Denials
10-1C-15: Resubmittals
10-1C-16: Duration Of Permits
10-1C-17: Means Of Submitting Applications
10-1C-18: Pole Attachment Agreement
10-1C-19: Collocation Requirements And Conditions
10-1C-20: Exceptions To Applicability
10-1C-21: Pre-Existing Agreements
10-1C-22: Annual Recurring Rate
10-1C-23: Abandonment
10-1C-24: Dispute Resolution
10-1C-25: Indemnification
10-1C-26: Insurance
10-1C-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations, standards and
procedures for the siting and collocation of small wireless facilities on
rights-of-way within the Village's jurisdiction, or outside the rights-of-way
on property zoned by the Village exclusively for commercial or industrial use,
in a manner that is consistent with Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act,
50 Illinois Compiled Statutes 835/1, et al. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-2: CONFLICTS WITH STATE AND FEDERAL LAWS:
In the event that applicable Federal or State laws or regulations conflict with
the requirements of this chapter, the wireless provider shall comply with the
requirements of this chapter to the maximum extent possible without violating
Federal or State laws or regulations. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
ANTENNA: Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services.
APPLICABLE CODES: Building, Fire, Electrical, Plumbing, or Mechanical Codes
adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments to those
codes, including the National Electric Safety Code.
APPLICANT: Any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider.
APPLICATION: A request submitted by an applicant to the Village for a permit to
collocate small wireless facilities, and a request that includes the
installation of a new utility pole for such collocation, as well as any
applicable fee for the review of such application.
COLLOCATE OR COLLOCATION: To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or
replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or
utility pole.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: Cable service, as defined in 47 USC 522(6), as amended;
information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as amended;
telecommunications service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; mobile
service, as defined in 47 USC 153(53), as amended; or wireless service other
than mobile service.
COMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDER: A cable operator, as defined in 47 USC 522(5),
as amended; a provider of information service, as defined in 47 USC 153(24), as
amended; a telecommunications carrier, as defined in 47 USC 153(51), as
amended; or a wireless provider.
FCC: The Federal Communications Commission of the United States.
FEE: A one-time charge.
HISTORIC DISTRICT OR HISTORIC LANDMARK: A building, property, or site, or group
of buildings, properties, or sites that are either: a) listed in the National
Register of Historic Places or formally determined eligible for listing by the
Keeper of the National Register, the individual who has been delegated the
authority by the Federal agency to list properties and determine their
eligibility for the National Register, in accordance with section VI.D.1.a.i
through section VI.D.1.a.v of the Nationwide Programmatic Agreement codified at
47 CFR part 1, appendix C; or b) designated as a locally landmarked building,
property, site, or historic district by an ordinance adopted by the Village
pursuant to a preservation program that meets the requirements of the Certified
Local Government Program of the Illinois State Historic Preservation Office or
where such certification of the preservation program by the Illinois State
Historic Preservation Office is pending.
LAW: A Federal or State Statute, common law, code, rule, regulation, order, or
local ordinance or resolution.
MICRO WIRELESS FACILITY: A small wireless facility that is not larger in
dimension than twenty four inches (24") in length, fifteen inches (15") in
width, and twelve inches (12") in height and that has an exterior antenna, if
any, no longer than eleven inches (11").
PERMIT: A written authorization required by the Village to perform an action or
initiate, continue, or complete a project.
PERSON: An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust, or other entity or organization.
PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY: The functional division of the Federal government, the
State, a unit of local government, or a special purpose district located in
whole or in part within this State, that provides or has authority to provide
firefighting, police, ambulance, medical, or other emergency services to
respond to and manage emergency incidents.
RATE: A recurring charge.
RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area on, below, or above a public roadway, highway, street,
public sidewalk, alley, or utility easement dedicated for compatible use.
Right-of-way does not include Village-owned aerial lines.
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY: A wireless facility that meets both of the following
qualifications: a) each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than
six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed
elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an
imaginary enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and b) all other
wireless equipment attached directly to a utility pole associated with the
facility is cumulatively no more than twenty five (25) cubic feet in volume.
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the
calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding
equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch, and vertical cable runs for
the connection of power and other services.
UTILITY POLE: A pole or similar structure that is used in whole or in part by a
communications service provider or for electric distribution, lighting, traffic
control, or a similar function.
VILLAGE UTILITY POLE: A utility pole owned or operated by the Village in public
rights-of-way.
WIRELESS FACILITY: Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless
communications between user equipment and a communications network, including:
a) equipment associated with wireless communications; and b) radio
transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power
supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration.
Wireless facility includes small wireless facilities. Wireless facility does
not include: a) the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the
equipment is collocated; or b) wireline backhaul facilities, coaxial or fiber
optic cable that is between wireless support structures or utility poles or
coaxial, or fiber optic cable that is otherwise not immediately adjacent to or
directly associated with an antenna.
WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: Any person authorized to provide
telecommunications service in the State that builds or installs wireless
communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities, wireless support
structures, or utility poles and that is not a wireless services provider but
is acting as an agent or a contractor for a wireless services provider for the
application submitted to the Village.
WIRELESS PROVIDER: A wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services
provider.
WIRELESS SERVICES: Any services provided to the general public, including a
particular class of customers, and made available on a nondiscriminatory basis
using licensed or unlicensed spectrum, whether at a fixed location or mobile,
provided using wireless facilities.
WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER: A person who provides wireless services.
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE: A freestanding structure, such as a monopole;
tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or other existing or
proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless
facilities. Wireless support structure does not include a utility pole. (Ord.
2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-4: PERMITTED USE:
Small wireless facilities are permitted uses and subject to administrative
review, except as provided in section
10-1C-19 of this chapter regarding height exceptions or variances, but not
subject to zoning review or approval if they are collocated: a) in rights-of-
way in any zoning district, or b) outside rights-of-way in property zoned
exclusively for commercial or industrial use. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-5: PERMIT REQUIRED:
An applicant shall obtain required permits from the Village to collocate a
small wireless facility. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-6: PERMIT APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS:
An application shall be received and processed, and permits issued shall be
subject to the following conditions and requirements:
   A.   Requirements: A wireless provider shall provide the following
information to the Village, together with the Village's Small Wireless
Facilities Permit Application, as a condition of any permit application to
collocate small wireless facilities on a utility pole or wireless support
structure:
      1.   Site specific structural integrity and, for a Village utility pole,
make-ready analysis prepared by a structural engineer, as that term is defined
in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of 1989;
      2.   The location where each proposed small wireless facility or utility
pole would be installed and photographs of the location and its immediate
surroundings depicting the utility poles or structures on which each proposed
small wireless facility would be mounted or location where utility poles or
structures would be installed. This should include a depiction of the completed
facility;
      3.   Specifications and drawings prepared by a structural engineer, as
that term is defined in section 4 of the Structural Engineering Practice Act of
1989, for each proposed small wireless facility covered by the application as
it is proposed to be installed;
      4.   The equipment type and model numbers for the antennas and all other
wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility;
      5.   A proposed schedule for the installation and completion of each
small wireless facility covered by the application, if approved; and
      6.   Certification that the collocation complies with the collocation
requirements and conditions contained herein, to the best of the applicant's
knowledge.
      7.   In the event that the proposed small wireless facility is to be
attached to an existing pole or wireless support structure owned by an entity
other than the Village, the wireless provider shall provide legally competent
evidence of the consent of the property owner, and, if not the same, the owner
of such pole or wireless support structure to the proposed collocation. (Ord.
2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-7: APPLICATION FEES:
Application fees are imposed as follows:
   A.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of six hundred fifty dollars
($650.00) for an application to collocate a single small wireless facility on
an existing utility pole or wireless support structure, and three hundred fifty
dollars ($350.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in a consolidated
application to collocate more than one small wireless facility on existing
utility poles or wireless support structures.
   B.   Applicant shall pay an application fee of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) for each small wireless facility addressed in an application that
includes the installation of a new utility pole for such collocation.
   C.   Notwithstanding any contrary provision of State law or local ordinance,
applications pursuant to this chapter shall be accompanied by the required
application fee. Application fees shall be non-refundable. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-
2018)
10-1C-8: APPLICATION/PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
The Village shall not require an application, approval or permit, or require
any fees or other charges, from a communications service provider authorized to
occupy the rights- of-way, for:
   A.   Routine maintenance;
   B.   The replacement of wireless facilities with wireless facilities that
are substantially similar, the same size, or smaller if the wireless provider
notifies the Village at least ten (10) days prior to the planned replacement
and includes equipment specifications for the replacement of equipment
consistent with subsection 10-1C-6A4 of this chapter; or
   C.   The installation, placement, maintenance, operation or replacement of
micro wireless facilities suspended on cables that are strung between existing
utility poles in compliance with applicable Safety Codes. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-
2018)
10-1C-9: WORK WITHIN RIGHT-OF-WAY AFFECTING TRAFFIC:
Wireless providers shall secure a permit from the Village to work within
rights-of-way for activities that affect traffic patterns or require lane
closures. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-10: COMPLETENESS OF APPLICATION:
Within thirty (30) days after receiving an application, the Village shall
determine whether the application is complete and notify the applicant. If an
application is incomplete, the Village must specifically identify the missing
information. An application shall be deemed complete if the Village fails to
provide notification to the applicant within thirty (30) days after all
documents, information and fees specifically enumerated in the Village's permit
application form are submitted by the applicant to the Village. (Ord. 2018-25,
8-28-2018)
10-1C-11: TOLLING:
Processing deadlines are tolled from the time the Village sends the notice of
incompleteness to the time the applicant provides the missing information. The
time period for applications may be further tolled by:
   A.   An express written agreement by both the applicant and the Village; or
   B.   A local, State or Federal disaster declaration or similar emergency
that causes the delay. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-12: CONSOLIDATED APPLICATIONS:
   A.   An applicant seeking to collocate small wireless facilities within the
jurisdiction of the Village shall be allowed, at the applicant's discretion, to
file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for the collocation
of up to twenty five (25) small wireless facilities if the collocations each
involve substantially the same type of small wireless facility and
substantially the same type of structure.
   B.   If an application includes multiple small wireless facilities, the
Village may remove small wireless facility collocations from the application
and treat separately small wireless facility collocations for which incomplete
information has been provided or that do not qualify for consolidated treatment
or that are denied. The Village may issue separate permits for each collocation
that is approved in a consolidated application. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-13: APPLICATION PROCESS:
The Village shall process applications as follows:
   A.   The first completed application shall have priority over applications
received by different applicants for collocation on the same utility pole or
wireless support structure.
   B.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility on an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure, or replacement of an existing
utility pole or wireless support structure shall be processed on a
nondiscriminatory basis and shall be deemed approved if the Village fails to
approve or deny the application within ninety (90) days after the submission of
a completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than seventy five (75) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 90th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided herein.
   C.   An application to collocate a small wireless facility that includes the
installation of a new utility pole shall be processed on a nondiscriminatory
basis and deemed approved if the Village fails to approve or deny the
application within one hundred twenty (120) days after the submission of a
completed application. However, if an applicant intends to proceed with the
permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, the applicant shall notify the
Village in writing of its intention to invoke the deemed approved remedy no
sooner than one hundred five (105) days after the submission of a completed
application. The permit shall be deemed approved on the latter of the 120th day
after submission of the complete application or the 10th day after the receipt
of the deemed approved notice by the Village. The receipt of the deemed
approved notice shall not preclude the Village's denial of the permit request
within the time limits as provided under this section. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-
2018)
10-1C-14: DENIALS:
   A.   The Village shall deny an application which does not meet the
requirements of this chapter.
   B.   If the Village determines that applicable codes, ordinances or
regulations that concern public safety, or the collocation requirements and
conditions contained herein require that the utility pole or wireless support
structure be replaced before the requested collocation, approval shall be
conditioned on the replacement of the utility pole or wireless support
structure at the cost of the wireless provider.
   C.   The Village shall document the basis for a denial, including the
specific code provisions or application conditions on which the denial is
based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the
Village denies an application. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-15: RESUBMITTALS:
   A.   The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the Village and
resubmit the revised application once within thirty (30) days after notice of
denial is sent to the applicant without paying an additional application fee.
The Village shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30)
days after the applicant resubmits the application or it is deemed approved.
Failure to resubmit the revised application within thirty (30) days of denial
shall require the applicant to submit a new application with applicable fees,
and recommencement of the Village's review period.
   B.   The applicant must notify the Village in writing of its intention to
proceed with the permitted activity on a deemed approved basis, which may be
submitted with the revised application.
   C.   Any review of a revised application shall be limited to the
deficiencies cited in the denial. However, this revised application does not
apply if the cure requires the review of a new location, new or different
structure to be collocated upon, new antennas, or other wireless equipment
associated with the small wireless facility. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-16: DURATION OF PERMITS:
The duration of a permit shall be for a period of not less than five (5) years,
and the permit shall be renewed for equivalent durations unless the Village
makes a finding that the small wireless facilities or the new or modified
utility pole do not comply with the applicable Village codes or any provision,
condition or requirement contained in this chapter. If the Act is repealed as
provided in section 90 therein, renewals of permits shall be subject to the
applicable Village code provisions or regulations in effect at the time of
renewal. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-17: MEANS OF SUBMITTING APPLICATIONS:
Applicants shall submit applications, supporting information and notices to the
Village by personal delivery at the Village Hall, 121 McEvilly Road, Minooka
IL. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-18: POLE ATTACHMENT AGREEMENT:
Within thirty (30) days after an approved permit to collocate a small wireless
facility on a Village utility pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter
into a Master Pole Attachment Agreement, provided by the Village for the
initial collocation on a Village utility pole by the applicant. For subsequent
approved permits to collocate on a small wireless facility on a Village utility
pole, the Village and the applicant shall enter into a License Supplement of
the Master Pole Attachment Agreement. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-19: COLLOCATION REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Public Safety Space Reservation: The Village may reserve space on
Village utility poles for future public safety uses, for the Village's electric
utility uses, or both, but a reservation of space may not preclude the
collocation of a small wireless facility unless the Village reasonably
determines that the Village utility pole cannot accommodate both uses.
   B.   Installation And Maintenance: The wireless provider shall install,
maintain, repair and modify its small wireless facilities in safe condition and
good repair and in compliance with the requirements and conditions of this
Code. The wireless provider shall ensure that its employees, agents or
contractors that perform work in connection with its small wireless facilities
are adequately trained and skilled in accordance with all applicable industry
and governmental standards and regulations.
   C.   No Interference With Public Safety Communication Frequencies: The
wireless provider's operation of the small wireless facilities shall not
interfere with the frequencies used by a public safety agency for public safety
communications. A wireless provider shall install small wireless facilities of
the type and frequency that will not cause unacceptable interference with a
public safety agency's communications equipment. Unacceptable interference will
be determined by and measured in accordance with industry standards and the
FCC's regulations addressing unacceptable interference to public safety
spectrum or any other spectrum licensed by a public safety agency. If a small
wireless facility causes such interference, and the wireless provider has been
given written notice of the interference by the public safety agency, the
wireless provider, at its own expense, shall remedy the interference in a
manner consistent with the abatement and resolution procedures for interference
with public safety spectrum established by the FCC including 47 CFR 22.970
through 47 CFR 22.973 and 47 CFR 90.672 through 47 CFR 90.675. The Village may
terminate a permit for a small wireless facility based on such interference if
the wireless provider is not in compliance with the Code of Federal Regulations
cited herein. Failure to remedy the interference as required herein shall
constitute a public nuisance.
   D.   Collocation Restrictions; Exceptions: The wireless provider shall not
collocate small wireless facilities on Village utility poles that are part of
an electric distribution or transmission system within the communication worker
safety zone of the pole or the electric supply zone of the pole. However, the
antenna and support equipment of the small wireless facility may be located in
the communications space on the Village utility pole and on the top of the
pole, if not otherwise unavailable, if the wireless provider complies with
applicable codes for work involving the top of the pole. For purposes of this
subparagraph, the terms "communications space", "communication worker safety
zone", and "electric supply zone" have the meanings given to those terms in the
National Electric Safety Code as published by the Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers.
   E.   Code Compliance: The wireless provider shall comply with all applicable
codes and local code provisions or regulations that concern public safety.
   F.   Design Standards: The wireless provider shall comply with written
design standards that are generally applicable for decorative utility poles, or
reasonable stealth, concealment and aesthetic requirements that apply to other
occupiers of the rights-of- way, including on a historic landmark or in a
historic district.
   G.   Alternate Placements: Except as provided in this collocation
requirements and conditions section, a wireless provider shall not be required
to collocate small wireless facilities on any specific utility pole, or
category of utility poles, or be required to collocate multiple antenna systems
on a single utility pole. However, with respect to an application for the
collocation of a small wireless facility associated with a new utility pole,
the Village may propose that the small wireless facility be collocated on an
existing utility pole or existing wireless support structure within one hundred
feet (100') of the proposed collocation, which the applicant shall accept if it
has the right to use the alternate structure on reasonable terms and
conditions, and the alternate location and structure does not impose technical
limits or additional material costs as determined by the applicant. If the
applicant refuses a collocation proposed by the Village, the applicant shall
provide written certification describing the property rights, technical limits
or material cost reasons the alternate location does not satisfy the criteria
in this paragraph.
   H.   Height Limitations: The maximum height of a small wireless facility
shall be no more than ten feet (10') above the utility pole or wireless support
structure on which the small wireless facility is collocated. New or
replacement utility poles or wireless support structures on which small
wireless facilities are collocated may not exceed the higher of:
      1.   Ten feet (10') in height above the tallest existing utility pole,
other than a utility pole supporting only wireless facilities, that is in place
on the date the application is submitted to the Village, that is located within
three hundred feet (300') of the new or replacement utility pole or wireless
support structure and that is in the same right-of- way within the
jurisdictional boundary of the Village, provided the Village may designate
which intersecting right-of-way within three hundred feet (300') of the
proposed utility pole or wireless support structures shall control the height
limitation for such facility; or
      2.   Forty five feet (45') above ground level.
   I.   Height Exceptions Or Variances: If an applicant proposes a height for a
new or replacement pole in excess of the above height limitations on which the
small wireless facility is proposed for collocation, the applicant shall apply
for a variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth
in section
10-1A-21 of this title in the case of construction/installation within the
Village right-of-way and in cases in industrial or commercial districts outside
of the Village right-of-way as provided in section
5-11-6 of this Code.
   J.   Contractual Design Requirements: The wireless provider shall comply
with requirements that are imposed by a contract between the Village and a
private property owner that concern design or construction standards applicable
to utility poles and ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-way.
   K.   Ground-Mounted Equipment Spacing: The wireless provider shall comply
with applicable spacing requirements in applicable codes and ordinances
concerning the location of ground-mounted equipment located in the right-of-
way. The applicant may apply for a variance in conformance with procedures,
terms and conditions set forth in section
10-1A-21 of this title.
   L.   Undergrounding Regulations: The wireless provider shall comply with
local code provisions or regulations concerning undergrounding requirements
that prohibit the installation of new or the modification of existing utility
poles in a right-of-way without prior approval. The applicant may apply for a
variance in conformance with procedures, terms and conditions set forth in
section
10-1A-21 of this title.
   M.   Collocation Completion Deadline: Collocation for which a permit is
granted shall be completed within one hundred eighty (180) days after issuance
of the permit, unless the Village and the wireless provider agree to extend
this period or a delay is caused by make-ready work for a Village utility pole
or by the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at the site,
provided the wireless provider has made a timely request within sixty (60) days
after the issuance of the permit for commercial power or backhaul services, and
the additional time to complete installation does not exceed three hundred
sixty (360) days after issuance of the permit. Otherwise, the permit shall be
void unless the Village grants an extension in writing to the applicant. (Ord.
2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-20: EXCEPTIONS TO APPLICABILITY:
Nothing in this chapter authorizes a person to collocate small wireless
facilities on:
   A.   Property owned by a private party or property owned or controlled by
the Village or another unit of local government that is not located within
rights-of-way, or a privately- owned utility pole or wireless support structure
without the consent of the property owner and, if not the same, the owner of
the pole or wireless support structure;
   B.   Property owned, leased, or controlled by a park district, forest
preserve district, or conservation district for public park, recreation or
conservation purposes without the consent of the affected district, excluding
the placement of facilities on rights-of-way located in an affected district
that are under the jurisdiction and control of a different unit of local
government as provided by the Illinois Highway Code; or
   C.   Property owned by a rail carrier registered under section 18c-7201 of
the Illinois Vehicle Code, Metra Commuter Rail or any other public commuter
rail service, or an electric utility as defined in section 16-102 of the Public
Utilities Act, without the consent of the rail carrier, public commuter rail
service, or electric utility. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to an
electric or gas public utility or such utility's wireless facilities if the
facilities are being used, developed and maintained consistent with the
provisions of subsection (i) of section 16-108.5 of the Public Utilities Act.
For the purposes of this subsection, "public utility" has the meaning given to
that term in section 3-105 of the Public Utilities Act. Nothing in this section
shall be construed to relieve any person from any requirement: 1) to obtain a
franchise or a State-issued authorization to offer cable service or video
service or 2) to obtain any required permission to install, place, maintain, or
operate communications facilities, other than small wireless facilities subject
to this chapter. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-21: PRE-EXISTING AGREEMENTS:
Existing agreements between the Village and wireless providers that relate to
the collocation of small wireless facilities in the right-of-way, including the
collocation of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles, that are in
effect on June 1, 2018, remain in effect for all small wireless facilities
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before June 1, 2018, subject to applicable termination provisions
contained therein. Agreements entered into after June 1, 2018, shall comply
with this chapter. A wireless provider that has an existing agreement with the
Village on the effective date of the Act may accept the rates, fees and terms
that the Village makes available under this chapter for the collocation of
small wireless facilities or the installation of new utility poles for the
collocation of small wireless facilities that are the subject of an application
submitted two (2) or more years after the effective date of the Act by
notifying the Village that it opts to accept such rates, fees and terms. The
existing agreement remains in effect, subject to applicable termination
provisions, for the small wireless facilities the wireless provider has
collocated on the Village's utility poles pursuant to applications submitted to
the Village before the wireless provider provides such notice and exercises its
option under this paragraph. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-22: ANNUAL RECURRING RATE:
A wireless provider shall pay to the Village an annual recurring rate to
collocate a small wireless facility on a Village utility pole located in a
right-of-way that equals: a) two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year or b) the
actual, direct and reasonable costs related to the wireless provider's use of
space on the Village utility pole. If the Village has not billed the wireless
provider actual and direct costs, the fee shall be two hundred dollars
($200.00) payable on the first day after the first annual anniversary of the
issuance of the permit or notice of intent to collocate, and on each annual
anniversary date thereafter. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-23: ABANDONMENT:
A small wireless facility that is not operated for a continuous period of
twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned. The owner of the facility
shall remove the small wireless facility within ninety (90) days after receipt
of written notice from the Village notifying the wireless provider of the
abandonment. The notice shall be sent by certified or registered mail, return
receipt requested, by the Village to the owner at the last known address of the
wireless provider. If the small wireless facility is not removed within ninety
(90) days of such notice, the Village may remove or cause the removal of such
facility pursuant to the terms of its pole attachment agreement for Village
utility poles or through whatever actions are provided for abatement of
nuisances or by other law for removal and cost recovery. A wireless provider
shall provide written notice to the Village if it sells or transfers small
wireless facilities within the jurisdiction of the Village. Such notice shall
include the name and contact information of the new wireless provider. (Ord.
2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-24: DISPUTE RESOLUTION:
The Circuit Court of Will County shall have exclusive jurisdiction to resolve
all disputes arising under the Small Wireless Facilities Deployment Act and
this chapter. Pending resolution of a dispute concerning rates for collocation
of small wireless facilities on Village utility poles within the right-of-way,
the Village shall allow the collocating person to collocate on its poles at
annual rates of no more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year per Village
utility pole, with rates to be determined upon final resolution of the dispute.
(Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-25: INDEMNIFICATION:
A wireless provider shall indemnify and hold the Village harmless against any
and all liability or loss from personal injury or property damage resulting
from or arising out of, in whole or in part, the use or occupancy of the
Village improvements or right-of-way associated with such improvements by the
wireless provider or its employees, agents, or contractors arising out of the
rights and privileges granted under this chapter and the Act. A wireless
provider has no obligation to indemnify or hold harmless against any
liabilities and losses as may be due to or caused by the sole negligence of the
Village or its employees or agents. A wireless provider shall further waive any
claims that they may have against the Village with respect to consequential,
incidental, or special damages, however caused, based on the theory of
liability. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
10-1C-26: INSURANCE:
The wireless provider shall carry, at the wireless provider's own cost and
expense, the following insurance:
   A.   Property insurance for its property's replacement cost against all
risks;
   B.   Workers' compensation insurance, as required by law; or
   C.   Commercial general liability insurance with respect to its activities
on the Village improvements or rights-of-way to afford minimum protection
limits consistent with its requirements of other users of Village improvements
or rights-of-way, including coverage for bodily injury and property damage. The
wireless provider shall include the Village as an additional insured on the
commercial general liability policy and provide certification and documentation
of inclusion of the Village in a commercial general liability policy prior to
the collocation of any wireless facility. A wireless provider may self-insure
all or a portion of the insurance coverage and limit requirement required by
the Village. A wireless provider that self-insures is not required, to the
extent of the self- insurance, to comply with the requirement for the name of
additional insureds under this section. A wireless provider that elects to
self-insure shall provide to the Village evidence sufficient to demonstrate its
financial ability to self-insure the insurance coverage limits required by the
Village. (Ord. 2018-25, 8-28-2018)
CHAPTER 2
RAILROADS
SECTION:
10-2-1 Obstructing Street Crossings
10-2-2 Lights Required
10-2-3 Fire Engines Crossing Tracks
10-2-4 Sounding Whistle
10-2-5 Maintain Crossings
10-2-6 Flagmen Or Bells At Crossings
10-2-7 Committing Offenses On Railroad Cars, Near Depot
10-2-1: OBSTRUCTING STREET CROSSINGS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit any locomotive
engine, railroad car or train of cars to stop on or remain upon any street or
railroad crossing within the Village so as to obstruct such crossing for a
longer period than ten (10) minutes at any one time. (1904 Code § 23.2)
10-2-2: LIGHTS REQUIRED:
Every locomotive engine, railroad car or train of cars running in the nighttime
on any railroad track within the Village shall have and keep, while so running,
a brilliant and conspicuous light on the advancing end of such locomotive
engine, car or train. (1904 Code § 23.3)
10-2-3: FIRE ENGINES CROSSING TRACKS:
In case any fire engine or other vehicle carrying firemen or fire apparatus, in
responding to any alarm of fire, shall find it necessary to cross any railroad
track at any street crossing within the Village, any engine or train of cars
standing on such crossing shall immediate vacate such crossing and allow a
passageway for such fire engine or vehicle. (1904 Code § 23.4)
10-2-4: SOUNDING WHISTLE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit the whistle of any
locomotive engine to be sounded within the Village, except to give necessary
signals; or to make any loud or unnecessary noise by letting off steam from any
locomotive engine. (1904 Code § 23.5)
10-2-5: MAINTAIN CROSSINGS:
Every railroad corporation operating any railroad within or through the
corporate limits of the Village shall, at the intersection of any street or
highway within the Village with such railroad, construct and maintain crossings
or viaducts and the approaches thereto so that at all times they shall be safe
as to persons and property. (1904 Code § 23.6)
Whenever any railroad corporation shall neglect to construct or maintain any of
its crossings and approaches as provided in this Section, it shall be the duty
of the President of the Village Board to notify, in writing, the nearest agent
of said corporation of the condition of said crossing or approaches, and direct
the same to be constructed, altered or repaired in such manner as the Board of
Trustees shall deem necessary for the safety of persons and property. (1904
Code § 23.7)
If any such railroad corporation shall, after having been notified as provided
in this Section, neglect or refuse to construct, alter or repair such crossing
or approaches within thirty (30) days after such notice, then the Village Board
shall forthwith cause such construction, alteration or repairs to be made, and
such railroad corporation shall be held responsible for all necessary expense
incurred in making such construction, alteration and repairs and in addition
thereto shall be liable to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for such
neglect, which fine shall be enforced by the Village Board, in the name of the
people of the State of Illinois, before any court of competent jurisdiction in
the County of Grundy and/or Will. Such fine, when collected, shall be paid into
the Village Treasury. (1904 Code § 23.8)
10-2-6: FLAGMEN OR BELLS AT CROSSINGS:
Whenever, in the opinion of the Village Board, it shall be deemed necessary to
require any railroad corporation operating any railroad within or through the
corporate limits of the Village, to station a flagman or place bells at the
intersection of any public street or highway within the Village with such
railroad, it shall, by ordinance so find and shall herein direct the President
of the Village Board to notify any agent of the corporation using or operating
such railroad that a flagman or bells is necessary at such crossing, and it
shall be the duty of such railroad corporation, within sixty (60) days
thereafter, to place and retain a flagman or place bells at such crossing, said
flagman shall perform the duties usually required of flagmen. (1904 Code §
23.9)
Any railroad company refusing or neglecting to place flagmen or bells as
required by this Section shall be fined one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day
that it shall neglect or refuse to do so; and it shall be the duty of the
Village Board to enforce the payment of such fine by suit in the corporate name
of the Village before any court of competent jurisdiction in the County of
Grundy. All moneys collected on account of any such fines shall be paid into
the Village Treasury. (1904 Code § 23.10)
10-2-7: COMMITTING OFFENSES ON RAILROAD CARS, NEAR DEPOT:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, being a minor, to climb, jump,
step, stand upon or cling to, or in any way attach himself to any locomotive
engine or car either stationary or in motion, upon any part of the track of any
railroad within the limits of the Village, unless in so doing he shall act in
compliance with law or by permission of the agents of, or under the lawful
rules and regulations of the corporation then owning or managing such railroad;
or to remain within or around any railroad depot or railroad building in the
Village without having obtained permission from the person in charge thereof so
to do. (1904 Code § 22.11)
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to run, jump or play upon the depot
platform or grounds or climb upon to take hold of, or in any manner interfere
with any railroad car, baggage or freight upon the railroad grounds within the
Village, except by permission of an agent of the railroad company, or in
pursuance of his business as a passenger or shipper or receiver of freight or
baggage, or to annoy or disturb any traveler or citizen at or near any depot
building or platform. (1904 Code § 22.12)
CHAPTER 3
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
SECTION:
10-3-1: Systems Combined
10-3-2: Superintendent
10-3-3: Repairs Generally
10-3-4: Water And Sewer Main Installations: Authority Of The Village;
Performance Bond; Terms; Amount
10-3-5: Water And Sewer Connections; Application, Fee
10-3-6: Service Rates, Charges
10-3-7: Billing Period; Liability For Payment
10-3-8: Delinquencies, Lien
10-3-9: Service Discontinued For Nonpayment
10-3-10: Application For Shutoff Of Water
10-3-11: Water Turned On, Permit Required
10-3-12: Treasurer To Render Bills
10-3-13: Funds Kept Separate
10-3-14: Waterworks And Sewerage Fund
10-3-15: Free Service Prohibited
10-3-16: Copy Filed With County
10-3-17: Water Sale Outside Village Limits
10-3-18: Sewer Sale Outside Village Limits
10-3-19: Connecting Downspouts Prohibited
10-3-20: Water Meters Required
10-3-21: Water Conservation Measures
10-3-22: Emergency Water Conservation
10-3-1: SYSTEMS COMBINED:
The existing waterworks system presently being operated in and for the Village,
in its entirety, together with all subsequent additions, improvements and
extensions that may hereafter be made thereto, and the existing sanitary
sewerage system presently being operated in and for the Village, in its
entirety, together with all additions, improvements and extensions that may
hereafter be made thereto, be and the same are hereby declared to be a combined
system to be operated in combination in and for the Village. Said combined
waterworks and sewerage system shall be maintained and operated as a single
utility, and charges or rates shall be established for the use and service of
such combined system and which shall be reasonable and commensurate with the
service performed by said combined system, and shall be sufficient at all times
to pay the cost of the operation and maintenance of said combined system, to
provide an adequate depreciation fund and to pay the principal of and interest
on all revenue bonds which may be issued by the Village and which by their
terms are made payable from the revenues to be derived from the operation of
said combined system. The Village shall be responsible and shall pay for the
maintenance of water lines up to the buffalo box at the user's service
connection. The Village shall be responsible and shall pay for the maintenance
of sewer lines to the connection by the user to the main sewer line. The user
shall be responsible for, and shall pay for, the maintenance of water lines
from the buffalo box to the user's premises, and the maintenance of sewer lines
from and including the connection to the main sewer line to the user's
premises. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-2: SUPERINTENDENT:
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be the Superintendent of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and the sewage treatment plant for the Village.
Said Superintendent shall obtain an operator's certificate from the State, and
shall perform such general duties as may be prescribed from time to time by the
Village Board. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-3: REPAIRS GENERALLY:
The Department of Public Works is assigned to monitor leakage and implement
corrective measures for all water storage, transmission, and distribution
systems. The Superintendent of Public Works shall cause to be repaired all
breakdowns in the sewage and water treatment facilities and all breaks or leaks
in the sewer and water systems of the Village. Where breaks and leaks cannot be
readily repaired by the employees of the department, the director of public
utilities shall create a report of repairs to be made by contract. (Ord. 2021-
33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-4: WATER AND SEWER MAIN INSTALLATIONS: AUTHORITY OF THE VILLAGE;
PERFORMANCE BOND; TERMS; AMOUNT:
   A.   Whenever any person shall make application for a permit to install
sewer or water mains in any dedicated street or roadway, he shall agree that
the installation shall be in compliance with the Village of Minooka
Construction Standards, latest edition, and that the work shall be done under
the supervision of the Village. Before a permit is issued, the project shall be
approved by the Village.
   B.   In order to guarantee that the work described in the preceding
subsection shall be in accordance with the Village of Minooka Construction
Standards, latest edition, and under the supervision of the Village, the
applicant shall post a performance bond with adequate surety in an amount of at
least one hundred (120) per cent of the estimated cost of such installation of
sewer or water mains. The bond shall remain in full force and effect for a
period of twenty four (24) months after the completion of the work. Completion
shall be determined to be in effect when the Village accepts the installation.
(Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-5: WATER AND SEWER CONNECTIONS; APPLICATION, FEE:
   A.   Application And Fee For Water Service Connections: Every person
desiring a new water service tap shall make application therefor in writing to
the Village Clerk. Such application shall state the location of the premises,
the legal description, the size of the pipe required and the approximate
location where such service will enter the premises. Taps or connections to the
water mains will then be under the supervision of the Superintendent. Taps
shall be paid for before they are made, and no person other than an authorized
person shall make any such tap or connection. The fees for such taps or
connections shall be as follows:
      1.   Single-Family Dwelling: four thousand nine hundred dollars
($4,900.00). The amount of this fee shall automatically increase by five
percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
      2.   Multiple-Family Dwelling: four thousand nine hundred dollars
($4,900.00) per dwelling unit. The amount of this fee shall automatically
increase by five percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
      3.   Commercial Business Rate:
         a.   Population Equivalent To Be Provided: Each applicant for a
commercial business tap or connection shall provide the Village with an
estimate of the population equivalent of the anticipated commercial use. One
“population equivalent” is defined to be the use of one hundred (100) gallons
of water per day.
         b.   Minimum Fee: A minimum fee of four thousand nine hundred dollars
($4,900.00) shall be charged for any tap or connection with an estimated
population equivalent of up to and including 3.5 (i.e., an anticipated use of
up to 350 gallons per day). In the event that the estimated population
equivalent exceeds 3.5, an additional fee of one thousand four hundred dollars
($1,400.00) shall apply for each estimated population equivalent, or portion
thereof, in excess of the aforementioned 3.5 (this fee shall not be pro-rated).
Once the applicant pays the tap or connection fee based upon their submitted
estimated population equivalent, the applicant’s “estimated population
equivalent” shall become the “allocated use” associated with the premises,
subject to the change in use provision set forth in subsection A3c of this
section. The amount of this fee shall automatically increase by five percent
(5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
         c.   Change In Use:
         (1)   If, at any time after the owner of any premises has paid the
connection fee and established a commercial water service tap for said premises
as provided for in subsection A3b of this section, the owner of said premises
applies for a subsequent building permit for any project that will likely
result in a water use population equivalent in excess of the allocated use
associated with said premises, such building permit shall not be approved or
issued until the applicant pays any required change in use fee as set forth in
subsection A3c(3) of this section.
         (2)   In the event that the Building Officer and inspector for the
Village determines that the issuance of a building permit is likely to increase
the population equivalent of the actual use on any given premises above the
allocated use associated with said premises, the Building Officer shall, before
granting or issuing said permit, instruct the applicant to provide the Village
with an estimate of the population equivalent of the anticipated use on the
premises after the project for which the building permit has been requested has
been completed.
         (3)   In the event that the applicant’s estimated population
equivalent, as set forth in subsection A3a of this section, exceeds the
allocated use associated with the premises, the building inspector shall assess
a change in use fee in the amount of one thousand four hundred dollars
($1,400.00) for each population equivalent, or portion thereof, that the
estimated population equivalent exceeds the allocated use associated with the
premises (this fee shall not be pro-rated). The amount of this fee shall
automatically increase by five percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
         (4)   Once the applicant pays any change in use fee, as required by
subsection A3c(3) of this section, the estimated population equivalent that
gave rise to said fee shall become the new “allocated use” associated with the
premises.
      At the time an application is made for a building permit for a single-
family residence, tap on fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
      The expense of labor and materials to install said tap or connection, to
bring the water lines to the property line of the premises, and all other labor
and materials shall be paid for by the applicant. Prior to, or at the same
time, the tap or connection is made to the water main, an authorized employee
of the Village waterworks shall install a water meter for the premises, upon
payment by the applicant to the Village Clerk of the actual cost thereof. No
person other than an authorized employee of the Village waterworks shall
install such water meter and payment of said charge shall be made before it is
installed.
   B.   Application And Fee For Sewer Connections: Every person desiring to
connect house drainage or sewerage of any kind to the Village sewer system
shall make application in writing for a permit to the Village Clerk. Such
application shall state the location of the premises, the legal description and
the approximate location where such connection will enter the premises. All
connections shall be made under the supervision of the Superintendent. The fees
for such taps or connections shall be as follows:
      1.   Single-Family Dwelling: four thousand nine hundred dollars
($4,900.00). The amount of this fee shall automatically increase by five
percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
      2.   Multiple-Family Dwelling: four thousand nine hundred dollars
($4,900.00) per dwelling unit. The amount of this fee shall automatically
increase by five percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
      3.   Commercial Business Rate:
         a.   Population Equivalent To Be Provided: Each applicant for a
commercial business tap or connection shall provide the Village with an
estimate of the population equivalent of the anticipated commercial use. One
“population equivalent” is defined to equal use producing a load of wastewater
equivalent to one hundred (100) gallons of wastewater per day containing two
hundred (200) parts per million five (5) day biological oxygen demand and two
hundred fifty (250) parts per million suspended solids.
         b.   Minimum Fee: A minimum fee of four thousand nine hundred dollars
($4,900.00) shall be charged for any tap or connection with an estimated
population equivalent of up to and including 3.5 (i.e., an anticipated
discharge of up to 350 gallons per day). In the event that the estimated
population equivalent exceeds 3.5, an additional fee of one thousand four
hundred dollars ($1,400.00) shall apply for each estimated population
equivalent, or portion thereof, in excess of the aforementioned 3.5 (this fee
shall not be pro-rated). Once the applicant pays the tap or connection fee
based upon their submitted estimated population equivalent, the applicant’s
“estimated population equivalent” shall become the “allocated capacity”
associated with the premises. The amount of this fee shall automatically
increase by five percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
         c.   Change In Use:
         (1)   If, at any time after the owner of any premises has paid the
connection fee and established a commercial sewerage service tap for said
premises as provided for in subsection B3b of this section, the owner of said
premises applies for a subsequent building permit for any project that will
likely result in a sewage discharge population equivalent in excess of the
allocated capacity associated with said premises, such building permit shall
not be approved or issued until the applicant pays any required change in use
fee as set forth in subsection B3c(3) of this section.
         (2)   In the event that the Building Officer and inspector for the
Village determines that the issuance of a building permit is likely to increase
the population equivalent of the actual discharge generated by any given
premises above the allocated capacity associated with said premises, the
Building Officer shall, before granting or issuing said permit, instruct the
applicant to provide the Village with an estimate of the population equivalent
of the anticipated rate of discharge that will be generated by the premises
after the project for which the building permit has been requested has been
completed.
         (3)   In the event that the applicant’s estimated population
equivalent, as set forth in subsection B3a of this section, exceeds the
allocated capacity associated with the premises, the building inspector shall
assess a change in use fee in the amount of one thousand four hundred dollars
($1,400.00) for each population equivalent, or portion thereof, that the
estimated population equivalent exceeds the allocated capacity associated with
the premises (this fee shall not be pro-rated). The amount of this fee shall
automatically increase by five percent (5%) annually beginning on May 1, 2025.
         (4)   Once the applicant pays any change in use fee, as required by
subsection B3c(3) of this section, the estimated population equivalent that
gave rise to said fee shall become the new “allocated capacity” associated with
the premises.
      At the time an application is made for a building permit for a single-
family residence, tap on fee shall be paid to the Village Clerk.
      The property owner or applicant shall pay for all labor and materials
necessary to make such sewer connection. If a public street or alley is
excavated or otherwise disturbed, the property owner or applicant shall pay for
all labor and materials to repair or replace such street or alley to its
original condition.
   C.   Subdivisions: In all new subdivisions approved by the President and
Board of Trustees after the effective date hereof, the subdivider shall be
responsible for bringing the water and sewer lines to the boundary line of each
lot and the subdivider shall pay the fee for water and sewer connections1.
   D.   Application And Fee For Temporary Sewer Connections: Every person
desiring to connect drainage or sewerage of any kind to the Village sewer
system, for a period of three (3) years or less, shall make application in
writing for a permit to the Village Clerk. Such application shall state the
location of the premises, the legal description and the approximate location
where such connection will enter the premises. All connections shall be made
under the supervision of the superintendent. The fees for such taps or
connections shall be twenty seven percent (27%) of the fee computed for
permanent connections for commercial purposes as computed in subsection B3 of
this section. In making application as described above, the applicant shall
state the estimated average daily population equivalent during the first year
of operations, and the tap-on fee shall be based on that estimate. All
discharge into the village system shall be metered. Upon the first anniversary
of the making of the tap or connection, the village may revise the fee based on
actual discharge during the first year of operations. Upon the termination of
the three (3) year period, the then owner of the property served by the sewer
connection shall cause disconnection from the village sewer system without the
necessity of prior notice. All disconnections shall be made under the
supervision of the superintendent. Upon application by the owner, the village
board by resolution may authorize the extension of the connection to the
village sewage system for up to two (2) additional one-year periods. The fee
for each such extension shall be one-third (1/3) of the original fee set forth
above. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022; Ord. 2022-25, 6-
28-2022; Ord. 2024-10, 2-27-2024; Ord. 2024-11, 3-26-2024)
10-3-6: SERVICE RATES, CHARGES:
A.   Monthly Charges or Rates for Users of Water Services Only: For each user
of water services only, there shall be a monthly charge or rate based upon the
amount of water consumed monthly as follows:
Effective Date  
Effective Date  
01-01-2022     $5.23 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2023     $5.39 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2024     $7.00 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2025     $8.00 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2026     $9.00 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2027     $10.00 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2028     $11.00 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2029     $12.00 per 1,000 Gallons
01-01-2030     $13.00 per 1,000 Gallons
 
      Effective January 1, 2031, and every year thereafter on January 1, there
will be a three percent (3%) increase from the prior year in the monthly charge
or rate based upon the amount of water consumed.
      For non-governmental users residing or located outside the corporate
limits of the village, the above rate schedule shall be increased by fifty
percent (50%).
   B.   Monthly Charges or Rates for Users of the Sewer Services Only: For each
user of sewer services only, there shall be a monthly charge or rate based upon
the amount of water consumed monthly as follows:
Effective Date  
Effective Date  
01-01-2022     $5.88 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2023     $6.06 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2024     $6.24 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2025     $6.43 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2026     $6.62 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2027     $6.82 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2028     $7.03 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2029     $7.24 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2030     $7.45 per 1,000 gallons
      Effective January 1, 2031, and every year thereafter on January 1, there
will be a three percent (3%) increase from the prior year in the monthly charge
or rate in each category based upon the amount of water consumed.
      All users that discharge water into the Village’s sewer system but do not
have a water connection shall install a separate sewer meter, which shall be
governed by the same rules applicable to water meters under this Chapter,
except that such user shall always be responsible for all costs associated with
said sewer meter. Sewer meters must be tested for accuracy at least annually,
at the user’s sole cost and expense.
      For non-governmental users residing or located outside the corporate
limits of the village, the above rate schedule shall be increased by fifty
percent (50%).
   C.   Monthly Charges or Rates for Users of the Combined Waterworks and Sewer
Services: For each user of the combined water and sewer services there shall be
a monthly charge or rate based upon the amount of water consumed monthly as
follows:
Effective Date  
Effective Date  
01-01-2022     $11.11 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2023     $11.45 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2024     $13.24 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2025     $14.43 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2026     $15.62 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2027     $16.82 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2028     $18.03 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2029     $19.24 per 1,000 gallons
01-01-2030     $20.45 per 1,000 gallons
 
      Effective January 1, 2031, and every year thereafter on January 1, there
will be a three percent (3%) increase from the prior year in the monthly charge
or rate in each category based upon the amount of water consumed.
      For non-governmental users residing or located outside the corporate
limits of the village, the above rate schedule shall be increased by fifty
percent (50%).
      In the event that any user of the combined water and sewer system
believes that there is a difference between the monthly level of water and
sewer services used or expected to be used, that user may elect to meter water
and sewer services separately. Any user that elects to separately meter water
and sewer services pursuant to this Section shall be charged for each such
service according to the price of that service only, as set forth above, but
such user shall always be responsible for all costs associated with said sewer
meter. Sewer meters must be tested for accuracy at least annually, at the
user’s sole cost and expense.
      The Village reserves the right to require that a non-residential user
meter water and sewer services separately whenever the Village determines that
there is a significant difference between the monthly level of water and sewer
services used or expected to be used. Any user required to separately meter
water and sewer services pursuant to this Section shall be charged for each
such service according to the price of that service only, as set forth above.
   D.   Account Maintenance Fee: Effective January 1, 2023, a monthly fee of
twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be charged to all active utility accounts.
Sprinkler system accounts (fire suppression) will not be charged this monthly
fee.
   E.   Separate Meters:
      1.   For all properties containing more than one residential unit and/or
commercial account, each such residential unit or commercial account shall be
metered separately.
      2.   As an alternative, one meter may be used for all residential units
and/or commercial accounts located on a single property, provided that the
owner of such property shall be responsible for the entire bill each month, and
shall be classified as commercial for water and sewer deposit rates.
   F.   Bulk Water:
      1.   Bulk Water Filling Stations: Bulk water filling stations are to be
used for supplying water to customers who wish to purchase and transport water,
without the need for renting a hydrant meter. The customer shall set up an
account with the Village of Minooka and shall have access to water whenever the
stations are accessible. Customers shall be charged three times the water
services rate per one thousand (1,000) gallons. Customers will be responsible
for credit card processing fees.
      2.   Hydrant Meter: An application for rental of a hydrant meter with
backflow preventer shall be submitted to the department of public works for
review and approval by the Superintendent of Public Works or designee. The
application shall be accompanied by the appropriate deposit amount to be
established on an annual basis based upon replacement costs for the size and
type of meter rented. Water shall only be taken at the hydrant(s) approved for
use by the Village. Meter readings shall be provided to the Village on a
monthly basis, either through the automatic read equipment attached to the
meter provided, or by manual readings provided by the customer. Final or annual
balance readings will be read by the Village and final or annual balance
payment will be paid at that time. Hydrant meters cannot be rented for longer
than twelve (12) months without approval of the director of public utilities.
Water usage charges shall be charged three times the water service rate per
1,000 gallons. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022; Ord.
2022-24, 6-28-2022; Ord. 2024-20, 4-23-2024)
10-3-7: BILLING PERIOD; LIABILITY FOR PAYMENT:
The owner of the premises, the occupant thereof and the user of the service
shall be jointly and severally liable to pay for the service on such premises
and the services furnished to the premises by the village only upon the
condition that the owner of the premises, occupant and user of the service are
jointly and severally liable therefor to the village. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-
2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-8: DELINQUENCIES, LIEN:
In the event that the charges for service are not paid within thirty (30) days
after rendition of the bill for such service, such charges shall be deemed and
are hereby declared to be delinquent, and thereafter such delinquencies shall
constitute liens upon the real estate for which such service is supplied, and
the village collector is hereby authorized and directed to file sworn
statements showing such delinquencies in the office of the recorder of deeds of
Grundy County, and the filing of such statements shall be deemed notice for the
payment of such charges for such service. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord.
2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-9: SERVICE DISCONTINUED FOR NONPAYMENT:
If the rates or charges for such services are not paid within thirty (30) days
after the rendition of the bill for such services, such services shall
thereafter be discontinued without further notice and shall not be reinstated
until all past due bills including the penalties thereon are paid in full,
together with payment made of fifty dollars ($50.00) for reinstating such
service. If the water service is to be reinstated at a time other than the
regular business hours of the village hall, then the reinstatement fee shall be
in the amount of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00). (Ord. 2021-33, 12-
21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-10: APPLICATION FOR SHUTOFF OF WATER:
Any user desiring for his convenience a shutting off of the water supply shall
make application therefor to the village water and sewer superintendent and a
charge of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be made for each act of shutting off or
turning on of the water at the request of any such user. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-
2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-11: WATER TURNED ON, PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person who shall turn on the supply of water to a service pipe from which
the supply has been turned off by the village on account of nonpayment of water
rates or for any other reason, without first having obtained a permit to do so
from the proper village officers, shall be subject to the penalty provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-12: TREASURER TO RENDER BILLS:
It is hereby made the duty of the treasurer to render bills for service and for
all rates and charges in connection therewith and to collect all monies due
thereon. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-13: FUNDS KEPT SEPARATE:
All revenues and monies derived from the operation of the combined waterworks
and sewerage system shall be delivered to the village treasurer not more than
ten (10) days after receipt of the same, or at such more frequent intervals as
may from time to time be directed by the president and board of trustees. (Ord.
2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-14: WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE FUND:
The village treasurer shall receive all such revenues from the combined
waterworks and sewerage system and all other funds and monies incident to the
operation of such system as the same may be delivered to him and deposit the
same in a separate fund designated as the "waterworks and sewerage fund of the
village of Minooka", and said treasurer shall administer such fund in every
respect in the manner provided by the applicable provisions of the Illinois
municipal code, approved May 29, 1961, 65 ILCS 5/11-139-1 et seq., and all laws
amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd.
Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-15: FREE SERVICE PROHIBITED:
No free service of any of the services supplied by the combined waterworks and
sewerage system shall be supplied by the village to the village or to any other
person, firm, organization or corporation, public or private. (Ord. 2021-33,
12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-16: COPY FILED WITH COUNTY:
A copy of the provisions of this chapter, properly certified by the village
clerk, shall be recorded in the office of the recorder of deeds of Grundy and/
or Will County and shall be deemed notice to all owners of real estate of their
liability for service supplied to any user of the service of the combined
waterworks and sewerage system of the village on their properties. (Ord. 2021-
33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-17: WATER SALE OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
The village shall not furnish or sell water outside the village limits unless
an agreement has been entered into with each individual property owner who is
furnished such water. Said agreement shall provide that each property owner
shall reimburse the village for said property owner's proportionate share of
the expense of furnishing such water, as specified by the village ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-18: SEWER SALE OUTSIDE VILLAGE LIMITS:
The village shall not furnish or sell water outside the village limits unless
an agreement has been entered into with each individual property owner who is
furnished such water. Said agreement shall provide that each property owner
shall reimburse the village for said property owner's proportionate share of
the expense of furnishing such water, as specified by the village ordinances.
(Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-19: CONNECTING DOWNSPOUTS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect downspouts from building eave
troughs to the sanitary sewers of the village, or to maintain any such
connection previously made. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-
2022)
10-3-20: WATER METERS REQUIRED:
Any person who now uses, or may hereafter use, any village water for resident
consumption or otherwise shall install a water meter of a character to be
approved by the president and village board of trustees. All such meters shall
be properly connected with the village water pipes so as to correctly measure
all village water used by such person, and all such meters so installed and the
normal maintenance of the same (except abuse, misuse, or negligent or
deliberate damage by the user) shall be at the expense of the village. The
village shall furnish such meters to all applicants using water, at actual
cost.
All meters must be kept free from obstruction and be so located that they may
be read or inspected at any reasonable time. Any person who shall arrange to
obtain water that has not passed through a meter, or contrive any means of
obtaining water that has not passed through a meter, shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-21: WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES:
   A.   Outdoor Water Conservation Measures:
      1.   Irrigation: Except as set forth in subsection A2 below, lawn
watering using the Village's public water supply as a source is limited to the
hours of six o'clock (6:00) A.M. to ten o'clock (10:00) A.M. and the hours of
six o'clock (6:00) P.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. as set forth below:
         a.   Lawns at even-numbered addresses may use the city public water
supply to water lawns on even-numbered calendar days during authorized hours.
         b.   Lawns at odd-numbered addresses may use the city public water
supply to water lawns on odd-numbered days during authorized hours.
      2.   The lawn watering restrictions set forth in subsection A1 shall not
apply in the following circumstances:
         a.   Newly installed sod lawns may be watered within the permitted
hours for fourteen (14) consecutive days after the sod is installed after first
notifying the director of public utilities of the installation.
      3.   The use of water for irrigation from a recycled water system is
allowed any time and on any day. Recycled system components shall be identified
as non-potable water sources.
      4.   New/replacement sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a
WaterSense labeled irrigation controller and shall be in compliance with
Section 2.5(g) of the Illinois Plumbing License Law, 225 ILCS 320.
   B.   Indoor Conservation Measures:
      1.   Plumbing Fixtures And Fixture Fittings: Plumbing fixtures and
fittings in all new and remodeled construction must be a labeled WaterSense
product, as specified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency. In
all new construction and in all repairs or replacement of fixtures in
lavatories intended for public use, the faucets of such lavatories located in
rest rooms intended for public use shall be of metering or self-closing type.
      2.   Water Recycling Systems In Commercial Car Wash Facilities: All new
and remodeled commercial car-wash installations shall be equipped with a water
recycling system.
      3.   Air Conditioning Systems: All new and remodeled installations of air
conditioning shall be closed system only. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021; amd. Ord.
2022-9, 1-25-2022)
10-3-22: EMERGENCY WATER CONSERVATION:
The village board may impose mandatory water conservation by passage by
majority vote of a resolution that a water emergency exists in the village.
Immediately upon passage of such a resolution, the following restrictions shall
apply:
   A.   Residential watering of lawns, trees, flowers, shrubs, gardens, or
other vegetation shall be restricted to the hours of five thirty o'clock (5:30)
P.M. to eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. Such watering shall be further restricted to
odd numbered calendar days for residences with odd numbered addresses and even
numbered calendar days for residences with even numbers, except that watering
of flowers, gardens, trees and shrubs by handheld hose may be done any day
during the hours set forth in this subsection.
   B.   Office, business and industrial watering of lawn, trees, flowers,
shrubs or other vegetation shall be restricted to the hours of five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Such watering shall be further restricted
to odd numbered calendar days for odd numbered addresses and even numbered
calendar days for even numbered addresses, except that watering of flowers,
gardens, trees and shrubs by handheld hose may be done any day during the hours
set forth above. These restrictions shall not apply to any person or entity
engaged in the business of growing or selling plants to the extent watering is
necessary to maintain such business inventory.
   C.   No water shall be used from a hose to wash automobiles, except at
places of business where autos are washed on every business day either with
attendants, with automatic equipment or by self- service. Any person may wash
an automobile with water from a bucket.
   D.   No swimming pools shall be filled, except that children's wading pools
of fifty (50) gallons or less may be filled.
Upon written application, the superintendent may issue permits, which allow
watering otherwise in violation of the above restrictions, if strict compliance
therewith would impose an undue hardship on the applicant. Said permits shall
be limited to ten (10) days' duration and shall allow only so much watering as
is necessary to relieve such undue hardship.
Said restrictions shall cease to be in effect on the date the village board
passes a resolution, by majority vote, that the water emergency no longer
exists.
Any person violating any provisions of this section shall be punishable as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
The superintendent shall use his best efforts to notify village residents and
businesses of the imposition of mandatory water conservation, due to a water
emergency, including posting a notice in the village hall and notifying local
newspapers and radio stations. Failure to receive notification shall not be a
defense or excuse for violation of this section. (Ord. 2021-33, 12-21-2021;
amd. Ord. 2022-9, 1-25-2022)
CHAPTER 3A
COMBINED WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
ARTICLE A. SEWER USE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
10-3A-1: Sewer Use Ordinance Adopted
10-3A-1: SEWER USE ORDINANCE ADOPTED1. See also Chapter 3 of this Title for
Combined Waterworks and Sewerage System.1:
There is hereby adopted by reference the "Sewer Use Ordinance to Meet the
Requirements of Public Law 95-217 and to Regulate the Use of Sewers and
Wastewater Treatment". Said Sewer Use Ordinance shall be incorporated herein by
reference, verbatim, with the same force and effect as if the same were fully
set out herein; and said Ordinance shall be and remain on file in the office of
the Village Clerk. (Ord. 1986-1, 1-13-1986)
CHAPTER 4
CROSS CONNECTIONS
SECTION:
10-4-1 Compliance With Plumbing Code
10-4-2 Private Water Supply Approval
10-4-3 Surveys And Investigations, Duty Of Superintendent
10-4-4 Right Of Entry For Inspection
10-4-5 Discontinue Water Service For Violation; Reconnection Fee
10-4-6 Responsibility For Cost Of Cleanup
10-4-7 Superintendent Defined
10-4-8 Penalty
10-4-9 Rules And Regulations Concerning Cross Connection Control
10-4-9-1: Cross Connection Control, General Policy
10-4-9-2: Definitions
10-4-9-3: Water System
10-4-9-4: Cross Connections Prohibited
10-4-9-5: Survey And Investigations
10-4-9-6: Where Protection Is Required
10-4-9-7: Type Of Protection Required
10-4-9-8: Backflow Prevention Devices
10-4-9-9: Inspection And Maintenance
10-4-9-10: Booster Pumps
10-4-9-11: Violations
10-4-1: COMPLIANCE WITH PLUMBING CODE:
All plumbing installed within the village shall be installed in accordance with
the state plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection agency and local
regulations. If in accordance with the state plumbing code or in the judgment
of the superintendent of public works, an approved backflow prevention device
is necessary for the safety of the public water supply system, the
superintendent will give notice to the water customer to install such an
approved device immediately. The water customer shall, at his own expense,
install such an approved device at a location and in a manner in accordance
with the state plumbing code, Illinois environmental protection agency and all
applicable local regulations, and shall have inspections and tests made of such
approved devices upon installation and as required by the state plumbing code,
Illinois environmental protection agency and local regulations. (Ord. 2005-39,
8-23-2005)
10-4-2: PRIVATE WATER SUPPLY APPROVAL:
No person shall establish or permit to be established or maintain or permit to
be maintained any connection whereby a private, auxiliary or emergency water
supply other than the regular public water supply of the village may enter the
supply or distribution system of the municipality, unless such private,
auxiliary or emergency water supply and the method of connection and use of
such supply shall have been approved by the superintendent and the Illinois
environmental protection agency. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-3: SURVEYS AND INVESTIGATIONS, DUTY OF SUPERINTENDENT:
It shall be the duty of the superintendent to cause surveys and investigations
to be made of industrial and other properties served by the public water supply
to determine whether actual or potential hazards to the public water supply may
exist. Such surveys and investigations shall be made a matter of public record
and shall be repeated at least every two (2) years, or as often as the
superintendent shall deem necessary. Records of such surveys shall be
maintained and available for review for a period of at least five (5) years.
(Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-4: RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR INSPECTION:
The approved cross connection control device inspector shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying
the presence or absence of cross connections, and the superintendent or his
authorized agent, upon showing proper identification, shall have the right to
enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public
water supply or distribution system of the village for the purpose of verifying
information submitted by the customer regarding the required cross connection
control inspection. On demand the owner, lessees or occupants of any property
so served shall furnish to the superintendent any information which he may
request regarding the piping system or systems or water use on such property.
The refusal of such information, when demanded, shall, within the discretion of
the superintendent, be deemed evidence of the presence of improper connections
as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992; amd. 1997 Code)
10-4-5: DISCONTINUE WATER SERVICE FOR VIOLATION; RECONNECTION FEE:
The Superintendent of Public Works of the Village is hereby authorized and
directed to discontinue, after reasonable notice to the occupant thereof, the
water service to any property wherein any connection in violation of the
provisions of this Chapter is known to exist, and to take such other
precautionary measures as he may deem necessary to eliminate any danger of
contamination of the public water supply distribution mains. Water service to
such property shall not be restored until such conditions have been eliminated
or corrected in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter, and until a
reconnection fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) is paid to the Village.
Immediate disconnection with verbal notice can be effected when the
Superintendent is assured that imminent danger of harmful contamination of the
public water supply system exists. Such action shall be followed by written
notification of the cause of disconnection. Immediate disconnection without
notice to any party can be effected to prevent actual or anticipated
contamination or pollution of the public water supply, provided that, in the
reasonable opinion of the Superintendent or the Illinois Environmental
Protection Agency, such action is required to prevent actual or potential
contamination or pollution of the public water supply. Neither the Village, the
Superintendent, or its agents or assigns shall be liable to any customer for
any injury, damages or lost revenues which may result from termination of said
customer's water supply in accordance with the terms of this Chapter, whether
or not said termination was with or without notice. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-6: RESPONSIBILITY FOR COST OF CLEANUP:
The consumer responsible for back-siphoned or back pressured material or
contamination through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply
system occurs through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed,
maintained or repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear
the cost of cleanup of the potable water supply system. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-
1992)
10-4-7: SUPERINTENDENT DEFINED:
As used in this Chapter, the "Superintendent" shall mean the Superintendent of
Public Works of the Village. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992; 1997 Code)
10-4-8: PENALTY:
Any violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be punishable as provided
in Section
1-4-1 of the Minooka Municipal Code. Each day that a violation of the
provisions of this Chapter exists shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord.
1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9: RULES AND REGULATIONS CONCERNING CROSS-CONNECTIONS CONTROL:
Rules and regulations concerning cross-connection control are hereby adopted,
and made a part of this Chapter by reference as set forth in the following
sections. The Village Clerk is hereby directed to publish the rules and
regulations in pamphlet form in the Village Hall. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-1: CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL, GENERAL POLICY:
   A.   Purposes: The purpose of these rules and regulations is:
      1.   To protect the public water supply system from contamination or
pollution by isolating within the customer's water system contaminants or
pollutants which could backflow through the service connection into the public
water supply system.
      2.   To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between the public or consumer's potable water system and
nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and sources of systems containing
substances of unknown or questionable safety.
      3.   To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-
connection control which will prevent the contamination or pollution of the
public and consumer's potable water systems.
   B.   Application: These rules and regulations shall apply to all premises
served by the public potable water supply system of the Village.
   C.   Policy: The owner or official custodian of premises served by the
public potable water supply system of the Village shall be responsible for
protection of the public water supply system from contamination due to backflow
or back-siphonage of contaminants through the customer's water service
connection. If, in the judgment of the Superintendent or his authorized
representative, an approved backflow prevention device is necessary for the
safety of the public water supply system, the Superintendent shall give notice
to the consumer to install such approved backflow prevention device at each
service connection to the premises. The consumer shall immediately install such
approved device or devices at his own expense; failure, refusal or inability on
the part of the consumer to install such device or devices immediately shall
constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises until such
device or devices have been installed. The consumer shall retain records of
installation, maintenance, testing and repair as required in subsection
10-4-9-5D4 of this Chapter for a period of at least five (5) years. The
Superintendent may require the consumer to submit a cross-connection inspection
report to the Village to assist in determining whether or not service line
protection will be required. All cross-connection inspections shall be
conducted by a cross-connection control device inspector certified by the
Illinois Environmental Protection Agency. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of
these regulations:
AGENCY: Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVED: Backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the Research
Foundation for Cross-Connection Control of the University of Southern
California, Association of State Sanitary Engineers, American Water Works
Association, American National Standards Institute or certified by the National
Sanitation Foundation.
AUXILIARY WATER SYSTEM: Any water source or system on or available to the
premises other than the public water supply system and includes the water
supplied by the system. These auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor's public water supply system; or water from a source such as wells,
lakes, or streams, or process fluids; or used water. These waters may be
polluted or contaminated or objectionable or constitute a water source or
system over which the water purveyor does not have control.
BACKFLOW: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water system from any source other than the
intended source of the potable water.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: Any device, method, or type of construction
intended to prevent backflow into a potable water system. All devices used for
backflow prevention in Illinois must meet the standards of the Illinois
Plumbing Code and the Illinois Environmental Protection Agency.
CONSUMER OR CUSTOMER: The owner, official custodian or person in control of any
premises supplied by or in any manner connected to a public water system.
CONSUMER'S WATER SYSTEM: Any water system located on the customer's premises. A
building plumbing system is considered to be a customer's water system.
CONTAMINATION: An impairment of the quality of the water by entrance of any
substance to a degree which could create a health hazard.
CROSS-CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement between two (2)
otherwise separate piping systems, one of which contains potable water and the
other a substance of unknown or questionable safety or quality, whereby there
may be a flow from one system into the other.
DIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection formed when a water system is
physically joined to a source of unknown or unsafe substance.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY: An assembly composed of single, independently
acting check valves approved under ASSE Standard 1015. A double check valve
assembly must include tight shutoff valves located at each end of the assembly
and suitable connections for testing the water-tightness of each check valve.
FIXED PROPER AIR GAP: The unobstructed vertical distance through the free
atmosphere between the water discharge point and the flood level rim of the
receptacle.
HEALTH HAZARD: Any condition, device or practice in a water system or its
operation resulting in a real or potential danger to the health and well-being
of consumers. The word "severe" as used to qualify "health hazard" means a
hazard to the health of the user that could be expected to result in death or
significant reduction in the quality of life.
INDIRECT CROSS-CONNECTION: A cross-connection through which an unknown
substance can be forced, drawn by vacuum or otherwise introduced into a potable
water system, other than by direct cross-connection.
INSPECTION: A plumbing inspection to examine carefully and critically all
materials, fixtures, piping and appurtenances, appliances and installations of
a plumbing system for compliance with requirements of the Illinois Plumbing
Code, 77 Illinois Administrative Code 890.
NONPOTABLE WATER: Water not safe for drinking, personal, or culinary use as
determined by the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative Code 604.
OWNER OR OFFICIAL CUSTODIAN: Any person or entity who has or purports to have
any ownership or possessory right to any premises containing a water system
connected to a public water system, and shall include, but not be limited to,
ownership in fee simple, beneficial owner of a land trust, partners, officers,
directors and shareholders of corporations who are owners or official
custodians, tenants, subtenants, licensees, guests, and the like.
PLUMBING: The actual installation, repair, maintenance, alteration or extension
of a plumbing system by any person. Plumbing includes all piping, fixtures,
appurtenances and appliances for a supply of water for all purposes, including
without limitation lawn sprinkler systems, from the source of a private water
supply on the premises or from the main in the street, alley or at the curb to,
within and about any building or buildings where a person or persons live, work
or assemble. Plumbing includes all piping, from discharge of pumping units to
and including pressure tanks in water supply systems. Plumbing includes all
piping, fixtures, appurtenances, and appliances for a building drain and a
sanitary drainage and related ventilation system of any building or buildings
where a person or persons live, work or assemble from the point of connection
of such building drain to the building sewer or private sewage disposal system
five feet (5') beyond the foundation walls.
POLLUTION: The presence of any foreign substance (organic, inorganic,
radiological, or biological) in water that tends to degrade its quality so as
to constitute a hazard or impair the usefulness of the water.
POTABLE WATER: Water which meets the requirements of 35 Illinois Administrative
Code 604 for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes.
POTENTIAL CROSS- CONNECTION: A fixture or appurtenance with threaded hose
connection, tapered spout, or other connection which would facilitate extension
of the water supply line beyond its legal termination point.
PROCESS FLUID(S): Any fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically
or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would
constitute a health, pollutional, or system hazard if introduced into the
public or a consumer's potable water system. This includes but is not limited
to:
   A.   Polluted or contaminated waters;
   B.   Process waters;
   C.   Used waters originating from the public water supply system which may
have deteriorated in sanitary quality;
   D.   Cooling waters:
   E.   Questionable or contaminated natural waters taken from wells, lakes,
streams, or irrigation systems;
   F.   Chemicals in solution or suspension;
   G.   Oils, gases, acids, alkalis and other liquid and gaseous fluids in
industrial or other processes, or for fire fighting purposes;
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY: All mains, pipes and structures through which water is
obtained and distributed to the public, including wells and well structures,
intakes and cribs, pumping stations, treatment plants, reservoirs, storage
tanks and appurtenances, collectively and severally, actually used or intended
for use for the purpose of furnishing water for drinking or general domestic
use and which serve at least fifteen (15) service connections or which
regularly serve at least twenty five (25) persons at least sixty (60) days per
year. A public water supply is either a "community water supply" or a
"noncommunity water supply".
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPAL BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE: A device containing a
minimum of two (2) independently acting check valves together with an
automatically operated pressure differential relief valve located between the
two (2) check valves and approved under ASSE Standard 1013. During normal flow
and at the cessation of normal flow, the pressure between these two (2) checks
shall be less than the supply pressure. In case of leakage of either check
valve, the differential relief valve, by discharging to the atmosphere, shall
operate to maintain the pressure between the check valves at less than the
supply pressure. The unit must include tightly closing shutoff valves located
at each end of the device, and each device shall be fitted with properly
located test cocks.
SERVICE CONNECTION: The opening, including all fittings and appurtenances, at
the water main through which water is supplied to the user.
SURVEY: The collection of information pertaining to a customer's piping system
regarding the location of all connections to the public water supply system and
must include the location, type and most recent inspection and testing date of
all cross-connection control devices and methods located within that customer's
piping system. The survey must be in written form, and should not be an actual
plumbing inspection.
SYSTEM HAZARD: A condition through which an aesthetically objectionable or
degrading material not dangerous to health may enter the public water supply
system or a consumer's potable water system.
USED WATER: Any water supplied by a public water supply system to a consumer's
water system after it has passed through the service connection and is no
longer under the control of the water supply official custodian.
WATER PURVEYOR: The owner or official custodian of a public water system. (Ord.
1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-3: WATER SYSTEM:
   A.   The water system shall be considered as made up of two (2) parts: the
public water supply system and the consumer's water system.
   B.   The public water supply system shall consist of the source facilities
and the distribution system, and shall include all those facilities of the
potable water system under the control of the Superintendent up to the point
where the consumer's water system begins.
   C.   The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in
the production, treatment, storage, and delivery of water to the public water
supply distribution system.
   D.   The public water supply distribution system shall include the network
of conduits used to deliver water from the source to the consumer's water
system.
   E.   The consumer's water system shall include all parts of the facilities
beyond the service connection used to convey water from the public water supply
distribution system to points of use. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-4: CROSS-CONNECTION PROHIBITED:
   A.   Connections between potable water systems and other systems or
equipment containing water or other substances of unknown or questionable
quality are prohibited except when and where approved cross-connection control
devices or methods are installed, tested and maintained to insure proper
operation on a continuing basis.
   B.   1.   No physical connection shall be permitted between the potable
portion of a supply and any other water supply not of equal or better
bacteriological and chemical quality as determined by inspection and analysis
by the Agency.
      2.   There shall be no arrangement or connection by which an unsafe
substance may enter a supply. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-5: SURVEY AND INVESTIGATIONS:
   A.   The consumer's premises shall be open at all reasonable times to the
approved cross-connection control device inspector for the inspection of the
presence or absence of cross-connections within the consumer's premises, and
testing, repair and maintenance of cross-connection devices within the
consumer's premises.
   B.   On request by the Superintendent, or his authorized representative, the
consumer shall furnish information regarding the piping system or systems or
water use within the customer's premises. The consumer's premises shall be open
at all reasonable times to the Superintendent for the verification of
information submitted by the water consumer to the public water supply
custodian regarding cross-connection inspection results.
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to arrange
periodic surveys of water use practices on his premises to determine whether
there are actual or potential cross-connections to his water system through
which contaminants or pollutants could backflow into his or the public potable
water system. All cross-connection control or other plumbing inspections must
be conducted in accordance with 225 Illinois Compiled Statutes 320/3(1).
   D.   It is the responsibility of the water consumer to prevent backflow into
the public water system by ensuring that:
      1.   All cross-connections are removed; or approved cross-connection
control devices are installed for control of backflow and back-siphonage.
      2.   Cross-connection control devices shall be installed in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions.
      3.   Cross-connection control devices shall be inspected at the time of
installation and at least annually by a person approved by the Agency as a
cross-connection control device inspector (CCCDI). The inspection of mechanical
devices shall include physical testing in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
      4.   Testing And Records:
         a.   Each device shall be tested at the time of installation and at
least annually or more frequently if recommended by the manufacturer.
         b.   Records submitted to the community public water supply shall be
available for inspection by Agency personnel in accordance with 415 Illinois
Compiled Statutes 5/4(e).
         c.   Such device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most
recent test, name of CCCDI and type and date of repairs.
         d.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
            (1)   Date of each test;
            (2)   Name and approval number of person performing the test;
            (3)   Test results;
            (4)   Repairs or servicing required;
            (5)   Repairs and date completed; and
            (6)   Servicing performed and dated completed. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-
1992)
10-4-9-6: WHERE PROTECTION IS REQUIRED:
   A.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the state plumbing code.
In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises, where in the
judgment of the superintendent, actual or potential hazards to the public water
supply system exist.
   B.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving premises where the following
conditions exist:
      1.   Premises having an auxiliary water supply, unless each auxiliary
supply is accepted as an additional source by the superintendent and the source
is approved by the Illinois environmental protection agency.
      2.   Premises on which any substance is handled which can create an
actual health hazard, if introduced into the public water supply system, or
premises having sources or systems containing process fluids or waters
originating from the public water supply system which are no longer under the
sanitary control of the superintendent.
      3.   Premises having internal cross connections that, in the judgment of
the superintendent and/or the cross connection control device inspector, are
not correctable or intricate plumbing arrangements which make it impractical to
determine whether or not cross connections exist.
      4.   Premises where, because of security requirements or other
prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a
complete cross connection survey.
      5.   Premises having a repeated history of cross connections being
established or reestablished.
   C.   An approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on all
connections to the public water supply as described in the state plumbing code.
In addition, an approved backflow prevention device shall be installed on each
service line to a consumer's water system serving, but not necessarily limited
to, the following types of facilities unless the superintendent determines that
no actual or potential hazard to the public water system exists:
      1.   Hospitals, mortuaries, clinics and nursing homes.
      2.   Laboratories.
      3.   Piers, docks, waterfront facilities.
      4.   Sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations or storm water
pumping stations.
      5.   Food or beverage processing plants.
      6.   Chemical plants.
      7.   Metal plating industries.
      8.   Petroleum processing or storage plants.
      9.   Radioactive material processing plants or nuclear reactors.
      10.   Car washes.
      11.   Pesticide, or herbicide or extermination plants and trucks.
      12.   Farm service and fertilizer plants and trucks. (Ord. 2005-39, 8-23-
2005)
10-4-9-7: TYPE OF PROTECTION REQUIRED:
   A.   The type of backflow prevention device required under section
10-4-9-6 of these regulations shall depend on the degree of hazard which exists
as follows:
      1.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation shall be installed where
the public water supply system may be contaminated with substances that could
cause a severe health hazard.
      2.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention assembly shall be installed where the
public water supply system may be contaminated with a substance that could
cause a system or health hazard.
      3.   An approved fixed proper air gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention assembly or double check valve assembly
shall be installed where the public water supply system may be polluted with
substances that could cause a pollution hazard not dangerous to health.
   B.   Where a public water supply or an auxiliary water supply is used for a
fire protection system, reduced pressure principal backflow preventers shall be
installed on fire safety systems connected to the public water supply when:
      1.   The fire safety contains antifreeze, fire retardant or other
chemicals;
      2.   Water is pumped into the system from another source; or
      3.   Water flows by gravity from a nonpotable source; or water can be
pumped into the fire safety system from any other source.
      4.   There is a connection whereby another source can be introduced into
the fire safety system.
   C.   All other fire safety systems connected to the potable water supply
shall be protected by a double check valve assembly on metered service lines
and a double detector check value assembly on unmetered service lines. (Ord.
1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-8: BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES:
   A.   All backflow prevention devices or methods required by these rules and
regulations shall be approved by the Research Foundation for Cross-Connection
Control of the University of Southern California, American Water Works
Association, American Society of Sanitary Engineering, or American National
Standards Institute or certified by the National Sanitation Foundation to be in
compliance with applicable industry specification.
   B.   Installation of approved devices shall be made in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions. Maintenance as recommended by the manufacturer of
the device shall be performed. Manufacturer's maintenance manual shall be
available on-site. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-9: INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE:
   A.   It shall be the duty of the consumer at any premises on which backflow
prevention devices required by these regulations are installed to have
inspection, tests, maintenance, and repair made in accordance with the
following schedule or more often where inspections indicate a need or are
specified in manufacturer's instructions.
      1.   Fixed proper air gap separations shall be inspected to document that
a proper vertical distance is maintained between the discharge point of the
service line and the flood level rim of the receptacle at the time of
installation and at least annually thereafter. Corrections to improper or
bypassed air gaps shall be made within twenty four (24) hours.
      2.   Double check valve assemblies shall be inspected and tested at time
of installation and at least annually thereafter, and required service
performed within five (5) days.
      3.   Reduced pressure principal backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested at the time of installation and at least annually or more frequently if
recommended by the manufacturer, and required service performed within five (5)
days.
   B.   Testing shall be performed by a person who has been approved by the
Agency as competent to service the device. Proof of approval shall be in
writing.
   C.   Each device shall have a tag attached listing the date of most recent
test or visual inspection, name of tester, and type and date of repairs.
   D.   A maintenance log shall be maintained and include:
      1.   Date of each test or visual inspection;
      2.   Name and approval number of person performing the test or visual
inspection;
      3.   Test results;
      4.   Repairs or servicing required;
      5.   Repairs and date completed; and
      6.   Servicing performed and dated completed.
   E.   Whenever backflow prevention devices required by these regulations are
found to be defective, they shall be repaired or replaced at the expense of the
consumer without delay as required by subsection A of this Section.
   F.   Backflow prevention devices shall not be bypassed, made inoperative,
removed or otherwise made ineffective without specific authorization by the
Superintendent. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-10: BOOSTER PUMPS:
   A.   Where a booster pump has been installed on the service line to or
within any premises, such pump shall be equipped with a low pressure cut-off
device designed to shut off the booster pump when the pressure in the service
line on the suction side of the pump drops to twenty (20) psi or less.
   B.   It shall be the duty of the water consumer to maintain the low pressure
cut-off device in proper working order and to certify to the Superintendent, at
least once a year, that the device is operable. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
10-4-9-11: VIOLATIONS:
   A.   The Superintendent shall deny or discontinue, after reasonable notice
to the occupants thereof, the water service to any premises wherein any
backflow prevention device required by these regulations is not installed,
tested, maintained and repaired in a manner acceptable to the Superintendent,
or if it is found that the backflow prevention device has been removed or
bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises, or if a
low pressure cut-off required by these regulations is not installed and
maintained in working order.
   B.   Water service to such premises shall not be restored until the consumer
has corrected or eliminated such conditions or defects in conformance with
these regulations and to the satisfaction of the Superintendent, and the
required reconnection fee is paid.
   C.   Neither the Village, the Superintendent, or its agents or assigns shall
be liable to any customers of the Village for any injury, damages or lost
revenues which may result from termination of said customer's water supply in
accordance with the terms of this Chapter, whether or not said termination of
the water supply was with or without notice.
   D.   The consumer responsible for back-siphoned material or contamination
through backflow, if contamination of the potable water supply system occurs
through an illegal cross-connection or an improperly installed, maintained or
repaired device, or a device which has been bypassed, must bear the cost of
cleanup of the potable water supply system.
   E.   Any person found to be violating any provision of this Chapter shall be
served with a written notice stating the notice of the violation and providing
a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender
shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all
violation.
   F.   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter, in addition
to the fine provided, shall become liable to the Village for any expense, loss
or damage occasioned by the Village by reason of such violation, whether the
same was caused before or after the notice. (Ord. 1992-3, 2-11-1992)
CHAPTER 5
VILLAGE PARKS
SECTION:
10-5-1 Park Rules And Regulations
10-5-2 Use Of Restroom Facilities
10-5-3: Veteran’s Dog Park
10-5-4: Penalty
10-5-1: PARK RULES AND REGULATIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the following subsections
in any village park: (Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
   A.   For any person to possess or consume alcoholic beverages at any village
park without first obtaining a permit in writing from the village. (Ord. 2003-
25, 4-22-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
   B.   For any person to violate the rules and regulations pertaining to
posted usage capacity of picnic grounds or any other area where limited
facilities make it necessary to control use by persons and/or motor vehicles.
Village officials and law enforcement officers of the village are authorized to
close such facilities to additional persons until such time as the number of
users falls below the capacity posted within the area. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-
2003)
   C.   For any person to enter or remain on any portion of any village park
where posted rules and regulations prohibit such entry to protect the natural
fauna and flora within such area. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003; amd. Ord. 2006-40,
11-14-2006)
   D.   For any person to remain in any area when advised by an authorized law
enforcement officer or village official that he is in violation of this chapter
and that the area in question is a prohibited area for persons and/or motor
vehicles. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003)
   E.   For any person to camp overnight in any village park unless written
permission is obtained from the village in advance. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003;
amd. Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006)
   F.   For any unauthorized person to wilfully or wantonly or intentionally
cut, break, injure or remove any shrub, tree or flower or attempt to remove any
of the above or to disturb any agricultural crop.
   G.   For any person to remove, take, mutilate, deface or destroy any
equipment, property, improvement, sign or building.
   H.   For any person to operate a motor vehicle with a wilful and wanton
disregard for the safety of persons or property.
   I.   For any person to operate a motor vehicle in excess of ten (10) miles
per hour unless otherwise posted by sign on any roadway or in any parking area.
Notwithstanding the above, no vehicle may be driven upon any roadway or in any
parking area at a speed which is greater than is reasonable and proper with
regard to traffic conditions and the use of the roadway or parking area or
endanger the safety of any persons or property. The fact that the speed of a
vehicle does not exceed the applicable maximum speed limit does not relieve the
driver from the duty to decrease speed when approaching and going around a
curve, when approaching a hillcrest, when traveling upon any narrow or winding
roadway, or when any special hazard exists with respect to pedestrians or other
traffic or by reason of weather or roadway conditions.
   J.   For any person to park a motor vehicle in any prohibited area which is
posted with signs or to park his vehicle in any parking area for the purpose of
repair, except those immediate repairs necessary to remove the vehicle.
   K.   For any person to abandon any vehicle in any parking area in or on any
property owned, leased, managed or supervised by the village. Village officials
and law enforcement officers are authorized to remove at the owner's expense
vehicles in question after a period of twenty four (24) hours has elapsed.
   L.   For any person to ride any motor driven bicycle, minibike or motorcycle
except on roadways designated for vehicular use. In addition, it shall be
unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle on any roadway or land
owned, supervised or managed by the village unless such person possesses a
valid Illinois driver's license and the vehicle is properly licensed and
equipped in accordance with the Illinois vehicle code, 625 Illinois Compiled
Statutes.
   M.   For any person to build any fire except in camp stoves provided by the
village or in charcoal or other types of metal grills which are furnished by
the visitor and approved by the village official and at specific campfire sites
designated by the village official. Ground fires are strictly prohibited.
   N.   For any person to discard scrap paper, garbage or rubbish of any kind
in any area except by placing such refuse in designated containers provided by
the village.
   O.   For any person to take fish from the water of any area contrary to the
rules and regulations of the Illinois department of natural resources and any
fish or parts of fish remaining from cleaning must be placed in a proper refuse
container that is provided by the village.
   P.   For any person to carry firearms of any kind, bow and arrow, or
blowgun.
   Q.   For any person to pursue with firearms, bow and arrow, blowgun, or any
other means with intent to maim, injure or kill any bird or animal.
   R.   For any person to attempt to entrap or trap by any means with intent to
capture, injure or kill any bird or animal.
   S.   For any person to possess or display any knife, commonly known as a
switchblade knife, with a blade which is spring loaded in violation of 720
Illinois Compiled Statutes 5/24-1 et seq.
   T.   For any person to allow or otherwise permit on a leash longer than ten
feet (10') any dog, cat, livestock or other domesticated animal on any area.
All leashed animals shall be at all times under the specific physical control
of a responsible person.
   U.   For any person to ride or lead any horse in any area except on
designated bridle paths or equestrian areas.
   V.   For any person to allow animal waste to remain in picnic areas or other
areas or on land owned, managed or supervised by the village.
   W.   For any person to place signs or distribute advertising of any type in
any area or make an attempt to make sales of any kind or solicit sales of any
kind without first obtaining a permit in writing from the village.
   X.   For persons to gather in groups of more than twenty five (25) persons
unless written permission is obtained from the village in advance to use such
facilities.
   Y.   For groups of nine (9) or more minors under the age of seventeen (17)
to gather unless written permission is obtained from the village in advance to
use such facilities.
   Z.   For any person to swim or wade except in designated areas.
   AA.   For any person to operate any off the road vehicle such as
snowmobiles, dune buggies, trail bikes or ATVs unless specific permission is
granted by the village to operate such vehicles on posted trails. (Ord. 2003-
25, 4-22-2003)
   BB.   For any person to act in such disorderly or unreasonable manner as to
alarm or disturb and to provoke a breach of peace or to enter or remain in any
village park for any unlawful purpose. (Ord. 2003-25, 4-22-2003; amd. Ord.
2006-40, 11-14-2006)
   CC.   For any person to knowingly resist or obstruct the performance by one
known to be a peace officer acting within his official capacity. (Ord. 2003-25,
4-22-2003)
   DD.   For any person to enter or remain in any village park before sunrise
and to enter or remain after sunset, excluding Veteran’s Park, without
previously obtaining a special permit from the village.
   EE.   For any person to use athletic fields for any organized activity
without previously obtaining a permit from the village and paying the fee
established from time to time by the village. For purposes of this subsection,
“organized activity” shall mean any game, practice, or training activity for
which forty percent (40%) or more of the participants shall have a reasonable
expectation of engaging in a similar game, practice or training activity on
three (3) or more occasions within any thirty (30) day period; or any event or
activity lasting more than one (1) hour and with more than thirty (30)
participants. General drop-in use, which is any use other than an organized
activity, of athletic fields does not require a permit and is available on a
first come, first serve basis. Any person with an approved permit to use the
athletic fields for any organized activity shall have priority in the use of
the athletic field for the times and fields described on the permit. It shall
be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person or persons to
interfere with any person using the field for an organized activity pursuant to
their permit. (Ord. 2006-40, 11-14-2006; amd. Ord. 2023-25, 6-27-2023)
10-5-2: USE OF RESTROOM FACILITIES:
Any person requesting the use of the restroom facilities for private parties,
picnics and gatherings shall obtain permission from the village and that person
shall be held responsible for the condition and cleanliness of the restroom
facilities upon leaving the area. (Ord. 1977-14, eff. 7-11-1977; amd. Ord.
2003-25, 4-22-2003)
10-5-3: VETERAN’S DOG PARK:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to use Veteran’s Dog Park in
violation of any of the following rules:
      1.   Use of the dog park is at each patron’s own risk. Each dog owner is
solely liable for the actions of their own dog.
      2.   Dogs must be in compliance with rabies vaccination requirements of
the Illinois Animal Control Act.
      3.   No animals other than dogs are permitted.
      4.   All patrons must clean up after their own dogs. Not properly
disposing of dog waste may result in permanent ban.
      5.   No vicious dogs allowed.
      6.   Dogs must be directly supervised.
      7.   The possession and/or use of alcohol and/or cannabis are prohibited.
      8.   Dogs entering and leaving dog park must be on a leash.
      9.   Dogs can be kept on leash within fence areas if leash is no longer
than 10 feet.
      10.   Dogs inside dog park may be taken off a leash while within the
fenced area, except as necessary for the safety of other dogs and patrons.
      11.   Children under the age of 18 must be accompanied by adult.
      12.   No bikes, skateboards, or skates allowed.
   B.   Any person convicted of violating the rules set forth in this Ordinance
shall be subject to fines and penalties consistent with Section 1-4-1 (General
Penalty) of the Minooka Village Code of Ordinances. (Ord. 2024-23, 5-28-2024)
10-5-4: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be punishable as
provided in section 1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1977-14, eff. 7-11-1977)
